Netflix's staggering slate of new films escalates the streaming wars:	I n the latest skirmish of the streaming wars,  Netflix  has come out fighting. In a star-studded promotional video, the studio announced a staggering slate of original releases in 2021, with a promise to release a new film every week this year. The studio’s level of productivity blows its competitors clean out of the water. In pre-Covid times, Warner Bros released 21 films in 2019, with Disney posting 19. True, the streamer doesn’t always have to contend with the additional costs associated with a theatrical release – or indeed the headache of cinemas not being open at all – but beneath the beaming smiles of its actors was a clear statement of intent. The past year has highlighted the fragility of a cinematic ecosystem which relies on blockbusters regularly making more than $400m to strike a profit and keep cinemas afloat. Netflix can’t yet claim to be the saviour of the cinematic experience, but it is undeniably giving the industry a major shot in the arm – and something approaching stability in profoundly unstable times – through a commitment to producing original content of all sizes. This year’s slate has its fair share of tent-pole releases. We will see the big-budget Red Notice, featuring Dwayne Johnson, Ryan Reynolds and Gal Gadot, released alongside the Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence-fuelled Don’t Look Up. But these are joined by films that lean much more into the company’s desire to increase the size of its awards cabinet. An adaptation of Booker prize winner  The White Tiger  stands out, while there is also the lockdown-inspired Malcolm and Marie. As ever with Netflix, the note of caution is whether this generous model is as inherently fragile as the distribution pattern it is disrupting. A house of glass to rival the House of Mouse. Clearly, it depends on huge growth, but up to now, the studio has consistently provided it. In the third quarter of 2020, the studio recorded $6.44bn in revenue, with the number of worldwide subscribers growing rapidly, yet this is all offset by a content bill which has been reported to be as high as $17.3bn in 2020. Combine this with the difficulty in ascertaining what each new release is worth in terms of attracting new subscribers and engaging others, and it may mean that  Hollywood accounting  has a new meaning. Netflix is evidently throwing a huge amount of money at original content creation, much like its rivals at Disney. Yet the streaming giant’s move in many ways runs counter to that of its competitor, which used  its recent Investor Day  to expand existing properties. Yes,  Disney+ ’s slate for 2021 is full of new series and films, but they often exist within established cinematic universes. From The Book of Boba Fett and Star Wars through to Wandavision and Marvel, the studio is using its platform to appeal to a loyal and devoted fanbase. This is unsurprising given the two streamers are coming from opposite starting points. Disney was a film-making colossus long before it switched to streaming, while Netflix traditionally hinged on a competitive curation of others’ productions. As the two slide closer together, it makes logical sense that they are cleaving to their traditional strengths, with Netflix enlisting outside creatives and Disney bolstering existing IP (not to mention making the most of its big-money purchases). That said, the concluding chapters of  To All the Boys …  and  The Kissing Booth  nod towards Netflix’s increasing ability to string together film franchises, with sequels also mooted for the bigger-budget properties Extraction and The Old Guard. While the paths ahead for both Disney and Netflix are taking shape, the direction of competitors such as Warner Bros’ HBO Max is still buffering. The studio’s decision to move its 2021 slate on to their own streaming platform – alongside limited theatre runs – caused ire among creatives including Christopher Nolan and Patty Jenkins. Wracked by the fear of another year of closed cinemas, the kneejerk reaction has seemingly also jeopardised the future of  Denis Villeneuve’s Dune   as a franchise. Away from this turmoil, those who collaborate with Netflix know exactly what to expect, even if it isn’t the fanfare of a theatrical run. There will no doubt be concern that Netflix’s crowded slate will only reinforce TV and film’s saturated landscape. Gasping for publicity, films such as Mank, The Trial of the Chicago Seven and Da Five Bloods came and went on the platform. What’s more, Netflix’s increasing willingness to release some titles for short theatrical runs won’t be enough to single-handedly save cinema chains. But after a desperate year, their gargantuan support for the sector shouldn’t be undervalued.
Vaccine scepticism in France reflects 'dissatisfaction with political class’:	I n  France , every child is now obliged to have 11 vaccinations. If parents want their children to attend school, or take part in many extracurricular activities, they must accept. There is no opt-out or concessions made to vaccine doubters. On Monday France’s government and health authorities are speeding up the country’s Covid-19 vaccine drive – a process complicated by widespread scepticism about the inoculation that has encompassed the usual global conspiracy theories. For weeks, polls have suggested up to 60% of French citizens do not wish to be vaccinated. As the government’s vaccine operation enters its third week,  official figures  show that as of Saturday at least 93,000 people had been given the jab – a much lower number than elsewhere in Europe, including the UK, Germany and Italy.  Laurent-Henri Vignaud, a science historian whose 2019 book  Antivax,  co-written with immunology specialist Françoise Salvadori, examines vaccine scepticism in the west since the 18th century, says we should not heed polls suggesting the French will refuse the vaccine. “There’s a very big difference between what the French say and what they do,” he told the Guardian. “And polls whose methodology and questions can seem abstract do not reflect what happens when people know where they will have the vaccine, what it does, the how, when and why.” Vaccine doubters have existed as long as vaccines , but for years polls have suggested France has more than most of its European neighbours – an odd reputation given that immunology pioneer Louis Pasteur was French and is a figure of fierce national pride. Prof Jocelyn Raude, an expert on health behaviour at the École des Hautes Études en Santé Publique who has studied the anti-vaccine movement, says that as recently as 2005 polls showed 90% support for vaccines, “which seems incredible today”. However, by the turn of the 21st century the seeds of doubt had already been sown. In the 1990s, a mass campaign to vaccinate French children against hepatitis B coincided with a jump in multiple sclerosis cases, though studies never found a convincing link between the two.  In 1991, there was a medical scandal not linked to vaccines specifically when it was discovered that health authorities had knowingly distributed blood products contaminated with HIV to haemophiliacs in the 1980s. Several ministers were later charged with manslaughter. However, Raude said it was the 2009 H1N1 scandal, in which the government massively overordered 94m vaccine doses at a cost of €869m (£780m), that fuelled today’s vaccine scepticism. The health ministry later cancelled more than half the order but the damage was done. Opposition parties criticised the waste of public money and accused officials of being in league with big pharma. In the end, 323 people in France died of H1N1, only 6m people were vaccinated and 19m vaccine doses were destroyed. An official estimate put the cost of the debacle at €382m. Raude says the scepticism was amplified when some high-profile French celebrities began expressing vaccine doubts, relayed by newly emerging social media networks. Then came the  Mediator scandal . The diabetic drug, widely but wrongly prescribed to those seeking to lose weight, was linked to between 500 and 1,200 deaths over more than three decades. Mediator’s manufacturer, Servier, was accused of charges including manslaughter, and 12 people ended up in the dock in a criminal trial last year, including officials who were also paid as consultants of pharmaceutical companies. The company and the individuals charged deny wrongdoing. Judgment is expected in March. “It was a tipping point. The Mediator scandal validated in people’s minds the idea of corruption between officials and pharmaceutical companies in France; that it was about business not health safety,” Raude says. Another cause, he says, is the lack of confidence in doctors and scientists. “It’s not new for the French to lack confidence in political leaders, but there is a low level of confidence in the medical authorities in France. The effect of this is if you don’t trust the experts, you don’t follow their advice.” Vignaud says vaccine scepticism is less against the vaccine itself than those promoting it, reflecting  a distrust of “politicians , high-profile doctors and experts and journalists”. “France doesn’t have any more hard and fast anti-vaxxers than anywhere else, what it does have is … a certain dissatisfaction with the political class,” he says. “There is a strong expectation of the state, but we are permanently disappointed: we see this with the vaccine programme: some say it’s too slow, others it’s too fast. Everyone is disappointed.” The  film Hold-Up , a much lampooned and debunked epic claiming Covid-19 is a global conspiracy, has compounded the mistrust and been been shared by influential figures. Among those trying to combat the disinformation with facts and humour is the Facebook site  Les Vaxxeuses . “Vaccines are the biggest medical advance … don’t let lies make you doubt the benefits,” the website says. Over the weekend anti-vaccination proponents were dealt a blow when the far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed course and said she would agree to receive a Covid jab, having previously voiced her opposition. Ministers are confident France’s vaccine programme will catch up in the coming weeks, insisting it is “a marathon, not a sprint”. “Once access to the vaccine becomes a reality people will have the vaccine. They have had enough,” Vignaud says. Raude agrees the government’s “slow steps” strategy appears to be working. “The  government has been slow and careful  so as not to frighten people … when French people see the benefits, they will do it.”
Schwarzenegger used to exemplify politico-showbiz ridiculousness. Now he's our true moral governator:	H ow amazing. Until a few years ago – 2016, in fact – if you asked people for the most absurd example of the politico-showbusiness complex in the 21st-century United States, they would have said  Arnold Schwarzenegger ’s recall election as governor of California in 2003, his candidacy being announced on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno. He was re-elected in 2006, and just about maintained a cheerfully Reaganesque public image of a moderate Republican – uneventfully standing down in 2011 to resume his movie career. We all took the mickey out of the governator. But, right now, he is America’s moral governator with real moral authority. It was the governator who uploaded a video  telling Americans to stay home during the Covid crisis . And now it is the governator who has issued a clarion call for decency on YouTube with his admittedly cheesy but genuinely stirring, heartfelt and relevant rebuke to the Trumpians and their desecration of the Capitol – a desecration that even now many Republicans and many sophisticates on the right cannot bring themselves to condemn fully. In his mature Reaganesque style, Schwarzenegger addressed the nation from a presidential-style desk, with the stars and stripes and Californian flag in the background, and a photo of himself in his bodybuilding pomp. With Hollywood-style music on the audio track, he denounced the complicit enablers of Trump’s fascism – culminating in a hilarious flourish of Conan the Barbarian’s sword. That should have been ridiculous. It should have been silly. But, compared with the seedy rightwingers and Fox News alternative-fact merchants and the giggling cynics who said Trump didn’t matter, Schwarzenegger’s sword was rather glorious. I found myself thinking of Evelyn Waugh’s Sword of Honour trilogy – and, yes, however preposterous, there was something honourable about Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Conan sword. Schwarzenegger called the vandalising of the Capitol (and the killing of Capitol police officer Brian Sicknick) America’s “Kristallnacht”. Like many others, I have seen it as America’s beer hall putsch (and who knows if that may not turn out to be the closer analogy?). But, for the time being, Schwarzenegger is absolutely right. And from personal experience, Schwarzenegger was able to address the openly  Nazi  stylings of the Capitol attackers, with the “Camp Auschwitz” T-shirts, because he grew up in an Austria that, in contrast to Germany, went into fierce denial about its role in the second world war. Schwarzenegger spoke about his angry, depressed and abusive father who beat his children. (Schwarzenegger did not speak in detail, but throughout his governorship much press research went into Gustav Schwarzenegger, the Austrian police chief and Stalingrad military veteran who applied for Nazi party membership in 1938 before the Anschluss, but was not found to have been responsible for war crimes or abuse.) Schwarzenegger’s video today, however schmaltzy and hokey in style, was a real reminder to the fatuous callow right that Nazis and nazism are not just death-metal icons or gamer fantasies. They really did exist, with America-first cheerleaders such as Joseph Kennedy and Charles Lindbergh encouraging their fellow citizens to look the other way. And he also showed us that the immigrant experience can bring wisdom. Arnold’s video is exactly what we all needed.
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Nigeria cattle crisis: how drought and urbanisation led to deadly land grabs:	In February last year, Sunday Ikenna’s fields were green and lush. Then, one evening, a herd of cattle led into the farm by roving pastoralists crushed, ate, and uprooted the crops. “I lost everything. The situation was sorrowful, watching another human being destroy your farm,” says Ikenna, a father of 10 who farms in Ukpabi-Nimbo in Enugu state, southern  Nigeria . “I farmed a smaller portion this year because I am still scared of another invasion.” Ikenna’s experience is not an isolated event. In the past few years there have been a growing number of skirmishes between farmers and cattle herders searching for pasture and water. For many years the clashes were problematic, but the two groups usually managed to reach a mutual accommodation. But in the past two decades, the climate crisis has contributed to altering that old order, and what used to be a friendly arrangement has become a crisis marked by looting, raids, cattle rustling and premeditated killings. In 2016, Ukpabi-Nimbo, Ikenna’s community, was attacked, allegedly by cattle herders, resulting in the death of 46 people, according to one local media report. “Nimbo will never be the same after that morning,” Ikenna says of the attack. At the root of the crisis, according to experts, is Nigeria’s teeming cattle population, which has more than doubled from an  estimated  9.2 million in 1981 to  around 20 million , making it one of the world’s largest. Nigeria’s human population has grown too, to about 200 million, the highest in  Africa  by far. This has led to cities sprawling ever larger and wider, in some cases into formerly designated cattle routes and reserves. Routes that dated back to the 1950s, in line with colonial arrangements, have either been overrun or dominated by new human settlements – pushing herders further into contested territories. Grazing space that should accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more In rural communities, smallholder farmers are claiming large swathes of grazing land. “It means that grazing space, for example, that should originally accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more,” says Ifeanyi Ubah, a cattle rancher based in eastern Nigeria. Nigeria is, moreover, a crossroads for cattle from other countries: transhumance migrants from Cameroon, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad routinely pass through in search of better climate, pasture and more plentiful water. Though there are fewer than 100 official border crossings into the country, Abba Moro, an ex-government official who headed the ministry of interior, was quoted as saying that there  were more than 1,499 illegal entry routes  into the country as of 2013. Terrorist groups have become involved in the situation. Boko Haram has been accused of using money obtained from the sale of rustled cattle to fund its deadly operations. On one occasion, Boko Haram militants killed 19 herders as they attempted to steal their cattle. A rising number of attacks has led to the  reported loss  of two million cattle and the death of 600 herders, many of whom have been forced to vacate the fertile Lake Chad basin in search of new lands. But the climate crisis is the biggest factor driving tensions. Most parts of northern Nigeria have suffered severe desertification and drought. Mean annual rainfall in this region has  dropped below  600mm, compared with 3,500mm in the south coast area.  This change threatens the livelihoods of around 40 million people,  especially livestock and smallholder  farmers. Large numbers of cattle herders are being forced to move from traditional grazing areas to central and southern Nigeria when dry periods start – a situation that heightens competition and heralds more clashes. “While growing up, I saw trees, forest, rivers and streams in most parts of northern Nigeria. The grasses grew and it was more than enough for the cattle,” says Bala Ardo, one of the leaders of cattle herders in south-east Nigeria. “But it’s no more. The situation has forced the average herder to seek pasture and water in places they never would have visited in the past, as he struggles to find drinkable water for himself and family and then his animals.” The government, meanwhile, has only taken piecemeal action. In 2018, the federal government proposed  colonies for cattle  and funded grazing camps across various states in the country. But local leaders were resistant, and fears grew in the south in particular that ethnic groups such as the Muslim Fulani would use the scheme to  grab land . Some researchers  estimate  that the members of the Fulani ethnic group own 90% of Nigeria’s livestock.  As the climate crisis continues, the government has set up the National Livestock Transformation Plan, which aims to modernise the livestock sector through a series of phased interventions from 2018 to 2027. Ranches for breeding and processing will be created, and several pilot projects have already been established. But this plan, too, is encountering difficulties. According to Khalid Salisu, a journalist in one of the pilot project regions, “It doesn’t serve the needs of cattle herders adequately. The herders in the ranches are struggling to find enough water and pastures to keep their herds alive during the dry season.” In the absence of effective solutions from the central government, states and communities are proposing various remedies. In Benue state, southern Nigeria, for example, legislation in 2017 banned open cattle grazing. The law required herders to rent or buy lands to host their ranches. The heart of the problem is the need to persuade herders to give up treating land and water as a free resource. It will be difficult to persuade them to move to capital-intensive ranching, said Ubah. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved Abubakar Sambo, the leader of the northern community in Enugu state, says the herders must be consulted before fresh initiatives are launched. “The policies received by cattle herders largely on radio and television cannot work. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved.” He believes younger herders need to be educated and sent to study model ranching systems in other countries. “What the herders have achieved [cattle population growth] despite all the challenges is remarkable. It shows the huge potential of the livestock sector,” says Ardo. “Imagine what the result could be if the government put the right structure and policies in place.” Sign up for the  Animals farmed monthly update  to get a roundup of the best farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at  animalsfarmed@theguardian.com
‘This is Africa’s generational cause,’ says Uganda’s election challenger:	Millions of voters in  Uganda  will cast their votes this week in an election pitting a 76-year-old president seeking his sixth term against a former popular musician half his age. The contest between  Bobi Wine , 38, and  Yoweri Museveni , who has been in power since 1986, is being keenly watched across the continent, where veteran leaders are coming under pressure to give way to politicians more representative of Africa’s increasingly youthful, urban and educated population. Wine has explicitly linked his campaign to efforts elsewhere across  Africa  to oust veteran leaders, and told the  Observer  that his was “a generational cause”. “The oppressed people can’t stay oppressed for ever. History has taught us that even the most brutal and famous dictators have come down, crumbling to the power of the people,” Wine said. “My warning to Museveni is to learn from history. It’s important that you respect the voices of the people of Uganda because, if you do not, then you will also end up in the dustbin of history like your friends [Muammar] Gaddafi, [Robert] Mugabe and [Omar al-] Bashir. The campaign has already been marked by the worst political violence in Uganda for decades,  with more than 50 people shot dead by security forces  over two days of protests following the arrest of Wine in November. On 1 December, police fired shots into Wine’s car, prompting him to briefly suspend his campaign. Since then, a bodyguard has been killed when run over by a police truck, and Wine was arrested for a second time. Opposition supporters have been routinely dispersed by security forces using teargas and rubber bullets. Journalists have been harassed, and human rights activists and high-profile critics of the government have been detained. International watchdogs such as Amnesty International say measures implemented ostensibly to fight Covid-19 are being applied selectively to prevent the opposition campaigning effectively. Wine said: “The campaign is crazy. Every day we are met with heavily armed military officers. I am afraid and concerned every day. I fear for my life and lives of my comrades in the struggle. “The regime is after our lives. Every day we live is as if it’s the last one.” On 7 January,  police confronted Wine during an online press conference  where he announced a petition to the international criminal court to investigate rights abuses in Uganda. Known to supporters as “the ghetto president”, the former singer broke into formal politics in 2017 when he won a seat in Uganda’s national assembly. He has since been badly assaulted and detained many times. Wine, whose real name is Robert Kyagulanyi, grew up in poverty in Kampala before his successful musical career. As a politician, he has attracted enthusiastic support from among Uganda’s young and urban population who want change. The median age in the country is less than 16. Flavia Namukasa, 23, was among hundreds of jubilant supporters who attended Wine’s campaign rally in the central town of Rakai, 200km from the capital Kampala, in late December. “We have come out in big numbers to support Bobi Wine. He is our only hope. He will be able to address our misery, daily suffering and high unemployment rates,” she said. But Wine faces an experienced opponent who can count on loyalty from individuals and institutions that have benefited from his rule over decades. Museveni is seeking a sixth term after MPs removed constitutional age limits on the presidency, and has the support of the security forces and much of the bureaucracy. Some voters have been rattled by the violence associated with recent protests, which they blame on the opposition. More importantly, decades of economic growth and subsidies have won Museveni a mass following in rural areas. “My next president still remains Museveni. Although they call him Mzee [old man], he is not weak. He is still strong and able to lead this country,” said Richard Kiboneka, a 62-year-old local leader in Mbalwa in the central district of Wakiso. Though few deny Museveni’s early achievements – from 1992 to 2013 the proportion of Ugandan households living in poverty was halved – serious economic problems were increasingly evident, even before the hammer blow of the pandemic. While some 700,000 young people reach working age every year in Uganda, only enough jobs for one in 10 are created,  according to the World Bank.  Poor basic services, corruption, expensive healthcare and overcrowded classrooms have also fuelled discontent in urban areas in particular. Museveni has not responded to criticism of his record,  instead accusing Wine and other opposition leaders of being “traitors”  who planned “insurrection … with their foreign backers”. At one rally, the president said that the protesters were “ being used by outsiders … homosexuals and others who don’t like the stability  and independence of Uganda”. Judith Nabakooba, Uganda’s minister for information, communications technology and national guidance, said that Museveni had guaranteed peace and stability “for so many years”. “He is a respectable leader. He has a full and wider view of Uganda, east Africa, Africa and internationally. He is tested. He knows where we have come from … and knows where to take us. To secure our future, we really need to support President Museveni,” she said. Though Museveni is expected to win the contest, the former rebel leader is likely to emerge weakened, and the poll may usher in a period of instability in Uganda. The former British protectorate has never had a peaceful transition of power, and previous elections have been marred by allegations of vote buying,  rigging  and  fraud . Wine said that “when people turn up in huge numbers and vote, there will be no way the regime can try to alter the voice and the will of the people”. Analysts have expressed concerns about democracy across eastern and southern Africa in recent years, although they say the picture is as varied within these regions as it is across the continent. The recent election in Tanzania was  marred by widespread repression,  while crackdowns in Zimbabwe have led to journalists and political activists being jailed for months without being found guilty of any offence. In Malawi, however,  Lazarus Chakwera  won power in a fresh poll after the judges overturned a 2019 election amid allegations of fraud. Patience Akumu , a Ugandan journalist and analyst, said officials’ claim that only Museveni could guarantee security was unfounded. “I think it tells us how flimsy the existing security is, if it relies on one man. The strongmen of the continent are falling one by one, and Museveni will go eventually,” Akumu told the  Observer . “Uganda, Africa, must face this fact.” •  This article was amended on 14 January 2021. Uganda was formerly a British protectorate, rather than a colony as an earlier version said. 
China tightens curbs as cases surge; Denmark restricts all travel – as it happened:	A quick recap of what has happened in the past few hours: We will be closing off this blog soon. You can find our ongoing live coverage  here  and our new blog  here . Viral fragments of Covid-19 have been detected at a sewerage plant in south-east  Queensland . Fragments were  detected at the Redcliffe wastewater treatment plant yesterday,  in a sample taken from the plant earlier in the week. Queensland’s chief health officer,  Dr Jeanette Young , said: This does not mean we have new cases of Covid-19 in these communities, but we are treating this detection with absolute caution.  A positive sewage result means that someone who has been infected was shedding the virus. Infected people can shed viral fragments and that shedding can happen for several weeks after the person is no longer infectious. She added: Given the recent case of community transmission in Brisbane and the regular detection of cases in other states, I am urging anyone who feels unwell in the communities of  Clontarf, Deception Bay, Kippa-Ring, Margate, Newport, Redcliffe, Rothwell, Scarborough and Woody Point  to get tested and isolate ... If there is a case we are not yet aware of, it is critical we detect it through our testing mechanisms as quickly as possible to contain any potential spread. Australia ’s federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , says he will be discharged from hospital in Sydney this afternoon. He spent the night in the Royal Prince Alfred hospital after a car accident in Marrickville yesterday. Will be discharged from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital this afternoon and continue treatment as an outpatient- thank you for all the good wishes and a huge thanks to the paramedics, police, doctors, nurses, orderlies, radiographers and other hospital staff - you are the best Back in  Australia , Labor’s Indigenous affairs spokeswoman,  Linda Burney , senator  Patrick Dodson  and  Warren Snowden  have said  a consultation report on creating an Indigenous voice to government  “fails” because the models it proposes would not be able to provide full and frank advice, and be protected against abolition. In a joint statement, they said:  Labor thanks members of the advisory groups who worked on this interim report under difficult circumstances. Many will be disappointed with the government’s refusal to consider a constitutionally enshrined voice to the parliament. Three and a half years ago, First Nations leaders clearly expressed our desire for a First Nations voice to the parliament enshrined in the constitution – through the Uluru Statement – while the government banned its advisory group from even considering this. It is also difficult to see any progress being made before the next election. It is critical to real and lasting progress for First Nations people that we have a say in the policies and laws that affect us. A voice must be able to provide full and frank advice. It must be secure and it should not be subject to the whims of the government of the day. This report fails in that context. Labor remains committed to all three elements of the Uluru Statement: a constitutionally enshrined First Nations voice to the parliament; a Makarrata Committee to oversee a process for agreement and treaty-making; as well as a process for Truth-telling. Mainland  China  reported 33 new cases of Covid-19  on Friday, down from 53 on Thursday.  Most of the cases were in Hebei province, where a coronavirus cluster has grown by more than 130 cases in the past week.  From Reuters: T he National Health Commission said in a statement that  14 of the 17 locally transmitted infections were in Hebei , the province surrounding Beijing which entered a “wartime mode” this week as it battles a new cluster of coronavirus infections. Shijiazhuang, Hebei’s capital, announced on Saturday it would suspend service on its subway . Earlier this week, authorities banned people from leaving the city in an effort to curb the spread of the disease. Shijiazhuang is launching mass testing across its population of 11 million. On 8 January, municipal authorities told residents they must stay home for at least seven days even after they complete a nucleic acid test. The commission also reported  38 new asymptomatic cases, down from 57 a day earlier .   China does not classify these patients, who have been infected by the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes the disease but are not yet showing any Covid-19 symptoms, as confirmed cases.  Speaking of cases of the UK variant in  Australia , New South Wales authorities have released a statement saying a woman who was carrying that strain, and was released from hotel quarantine on 5 January after completing an isolation period and going 72 hours without any symptoms, was  not infectious when she returned to the community . They said: The person had been medically assessed the day before, met all exit criteria in place at the time, and on the basis of those criteria were considered clear of Covid-19. On the 7 January, genome sequencing found the person had been infected with the new UK variant of Covid-19. As a precaution, the person was immediately contacted by NSW Health and asked to isolate for retesting.  The person returned a positive test with a high CT value, which indicates low levels of infection, and returned to the Special Health Accommodation . This person attended several venues in Burwood in Sydney’s inner west on 6 and 7 January, which, as a precaution, were included in a public health alert released by NSW Health on Friday night. The person has one household contact who has tested negative to date. The full list of NSW exposure sites is  here . The  UK variant of Covid-19 has been detected in a case at the Howard Springs quarantine facility in the Northern Territory  in Australia. It’s the first time the variant has been detected in the NT. It has also been detected in Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia and Victoria.  Genomic sequencing revelled that a 26-year-old woman, who arrived at Howard Springs on an Australian government repatriation flight on 30 December and tested positive to Covid-19 on 31 December, was carrying the variant. The NT government said the woman remains under the care of health officials and under isolation.  Passengers and air crew on the same flight have been tested twice already with no positive cases resulting, and will be retested today.  China has announced fresh lockdowns in Hebei province, which borders Beijing, in a bid to stamp out a resurgence in infections before Lunar New Year. From AFP: Two Chinese cities south of Beijing further tightened virus restrictions Saturday  as authorities race to stamp out a resurgence in infections. China has largely brought its domestic outbreak under control after the coronavirus first emerged in Wuhan in late 2019 – but a spike in Hebei province, bordering Beijing, has sparked fresh lockdowns ahead of the Lunar New Year next month. Hebei has reported over 130 confirmed Covid-19 cases in the past week, with more than 200 more asymptomatic infections. Most of the cases were in Shijiazhuang city, which along with its surrounding areas is home to 11 million people. Several other infections were reported in neighbouring Xingtai city, home to 7 million. Shijiazhuang suspended subway operations from Saturday morning to aid “prevention and control of the outbreak”, authorities said. Major highways leading into the city, around 300km (200 miles) south of Beijing, have already been closed and inter-city passenger travel halted. Overnight, Xingtai announced a week-long stay-at-home order to residents in order to curb its outbreak. The curbs come ahead of the Lunar New Year, when hundreds of millions criss-cross China to visit family and friends, with National Health Commission vice-minister Zeng Yixin warning Saturday the festival “will further boost the risk of transmission”. Authorities are racing to roll out vaccines, with more than 9m doses given so far, Zeng added. Health authorities recently gave conditional approval to a vaccine candidate by Chinese pharma giant Sinopharm, with emergency use jabs already administered in the later part of 2020. Health authorities in  Victoria, Australia , have added one new potential exposure site in Melbourne. Anyone who attended  Block 7 Dumplings in Ringwood on 29 December from 8.10pm to 8.45pm  has been advised to monitor themselves for symptoms and get tested and isolate should they appear. You can read the full list of Victorian exposure sites  here . T hree people in Queensland have been fined for not wearing a face mask , after face masks became mandatory in greater Brisbane at 6pm last night.  Police handed out “hundreds” of free masks in greater Brisbane on Friday night, the Queensland police deputy commissioner,  Steve Gollschewski ,   told reporters today. On three occasions those persons were actually offered the masks, refused to wear them, offered again and were given directions to go home because they shouldn’t have been out. Police were left with no alternative but to take enforcement action, which they did. A fourth person was fined for being in an unauthorised area, and all were hit with a $1,334 fine for failing to comply with the chief health officer’s directions. Future fines for failing to wear a mask will be $200, but Gollschewski said infringement notices were not yet ready to be issued. Police are handing out masks rather than fines – our officers have 40,000 masks that they can hand out, so I think they’ve got plenty. But we need the community to listen to the messaging and if the police officer engages with you and says, ‘You need to put this mask on’, you need to put the mask on, so it is a pretty good deal. Australia ’s chief nursing and midwifery officer,  Alison McMillan , has just given a coronavirus update in Melbourne.  She spoke about the new guidelines from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia, which I’ve mentioned a few times today, on getting rapid genomic testing for positive cases in hotel quarantine, extending the required isolation period to 14 days, and getting an exit test. The  United States has  set a new daily record for new coronavirus cases , with 290,000 cases reported in 24 hours, according to the Johns Hopkins global tally. Some 3,676 people in the US died with the virus in the same period.  There have been 21.8m cases and 368,685 deaths in the US since the pandemic began. Mexico has reported 14,362 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 1,038 deaths .  It is one of the highest daily case increases and brings the total number of cases in Mexico since the pandemic began to 1,507,931, with 132,069 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the health ministry has said.  Coronavirus  border restrictions are  also causing problems at the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe . Zimbabwe has reintroduced movement restrictions following a surge in Covid-19 infections, which have doubled to 18,000 cases since the start of November. South Africa is the worst-affected nation in  Africa , with more than 1.17m infections and 31,800 fatalities since the pandemic began and unprecedented daily figures of more than 20,000 cases reported several times this week. More on this from AFP: Zimbabwean truck driver  Wallace Muzondiwa  queued four days in his vehicle to enter neighbouring South Africa after thousands of people rushed to the border to escape new Zimbabwean movement restrictions this week. The surge overwhelmed immigration authorities at the Beitbridge border post, South Africa’s second-busiest entry port, where angry crowds were stranded by the backlog. “The situation is very, very, very hectic,” said Muzondiwa, desperate to get back on the road after officials finally approved his coronavirus test and additional pandemic-related paperwork. “The line is going very, very slowly and the sun is very hot,” he complained. Flustered travellers hurried past with their luggage, hopping into minivan taxis parked alongside sizzling barbecue stands selling chicken wings on the go. Coronavirus has complicated cumbersome land border crossings in southern Africa, where trucks can sometimes wait days to get through sluggish customs. “What causes the delays at the borders are the documents,” explained South African driver Sinki Tshangise, 44, who has criss-crossed between Botswana, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe for almost a decade. Negative Covid-19 certificates often expire before arrival, he added, forcing drivers to pay for more testing on the road. “I don’t think I can afford to pay at each and every border,” said Tshangise. “It’s a real struggle.”
'Brazilian horror story': internet melts down over sculptor's peculiar waxworks:	The first household name Arlindo Armacollo smothered in beeswax was Mother Teresa. Then came Albert Einstein, Pope John Paul II and a string of global luminaries who the entrepreneur-turned-artist admired. “It might look simple, but to achieve this richness of detail was hard work,” a local television reporter gushed during  a 2015 visit to Armacollo’s waxwork collection  in southern Brazil. “The artist wanted to capture the character as well as the soul of each person.” Whether the septuagenarian sculptor achieved that goal is now a matter of intense international debate, after images of his wax creations went viral on social media – six years after first being displayed in the town of Rolândia. Footage of Armacollo’s startling figures spread like wildfire last week after internet users unearthed – and ridiculed –  the video report  about their exhibition in a local church. The strangely disfigured personalities on show include Nelson Mandela, who has a beefcake’s body, a tiny head and dazzling peroxide hair; Princess Diana, who wears a crazed and terrifying grin; and Marilyn Monroe, who boasts a neck the size of a tree trunk and a seemingly melted face. Nearby, black hairs sprout from unusual corners of Elvis Presley’s shiny wax face. “Brazilian horror story,”  gasped  one of the numerous Twitter users discombobulated by the models. Word of the collection – which reminded some of  Spain’s jaw-dropping botched restorations  – soon spread. Journalists from leading news outlets in Brazil and beyond pursued the previously unknown artist for a reaction to his newfound fame. “I couldn’t care less [about the criticism],” Armacollo, 77, told the Guardian on Tuesday as he was flooded with interview requests and invitations for television appearances he planned to decline. “If it was about making money it might bother me whether people appreciated what I was doing or not. But I do the things I do because I enjoy them. I did this for our town. If people like it, come and visit. If they don’t, don’t,” he shrugged. “Why worry?” Armacollo’s statues, which each involve about 5kg of wax and imported English eyeballs, have moved since their 2015 television debut and are now housed in a nearby museum named after his father. There, Princess Diana has been joined by newer sculptures, including a similarly peculiar portrayal of the Queen. Until recently the exhibition also featured a statue of the corruption-busting judge Sergio Moro with a distinct resemblance to England defender Harry Maguire. But Armacollo evicted Brazil’s former security minister after  he resigned  from government and  took a high-paid job  with a consultancy involved in the judicial recovery of one of the construction giants he once pursued. “It’s all a bit weird, isn’t it?” Armacollo said. Like many in south  Brazil , Armacollo is a supporter of Jair Bolsonaro, and had considered honouring the right-wing populist president with his wax. “But then I thought: ‘I’m going to hold off for a bit to keep an eye on his behaviour.’ For now I’m still behind him and think he’s on the right path – but let’s wait a bit more to see to see if that solidifies.” The artist scoffed at the idea of celebrating Bolsonaro’s leftwing rival, the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. “You’re not in favour of him, are you?” he asked this reporter with a mistrustful laugh. Politics aside, Armacollo hoped “all this commotion” would attract tourists from other cities and abroad. A similar museum in Norfolk achieved cult status as “the world’s worst waxworks”, drawing thousands of visitors with  its un-lifelike lifelikes . Armacollo’s only regret was the reaction of his teenager granddaughter, left distraught by the mocking of her grandfather’s mannequins. “She’s very sensitive. She even cried,” the artist admitted, “but now she’s laughing about it too.”
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Second impeachment puts Trump in first place among lords of misrule:	Donald Trump, Donald Trump (so good they impeached him twice). It was always going to end this way. A presidency centered on fear, rage and division is climaxing in a Grand Guignol of three acts at the US Capitol in Washington: last Wednesday’s insurrection, this Wednesday’s impeachment, next Wednesday’s inauguration. As Barack Obama noted after act one, “we’d be kidding ourselves if we treated it as a total surprise”. What remains uncertain is whether this is the moment that the fever breaks and the nation gets back on track or merely a harbinger of further polarisation, violence and decline. Liz Cheney and nine other  Republicans  who joined Democrats in a 232-197 bipartisan vote to impeach Trump did not provide a comprehensive answer to that question. Yes, it was 10 more than the first impeachment just over a year ago and, yes, there are cracks in the dam. But it has not yet burst. And certainly on this Wednesday, with its besieged capital being prised from the grasp of a would-be autocrat, America resembled the sort of fragile state that it used to think it was in the business of rescuing and rebuilding. Barriers, checkpoints and a ring of steel had been erected on Capitol Hill. Members of the national guard, with masks, guns and military garb, could be seen sleeping on hard floors in the hallways of the Capitol. The last time troops were quartered here was during the American civil war; there were more of them than in Afghanistan or Iraq today. Inside the chamber, where members wore masks under strict new coronavirus rules, the historic day began with a prayer from R Adm Margaret Grun Kibben, the House chaplain. She noted that last week “we found ourselves seizing the scales of justice from the jaws of mobocracy”. But it did not take long for partisanship to bare its teeth. Although this process has been much speedier than Impeachment One, which sanctioned Trump for pressuring Ukraine for political favours, there were again angry speeches from both sides. Democrats  came to bury Caesar, not to praise him. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, said: “The president of the United States incited this insurrection, this armed rebellion, against our common country. He must go. He is a clear and present danger to the nation that we all love.” Steny Hoyer, the House majority leader, followed up: “Donald Trump has constructed a glass palace of lies, fearmongering and sedition. Last Wednesday, on January 6th, the nation and the world watched it shatter to pieces.” Case closed? No, this is still Trump’s Republican party. They played the cards of cancel culture, national healing and whataboutism and somehow they kept straight faces. The Ohio congressman Jim Jordan, regarded as a loyal  Trump attack dog , countered: “Democrats are going to impeach the president for a second time one week – one week – before he leaves office. Why? Why? Politics, and the fact that they want to cancel the president.” Andy Biggs, another Trump loyalist, warned: “Yours will be a pyrrhic victory for instead of stopping the Trump train, his movement will grow stronger, for you will have made him a martyr.” And Matt Gaetz of Florida complained: “It seems to me impeachment is an itch that doesn’t go away with just one scratch.” He went on to draw a false equivalence with last summer’s mostly peaceful Black Lives Matter protests, accusing Trump’s foes of lighting “actual flames, actual fires”. Democrats yelled objections. What was most shocking, perhaps, was not that 10 conservative Republicans discovered a spine after three years and 11 months of the Trump presidency, but that nearly 200 were still willing to go down with the ship and perpetuate his big lie about election fraud. Their masters are not party leaders but the cult-like “Maga nation” of grassroots Trump fans and rightwing media. Leader Kevin McCarthy summed up the soul tormenting conflict, admitting that Trump “bears responsibility” for the mob violence yet insisting: “A vote to impeach will further divide the nation. A vote to impeach will further fan the flames of partisan division.” Some observers might find this pretty rich from the party of voter suppression, border wall and “Lock her up!” In essence, their argument was we can’t impeach him because it would upset the domestic terrorists who stormed the Capitol eager to hang his vice-president, Mike Pence. Cori Bush, a new Democratic member, made the point for justice and accountability more pithily than most. “We have a mandate to legislate in defense of Black lives. The first step in that process is to root out white supremacy starting with impeaching the white supremacist-in-chief.” (She tweeted later: “What does it mean when they boo the Black congresswoman denouncing white supremacy?”) Indeed, the putsch against the US government was hardly unexpected in a country led by a man with a peculiar penchant for Confederate statues. Congressman Cedric Richmond, on his way to joining the Biden administration, referred to “some of my colleagues, some of whom may well be co-conspirators”, before concluding: “Simply put, we told you so. Richmond out.” But unlike the last impeachment circus, this time there was an eerie silence in the digital universe. Trump may be more aggrieved by having his favourite toy, Twitter, taken away than now owning half the presidential impeachments in history; Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton are mere also rans. But his fate in a Senate trial, whenever it happens, is less certain than first time around and will tell much about the future of the Republican party and America. As Oscar Wilde almost said, to lose one impeachment vote may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose both looks like you’re in the wrong job.
Why are ocean warming records so important?:	As if 2020 could get any worse, the latest research showed that oceans hit their highest recorded temperatures, a record that keeps getting broken year after year. Why are the oceans so important? It is quite simple: almost all of the extra heat we gain because of greenhouse gases ultimately ends up in the oceans. In fact, the oceans absorb more than 90% of the excess heat. Consequently, if you want to understand global warming, you have to measure ocean warming. I am part of a team of 20 climate scientists who just published new research in  Advances in Atmospheric Sciences . We collected temperature measurements spread out across the world’s oceans – measurements that in some cases, went back to the 1950s and even earlier. These data paint an unambiguous picture of a warming planet – warming that is a direct consequence of human emission of greenhouse gases. Ocean warming has been continuing apace for as long as we have made measurements. Scientists acknowledge year-to-year records, but the long-terms trends are what matter most. Any single year that is warm or cold cannot prove or disprove global warming. The more important issue is, what happens year after year after year? Is there a trend? The unambiguous answer is yes. Since the oceans are huge, they absorb unbelievable amounts of energy. The most common everyday unit of energy is the joule. But for the oceans, we think about energy in terms of zettajoules. A zettajoule is equal to 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 joules. How much is this? Well, in the past year, according to our data, the Earth has absorbed about 20 zettajoules of heat, equivalent to the heat given off by 630bn common household hairdryers blowing all day and night, 360 days a year. To check our findings, we compared our results with other institutions. We found that the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration data also ranked 2020 as the hottest year ever for the oceans. Their data showed a much smaller warming last year compared with the preceding year, but over the long term, the data from the two groups agrees quite well. When different groups using different techniques reach similar conclusions, its adds confidence to the results. “But people don’t live on the oceans, so why should we care?” That is a question I get all the time and the answer is clear. The oceans actually control the Earth’s weather. Approximately 70% of the planet is covered by ocean waters; when those waters heat, they in turn warm the atmosphere. Also, water evaporates from oceans into the atmosphere and the evaporation increases dramatically as temperatures rise. Think about how humid a warm day can be compared to a cold day. By these mechanisms, oceans control both the temperature and the humidity level in the atmosphere. Consequently, oceans control the weather. All of this affects humans. Warming oceans are creating more powerful storms, like cyclone Yasa, which recently hit the South Pacific. Some areas are becoming wetter, with heavier rainfall and flooding. Simultaneously, other areas are becoming more dry, with more intense heatwaves, droughts, and wildfires. We have seen these effects manifest with wildfires in Australia, the western US, and other locations. We can expect studies like ours to become routine as global warming continues. We expect to see heat records continue to be broken and weather to become more and more strange. And of course, there will be costs – in human lives and infrastructure. But there is still time to turn this ship around. We can still do things that make the future better for us and our children. With the change in leadership in the US, we can hope things will get better. President-elect Joe Biden must rejoin the rest of the world in working to create the planet we want and that our children deserve. John Abraham is a professor of thermal sciences at the University of St Thomas in Minnesota •  The headline was amended on 14 January 2021 to more accurately reflect the content of the article.
Sri Lanka v England: first Test, day one – as it happened:	Here you go . See you on Friday for day two. The day belongs to four people.  Dom Bess took the jammiest five-for you’ll ever see, but it’s still a five-for, and it brings his Test average down from a forgettable 40 to a thrifty 33. Stuart Broad varied his pace to take three for 20 – all three in the top four – and show why England preferred him to Jimmy Anderson, who becomes the first Englishman ever to be left out straight after taking his 600th Test wicket.  Jonny Bairstow, returning from the wilderness, played a mature hand to reach 47 not out, took one catch and created another by taking a blow on the ankle. But the man of the day was Joe Root, who captained England well in the field (the first wicket fell to a strategically placed leg slip) and then found his most fluent form, with no preparation, to ram home the advantage. Back home, a nation woke up to wonder if it was dreaming. The other star was the ground at Galle, sadly empty but still beautiful, with its photogenic fort and its stirring sea views. “Watching Tests at Galle brings back lovely memories for me,” says Ian Truman. “On our honeymoon, my wife and I were by coincidence staying at the same hotel in Galle as the Australia team who were touring. Whilst years of Ashes hurt wouldn’t allow me to acknowledge the Aussies’ presence, my abiding memory was the moment at breakfast I reached for the last box of cornflakes at the same time as one of their bowling coaches. He stared me in the eye, could see no sign of discernible weakness, and yielded... Who else can say they’ve seen off a fired-up Allan Donald, hey?”  Thanks for your correspondence and your company. And while you wait for our match report … 41st over: England 127-2 (Bairstow 47, Root 66)  Fernando knows where Bairstow’s weakness lies – against the ball coming back in to his off stump. He’s finding some swing, and yelling for LBW, but Bairstow’s eye is in and he’s got bat on it. When Fernando goes full, looking for the yorker, Bairstow clips him crisply for four. And that’s stumps, with  England in dreamland . They’ve almost cancelled out Sri Lanka’s meagre total already, and they’ve got Root and Bairstow still there, with Lawrence, Buttler and Curran waiting to cash in. Who says the subcontinent is a tough place to play? 40th over: England 119-2 (Bairstow 39, Root 66)  Embuldeniya, finally tiring, dishes up a full toss, which Root sweeps for two, and another, which he slog-sweeps for four. Root 66! And that’s the  hundred partnership . It’s been excellent, patient but positive, and after the Sri Lankan shambles, it’s worth about 200. 39th over: England 113-2 (Bairstow 39, Root 60)  Chandimal is so frustrated that he turns back to his seamer, Fernando. Root clips a single and Bairstow sees out five dots. With three overs to go, Dan Lawrence is still padded up, so anyone hoping for a cult cameo from Jack Leach may be disappointed.  38th over: England 112-2 (Bairstow 39, Root 59)  Root sweeps Embuldeniya for four, then pushes through the covers for a single. He’s playing with his full fluency now, and the only question is whether he can keep it up for another hour and a half or so and get his first Test hundred since 2019. The state of the game is on his side.  37th over: England 107-2 (Bairstow 39, Root 54)  A couple of singles off Perera. Root takes off his helmet, revealing a crew cut rather than the longer locks that were his lockdown look. “It’s weird following England,” says Bob O’Hara in Trondheim. “We’re 85-2, with SL only getting 135, and because it’s on a spinning pitch I’m still not confident about us getting a decent first-innings lead.” 36th over: England 105-2 (Bairstow 38, Root 53)  Embuldeniya’s rest lasted all of three minutes. He comes back from the other end and instantly beats Root, prompting an appeal from the keeper, Dickwella, who doesn’t get any support from his team mates. 35th over: England 103-2 (Bairstow 37, Root 52)  Embuldeniya gets a rest, Perera returns, and both batsmen do some milking. England’s  hundred  comes up, and the second fifty took only 76 balls, whereas the first took 131.  A tweet arrives from someone called Dr Creepen. “Having read the entirety of today’s OBO (of course),” he says, “I’ve not found a single mention of YJB. Has he finally grown up, I wonder?” Ha. No offence, but nicknames sometimes wear a bit thin, don’t they?  34th over: England 97-2 (Bairstow 33, Root 50)  Root sweeps yet again, firmly, for four, off Hasaranga, follows up with a two and a single, and that’s his  fifty  from 94 balls. It’s been easily the innings of the day. Only three fours, but superb concentration, judgment of length and rotating of the strike – the only blemish came with that reprieve on review.  33rd over: England 89-2 (Bairstow 32, Root 43)  Embuldeniya concedes just a single, to another Root sweep. He has two for 42 off 15 hard-working overs. 32nd over: England 88-2 (Bairstow 32, Root 42)  Hasaranga is finding turn with his leg-breaks, but Root is “giving a masterclass in how to play spin,” as Rob Key observes. On Twitter, Srihari Venugopalan is already gloating about England’s next Test series. “Excellent work by our Lankan neighbours there, making sure Bess plays in India. Going to be fun.” 31st over: England 85-2 (Bairstow 32, Root 39)  Root sweeps Embuldeniya for two, then tucks him for two more. Just when he seems to be in command, he edges one, but his hands are soft and his head is over the bat, so the ball trickles away safely.  “Ungulates,” says Duncan Haskell, picking up on the 22nd over. “Having ruminated on Mark Lewis’s question, the two that (klip)spring to mind are the Americamels Cup and the Calcuttapir Cup.” Deer, deer. 30th over: England 80-2 (Bairstow 32, Root 34)  Better from Hasaranga, who manages four dots to Root before dropping short again and being cut for a single. He has only one catcher (at slip), which is making it a bit obvious that his captain doesn’t trust him. And you can understand why, but it’s making a vicious circle, when the boss’s job is to make a virtuous one.  “I agree with Mr Withal,” says David Gaskell. “A virtual day out at Galle watching cricket and the odd flash of the splendid ocean. Gentle cricket with a possible war setting to come in Brisbane later on; very pleasant and restorative in troubled times. I am reminded of Ronnie Barker in Porridge comforting Godber on his first night in prison, ‘What do you want to do tonight, do you want to go out? Or shall we just stop in?’ Let’s stop in and watch the cricket, eh?” 29th over: England 77-2 (Bairstow 30, Root 33)  Bairstow almost chips a catch back to Embuldeniya, but there’s just enough muscle on it to go past him. 28th over: England 74-2 (Bairstow 28, Root 32)  Back comes Hasaranga, to be guided for a delicate four by Bairstow. “The beginning of a novel,” says Abhijato Sensarma, picking up the gauntlet from the 4th over. “It’s cold in Transylvania, and I’d like to imagine myself in Galle. The roads are more meandering there, but for me, a shift from the monotone is a delight amidst the paperwork and the lockdowns which have engulfed my life over the past year. And thus, I tuned into the screen of my television. This was a Thursday morning, on which I was ordained to witness an England XI collapse on the other side of the world when we least expected them to – again ...” Not a magic realist, then. 27th over: England 68-2 (Bairstow 23, Root 31)  Root plays the umpteenth and best sweep if this session, getting right forward to Embuldeniya and smacking it square, with some authority. And then he rocks back to late-cut for a couple and bring up the  fifty partnership . It’s the first one since Mathews and Chandimal, nine wickets ago. 26th over: England 62-2 (Bairstow 23, Root 25)  Perera has a big appeal for LBW against Bairstow, who escapes because the umpire shakes his head. If Chandimal had reviewed, it would have been umpire’s call. 25th over: England 59-2 (Bairstow 22, Root 23)  Bairstow runs Embuldeniya down to third man for two. “Embuldeniya is bowling a beautiful line and tempted Crawley into making a false shot,” says Colum Fordham. “I hope Joe Root can use his nous and avoid doing likewise but the ball is turning a mile. I think Sri Lanka have found the successor to Herath and this is a real challenge for Root’s batting prowess.” Hear, hear – Herath says the same thing himself. 24th over: England 56-2 (Bairstow 20, Root 22)  More singles off Perera, as some dark clouds gather in the background. “Have I missed something?” asks Ian Wilson in Turkey, “or are the England players wearing black arm bands for the passing of John Edrich?” I haven’t heard but I assume it’s for Edrich, who had a distinguished Test career, and perhaps also Robin Jackman, who should have played more than he did. “I think that we have a long tail,” Ian adds, “so I hope Root, Bairstow, Lawrence and Buttler can get some big runs.” One of them needs to, although this could be the rare Test in which 250 is enough.  23rd over: England 52-2 (Bairstow 18, Root 20)  Chandimal, fed up with Hasaranga’s length, turned back to Embuldeniya. Root immediately reverted to the sweep, picking up two, but he was outwitted by the ball that nearly got him.  It did pitch in line.. but it was going over middle-and-off. “Saved by the bounce,” Rob Key says. The camera finds Mickey Arthur, the Sri Lankan coach, in the stands, just as he says “Fuck!”. Up goes the finger as Root is trapped on the crease by the turning ball, but did it pitch outside leg? 22nd over: England 50-2 (Bairstow 18, Root 18)  As these two warm to their task, helped by the heavy humidity, Perera gets nurdled for three singles.  “To echo earlier sentiments,” says Mark Lewis, “it is indeed great to have Test cricket back. It certainly makes WFH at the same desk where I ate my Christmas dinner more palatable.” Sign o’ the times. “And made all the brighter by the ridiculously named Moose Cup being up for grabs. Which makes me wonder: has any other international tournament ever been sponsored by an ungulate?” 21st over: England 47-2 (Bairstow 17, Root 16)  Hasaranga is still dropping too short, giving away runs to the cut and the pull. Meanwhile Rob Key spots a sticker on Joe Root’s bat that says Barmy Army. It’s a nice touch, but some of the Barmies will be appalled at this official recognition, and may have to start a splinter group. “Can’t believe Sri Lanka failed to bat out their 50 overs,” says Steve Pye, “and it now looks like we might do the same.” 20th over: England 41-2 (Bairstow 15, Root 12)  At the other end Perera is bowling at the stumps and keeping both batsmen quiet. This over is a maiden to Root, who has already faced 39 balls.  19th over: England 41-2 (Bairstow 15, Root 12)  Those sweep shots have seen off Embuldeniya, who gives way to Hasaranga. He’s a touch short, conceding three singles out to the cover sweeper, but I’d back him to get some wickets here. 18th over: England 38-2 (Bairstow 14, Root 10)  A maiden from Perera to Bairstow. “Happy New Test Series!” says Richard Jansz-Moore. Thanks, and the same to you. “I assume that Dom Bess’s performance was inspired by Vic Marks’ retirement and will be dedicated to him in the post-match interview. Either that or it was a thinly disguised attempt to persuade him to come out of retirement for ‘one last job’ to be able to write about a surprisingly good Somerset performance!” Ha. I can hear Vic’s trademark chuckle, drifting over the sodden hills of south-west England. 17th over: England 38-2 (Bairstow 14, Root 10)  A change of tack against Embuldeniya, as both batsmen attack him with the sweep. Bairstow picks up a two and a single, Root a four – the first one since Crawley’s flick, several days ago.  16th over: England 31-2 (Bairstow 11, Root 6)  A single to each batsman off Perera. They’ve always liked batting together, though Bairstow may be a little sore at the way he’s been pushed to the margins of the Test team. 15th over: England 29-2 (Bairstow 10, Root 5)  A maiden to Bairstow from Embuldeniya, who has been superb. We have the TMS link.  Thank you, Robert Barnes. You’re allowed to use  it  as long as you keep reading this. 14th over: England 29-2 (Bairstow 10, Root 5)  Root, still watchful, goes block-block-block before tucking Perera to midwicket for a single. Bairstow blocks out the blocking and just takes the tuck. “Got to say, I’m loving the Under-12s feel this match has at the moment,” said Peter Salmon, before Crawley was out. “Batting collapses, batsmen run out from the ball being hit back, catches which bounce off other players and Crawley having to dive after a stupid call. I really want Joe Root to come out without his box and have to go back and get it, and then the bigger boy Bairstow to thump 25 and retire.” 13th over: England 27-2 (Bairstow 9, Root 4)  No, it wasn’t a change of ends – Embuldeniya is continuing. Bairstow gets hold of a sweep for the first time, a lap for two, and then he rocks back and cuts for three, playing nice and late. And that’s  drinks,  with Sri Lanka on top for the half-session and hanging in there overall. They just need one more wicket soon to get down to Dan Lawrence, the debutant who showed some nerves this morning by dropping an easy catch. 12th over: England 21-2 (Bairstow 4, Root 3)  Hasaranga is no sooner on than off, perhaps because he’s going to change ends. On comes Dilruwan Perera, who is 15 years his senior. He has a fine record at Galle but these two batsmen, both right-handers, are probably happy to face off-spin rather than leg-breaks and googles.
Rooftop rallies, frisbee golf and alpacas: alternative clips of the year:	You want hard work? We’ll give you hard work.  The Dutch headwind cycling championships  in February. Frisbee golf: who knew? A magnificent  hole in one  by Kevin Jones from September. In May the Brazilian skateboarder Gui Khury became the first person to land a 1080-degree turn on a vertical ramp.  Not bad for an 11-year-old . On the other side of the world,  Isamu Yamamoto in Japan is more than worth watching too . And Katie Ledecky swam a length  with a glass of milk on her head  in August. Perhaps the rugby pass of the year as Teddy Iribaren of Racing 92  puts Teddy Thomas in  to score against Munster in January. Ronnie O’Sullivan clip of the year . There were plenty to choose from, as ever. Some amazing bowls as  Nick Brett finds the gap and puts it on a sixpence ; in the IPL, Nicholas Pooran produced some  stunning fielding  at the IPL and Sarah Fuller  made college football history . And some golfing spectaculars: here’s one-armed amateur golfer Laurent Hurtubise’s  hole in one  at the PGA American Express in January, Jon Rahm’s astonishing  skim across the water before the Masters  (they always go in in practice), and then there’s 84-year-old Mary Wakefield  sinking a putt across the length of a basketball court . A  canine goalline clearance  spares a keeper’s blushes in Argentina in January. But that was eclipsed by the  Carlton v Ilkley alpaca  pitch invasion.  A parrot decided to perch on Brazil defender Bruna Benties’ head  in a training session in September, too. A player uses a spare ball to  dispossess an opponent in North Macedonia  in February as a match between Makedonija Gjorce Petrov and Akademija Pandev descends into farce. And for dive of the year, take a bow (and tumble)  AFC Totton’s Stéphane Zubar . Footballers kept themselves busy. We had Trent Alexander-Arnold  chipping into a garden ornament , Angel Gomes  finding the top bin  and  Ben Chilwell’s tea break . And with getting hold of toilet rolls becoming a preoccupation,  some players inevitably showed off their keepy-uppy skills with them . Hats off to Elisha Nochomovitz for  running a marathon on his balcony , while this  rally across the rooftops  between 11-year-old Carola Pessina and Vittoria Oliveri, 13, in Italy caught the eye in April. On a similar theme badminton stars Lauren Smith and Marcus Ellis  kept themselves, and us, entertained , in June. With nothing else going on outside, how about the  thrills and spills of Marbula E ? And for a defining image of our time, here’s the US’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci  throwing the first pitch  at MLB’s opening day. Robot fans at a Japanese baseball game  in July. Be afraid. Go-karter Luca Corberi , and a dangerous one at that, in October. A shattering moment for Branislav Ivanovic as he  drops the trophy after Zenit St Petersburg’s Russian Cup final win over FC Khimki  – he ended the year at West Brom. A frightening MotoGP moment for Valentino Rossi as Franco Morbidelli’s bike  bounces over him at the Austrian GP . Thankfully and remarkably, no one was hurt. And here’s an in-car view of the  rallying escape of the year  for Ott Tänak and Martin Järveoja. An Atlanta school basketball  team manager makes the most of his big shot . And here’s the Harlem Globetrotters’  military family reunion surprise . 1) RIP dressage wonderhorse Totilas.  Here he is in his prime  with the Dutch rider Edward Gal. 2) More Maradona magic,  setting up a World Cup final winner . 3) The astonishing final three laps of the  1982 Monaco Grand Prix . 4) Gérard Houllier’s first title,  with PSG in 1986 . Spotters badges:  vsbain67, ronbarwick, whobroughtoranges, bf_silvertown Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy. •   Thanks for all your posts BTL throughout the year. We’ll be back on 7 January
What's the furthest from goal a player has seen red for a professional foul?:	“What is the furthest away from goal someone has been sent off for a professional foul?”  muses Robert Davies. Our thoughts immediately settled on Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s gloriously cynical  scything down of Newcastle’s Rob Lee  at Old Trafford in 1998 but by the time the Norwegian actually made contact with Lee’s shins, he was only around 30 yards from goal. How about  this shocking decision  from the 1991 League Cup quarter-finals then, when Southampton’s Jimmy Case was sent for an early bath after hauling down Bryan Robson – hardly known for his blistering pace – a good 40 yards from goal with two covering defenders for company? At the beginning of the season referees had been instructed to tighten up punishment for fouls that denied a clear goalscoring opportunity and, on this evidence, they had a loose understanding of what that meant. Another example from September 2018, in which Aberdeen’s Michael Devlin was given his marching orders  for a foul around 45 yards from goal , suggested officials were still struggling many years later. Aberdeen fail to overturn Michael Devlin's red card against Kilmarnock. Your thoughts? ➡️  https://t.co/Bsp8HyvWfS   pic.twitter.com/EeyiaKm9Gs Simon Kaplan has a potential winner. “I’d suggest Gary Cahill playing for Bolton against Tottenham in December 2011,” he writes. “He got a red card (rescinded on appeal) for denying Scott Parker a ‘clear goalscoring opportunity’ by taking him out about five yards inside the Bolton half.” Owen Coyle measured it for us in his post-match rant: If you understand the terminology it has to be a clear goalscoring opportunity. Now, Scott Parker is a fantastic player but he took a touch with his left foot, went out to the wing, 50 yards from goal. We had Zat Knight in the middle and other defenders coming back. However, if  this video evidence  is anything to go by, we reckon Mikel Arteta can match those 50 yards after bundling over Marouane Chamakh at Crystal Palace in 2013. “He was far from goal, it was an accidental foul, he was not the last man,” protested Arsène Wenger. Arsenal didn’t appeal, so the red card stood. “Has any club scored as many goals in the Champions League group stages as Manchester United this year (15) and not qualified for the knockouts? ” wonders Tim Leehan. While we’ve been polishing off the last few Quality Street, Yorben Geerinckx has done the hard yards for us. “If I’m correct, this only happened twice,” he suggests. “The first time was in 2012-13 when Chelsea scored 16 and amassed 10 points, as many as Shakhtar Donetsk. The Ukrainian side went through because they scored more away goals in the games between the two, with later-to-be-Chelsea player Willian scoring twice at Stamford Bridge in a 3-2 loss, which would prove sufficient to progress after a 2-1 home win. Juventus topped that group and Chelsea would go on to win the Europa League. “The second time was last season. RB Salzburg introduced Erling Braut Haaland to the world and also scored 16. Liverpool won that group and Salzburg finished five points behind runners-up Napoli, progressing to the Europa League, where they were eliminated by Eintracht Frankfurt in last 32.” Paul Moran unearthed the same examples and came up with some new ones. “In poring over 27 years of Champions League group stages, I found that Group D of the 2005-06 competition surprisingly only featured 12 goals across the 12 games. Two 2-1 results were the highest-scoring fixtures and, incredibly, Lille managed to secure six points and third place (transferring to the Uefa Cup) despite only scoring once – they were helped by an impressive defence which conceded just two goals.” Perhaps Jorge Valdano was right about  that particular era of European football . Anyway, back to Paul. “Has any other group stage in a competition (or even a whole competition) featured a goals-per-game figure of less than one? Or has any team in a group stage/competition had a lower figure of goals-per-game (scored + conceded) than Lille’s 0.5?” Send your answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU . “Portsmouth won 2-0 at Hull with only one shot on target and it didn’t come from Pompey (there were two own goals),”  writes Eddy Reynolds. “ Is this a record?” Nope. Burnley have gone one (none? – Knowledge Ed) better. “I watched Fulham lose 2-1 at Burnley in January 2019,” writes Jon Gundry. “That Fulham lost was not a surprise. We haven’t won at Turf Moor since 1951. Even in a desperately poor season ending in relegation from the Premier League, it was a surprise to lose when Burnley  did not have a shot on target . Fulham conceded two own goals by Joe Bryan and Denis Odoi. André Schürrle scored a cracker at the right end.” Worthy of note is this from Mike Dunford, who recalls Southampton’s  6-0 smash-and-grab win at Wolves  in 2007. “Memory serves that we had five shots on target. Mick McCarthy’s team were so unfortunate – and I speak as a Saints fan who saw it – that the home supporters  applauded  their team off. Has that ever happened in a bigger home defeat? And has anyone ever won by more goals in which every shot on target went in?” Patrick Brennan has one, at least. “ Luton beat Blackburn 3-2  on the last day of the 2019-20 season with one shot on target (a penalty) and two own goals,” he tweets. “If they hadn’t won they’d have gone down.” “Arsenal have been beaten home and away by Manchester United and Chelsea,”  noted Paul Brazier in March 2010.  “Has any side become champions of England despite losing all four games against the teams in second and third place?” In short, no. There have been a few examples of the champions losing three and drawing one, the most recent being Aston Villa in the 1980-81 season. They drew 1-1 at home to third-placed Arsenal, losing 2-0 at Highbury (the day they clinched the title), and lost both fixtures to second-placed Ipswich: 2-1 at Villa Park in mid-April and 1-0 at Portman Road. “Wikipedia reliably informs me there are five clubs that Sam Allardyce has played for and managed: Limerick, Preston, Bolton, Sunderland and West Brom. Can any manager beat that?” asks David Skinner. Has any other manager recovered from a huge loss (yes the 9-0!) and some as well as Hasenhuttl has? Or simply not been sacked. It’s an astonishing turnaround. @blzzrd   @OptaJoe   @guardian_sport  might know #SaintsFC   #Hasenhuttl “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,” reports Alex Crane. “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” @TheKnowledge_GU  Do you know the long and short of this question?  https://t.co/wLRqy70wXf “After an FA Cup tie on 1 February 1913, Burnley, then riding high in the Second Division, beat Midland League Gainsborough Trinity 4-1,” begins John Spooner. Trinity led until the last half hour, largely due to the efforts of goalkeeper Ronnie Sewell and his full-backs Cliff Jones and Sam Gunton. At full-time, Burnley made a bid to buy the trio  en bloc . The deal was sealed by 6.20pm that evening. Has a similar instance of players being signed by the opposition at the final whistle happened since?” Or similar bulk buys? @TheKnowledge_GU  Excluding one off huge wins, what's the highest goals-per-game ratio in a cup run?  For example, Newport County's 1988-89 Conference Cup involved 27 goals over three matches, ending in a 6-5 AET defeat. Barking.  pic.twitter.com/dSRdHmwzFP •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Ivan Cavaleiro's header earns Fulham deserved point at Tottenham:	Tottenham refuse to learn their lesson. Once again they allowed a game to slip from their control, failing to build on Harry Kane’s early goal and falling into defensive mode. It has become a recurring theme and Spurs ended up paying the price for José Mourinho’s conservatism when  Fulham , inspired by a thrilling cameo from Ademola Lookman, punished their negative opponents with a deserved equaliser. Mourinho could not complain about bad luck, even though his side missed a series of outstanding opportunities and had a winner from Sergio Reguilón disallowed for offside. To focus on misfortune and missed chances would be a distraction when the reality is that Spurs, who have won two of their past eight league games, have made a habit of conceding costly late goals. It happened when they drew with Crystal Palace and Wolves last month, it happened when they lost against Liverpool at Anfield, and it happened again when Ivan Cavaleiro leapt in the 74th minute to haul Fulham level. Spurs had contrived to squander yet another commanding position and although they were top of the league midway through December, they now are six points behind Manchester United in first place. Although the reliance on Kane and Son Heung-min is a hindrance, the overall mentality is an issue. Spurs did not approach the second half like title contenders. They were quick to retreat and, although Fulham rode their luck at times, Scott Parker’s side merited a draw that lifts them two points below Brighton in 17th place. Fulham, who have two games in hand on Brighton, ran their hearts out and almost snatched a priceless win when Hugo Lloris denied Ruben Loftus‑Cheek. Although they arrived in a funk, seething at being given only two days to prepare after a Covid-19 outbreak forced Aston Villa to postpone their game against Spurs, they responded magnificently. Parker had called the scheduling scandalous, arguing that Fulham needed more notice from the  Premier League . This fixture had originally been postponed on 30 December after Fulham, who also had to call off their trip to Burnley on 3 January, recorded a number of positive coronavirus tests. Parker had not banked on it being rearranged so quickly; otherwise he would not have played so many of his regulars when his side returned to action against Queens Park Rangers in the third round of the FA Cup last weekend. Yet perfection is impossible given the sport is playing by the pandemic’s rules and Fulham had no choice but to get on with it. Mourinho, who expected Fulham to field a strong side, had dismissed Parker’s complaints and Spurs were determined to make their guests suffer during the first half. Spurs sought to expose Fulham’s rustiness, threatening whenever they raised the tempo. Mourinho wanted his full-backs high and wide, attacking the space behind Parker’s wing-backs, and whipping in crosses for Kane and Son. The tactic was effective throughout the opening period and it should have led to a goal in the sixth minute, Serge Aurier’s cutback reaching Reguilón, who fired over from close range. Spurs kept cutting through Parker’s cautious 3-5-2 system. Alphonse Areola had to be in inspired form in Fulham’s goal, twice denying Son. Tosin Adarabioyo was forced into last-ditch action, sliding in to rob Kane, and it was not a surprise when Fulham cracked. Reguilón raided from left-back and delivered a peach of a cross for Kane to head home. Yet Fulham, who had not played a league game since Boxing Day, refused to lie down. They have developed a solid work ethic under Parker and were diligent in their approach, with Harrison Reed fighting in midfield. Andre-Frank Zambo Anguissa offered a languid quality on the ball, showing quick feet before testing Lloris. Loftus-Cheek almost equalised and the longer it stayed 1-0, the bolder Fulham became. Parker saw that Spurs had lost their fluency in midfield. He gambled, introducing Lookman, a livewire on the left. Spurs dropped deeper, relying on counterattacks, their nerves growing when Son hit a post at the end of a swift break. Fulham saw their chance. Spurs could not contain Lookman, who turned Aurier inside out before crossing for Cavaleiro to score. Fulham, who host Chelsea on Saturday, ended up enjoying their last‑minute invitation to north London. “People need to understand the predicament we were in,” Parker said afterwards. “We are not making it up. We have been very open and had worries for the safety of others too … we don’t need to apologise for anything. I thought we were immense tonight. I was very proud because of what we faced.” Mourinho, meanwhile, was left frustrated by his team’s inability to take their chances. “This is the same story basically since the beginning of the season,” he added. “Today was a clear situation where we could and should have killed the game in the first half but then you go back to the goals that we concede. “There are some things [that] have to do with organisation of the team, but other things they have to do with individual skills, individual ability, and it’s as simple as that.”
Modern life is rubbish! The people whose homes are portals to the past:	W ill future generations look at the interior design of the early 21st century in appreciation? Possibly not. We do not appear to have crafted many design classics, unless slab-like corner sofas in mud-grey velvet are Eames chairs in the making. Our feature walls are gaudy;  our furniture cheaply made . Scarcely anything seems to be built to last, which is just as well, as the next Instagram-led interior design trend will be along soon enough. But there are those who retreat from modern trends into the interiors of the past, drawn by the allure of original designs. We speak to five people whose homes are portals into the past. Whiteside has assiduously converted his suburban semi into a prewar home. Photographs: Richard Saker My mum says that I was always into the 30s, ever since she can remember. I’d go around to my aunt and uncle’s house and play old dance band records. At weekends, I’d rummage in Patrick’s Saleroom, a sort of junk shop that’s still around today. I’d go there every weekend from the age of seven or eight and buy all sorts of weird things: gramophones, gas mantles, electric toasters, Bakelite hairdryers. I have an obsession with 30s vacuums. They’re the best! They really get all the crap out of the carpet. I shut the door and I'm in 1936 The music, the fashion and the style were magical. Even the food was great – everything was homegrown back then. I would go back in time now if I could, although I’d take my family with me. It probably wouldn’t live up to my expectations unless I was rich and able to do fun things such as go to the Savoy theatre and go out dancing. I grew up over the road from the house I live in. It used to belong to an old lady. She was well over 100 when I was a child. She was a real character: a former schoolteacher, very strict. Us kids used to call it the witch’s house, because if a ball hit her window you’d see an eye poke out from behind her venetian blinds. She’d come outside with a carving knife and cut the ball open. But she was a lovely lady, really. It must have been annoying for her, all these kids knocking balls into her windows. After she died, the house lay unused for nine years, until I bought it. I found her old ration book and letters from her sweetheart, who died in the first world war, under the floorboards. The letters were quite upsetting to read, knowing how he died young. Most of my furniture comes from Patrick’s Saleroom, unless it’s something rare and hard to find, in which case I use eBay. Everything is vintage, apart from my Alexa – but that’s hidden in an old speaker. I have a laptop for work and watching Netflix. But that’s it. I restored a 1951 Bush television, so I can watch old movies on it. I know it’s not from the 30s, but TVs weren’t popular back then. There’s a lot I don’t like about modern life. I find society quite greedy. Everyone’s a bit more selfish. If I live by any 30s values in my life, I suppose it’s trying to have good manners: be polite, and nice to folk, and help them as much as you can. When I come home from work, I like to shut the door and pretend I’m back in 1936. Not to the extent it’s freaky, though. I do go to work and see my friends and have a normal life. But my house is my little time capsule. The 30s stay here; when I leave the house, I’m back in the real world. I forget I have a 30s house. If I don’t warn people before they come over for the first time, they walk in, stop speaking, then ask me if it’s my grandparents’ house. I had a postman come to the house once and ask me if my mum and dad were in. I get it. It looks like an old lady’s house. Kelty  at home in South Uist. Photographs courtesy of Julie Kelty Everything in my house is 40s-style – or if it isn’t, it’s hidden away. I have three children, so there’s no way in the world I could get away without having modern things such as a TV and a washing machine. But the washing machine is covered with a curtain and the toaster is in a cupboard under the worktop. I have a real 40s toaster on the counter: I daren’t turn it on, even though it does have a plug fitted. My kids are always complaining about the toaster. They go: “Mum, why is the toaster in the cupboard?” I say: “Because that’s the way I like it!” But they don’t mind, really, because they know it makes me happy. I love the simplicity of the era I’m most proud of my living room. It’s so relaxing. I love the rocking chair and the old clock on the mantelpiece. If you don’t look at the TV, you can imagine you are in a 40s lounge. I love to sit there and read old magazines from the 40s. Sometimes, they have people’s addresses on the label. I think about them: what were they like? What lives did they lead? I get all my furniture on the island.  There’s a brilliant place called ReStore  that restores old furniture that people have donated: almost everything in my house is from there. There are two charity shops on the island that are also really good – I can always pick up beautiful things there and they aren’t expensive. The charity shops on the mainland know about vintage now; they put up the price. I dress in 40s clothes, too. I love the style – it’s very feminine. The ladies always got dressed up to go out back then. They took care, you know? No leggings and long T-shirts! I always wear a skirt, no matter what I’m doing. You have to wear thick tights in winter, though. I love the simplicity of the era. It’s not over the top, like it is now. There’s too much  stuff  now. It’s all about what car you have, or what clothes you wear. Even modern cars are stressful. There’s so much that can go wrong with them. Back then, things were simple and modest. It felt like everyone was in it together. People were different – they did things for each other. I love that sense of neighbourliness and community. If I had the chance to go back to the 40s, I’d love to go. Not to stay there – I imagine it was pretty terrifying to live through the war. But maybe after the war, when it was all over, to visit a world without cars and people everywhere. That’s one of the reasons my husband and I moved to Uist – to get away from technology and crowds and to live a simpler life. There are plenty of places on the island where you can look around and it’s exactly as it would have been in the 40s. Although, sadly, technology has followed us to the island – we got 4G last year. I’m constantly looking at my phone now. Adverts pop up and I think: “Ooh, I’d love to buy that.” I wish I wasn’t looking at my phone all the time. Preston at home in Bolton. Photographs courtesy of Emma Preston I’d say my style is mid-century American ranch style, with a tiki influence. I’ve always loved vintage style, ever since I was a teenager. In the 80s, I was into the mod scene. I remember walking into a friend’s house when I was about 19 and everything was styled like the 50s: there was a cocktail bar and 50s magazines. I thought it was so stylish. After that, I never looked back: I’ve decorated all of my houses in a vintage way. I feel wowed by it – every day When I started collecting in the 80s, you could pick up stuff in charity shops and flea markets for next to nothing. I still have a 50s pale-green and pink bedroom suite I got at a Manchester flea market in the early 90s. Nowadays, I get most of my things through specialist dealers, although you can also get good pieces from eBay and Etsy if you look hard enough. I’d love some Heywood-Wakefield or Paul Frankl rattan furniture and I’m desperate for an Alfred Meakin cactus teapot – I have almost the full set, but I’m missing the teapot. I have two cocktail bars. They are pretty special. One is a mid-century bar with a glitter vinyl front. My tiki bamboo bar I got from a friend who was selling it. I’ve owned several bamboo bars over the years. At one point, I had about four bars in my house at the same time. I had to get rid of them, though – you can’t keep them all. I do have modern bits in the house. My kitchen isn’t original. It’s styled on a Youngstown kitchen from the US; it would be difficult and expensive to ship one over, so I created the look using chevron cupboard pulls and aluminium trim on a modern kitchen. I had really positive comments on  my Instagram account  from people in the US, which was nice. The only thing in my house that I really hate is the TV, because it doesn’t fit with the decor. We have a modern TV – my husband, Nigel, insisted. It is nice to watch old movies on a decent screen, though. William Morris said that you should have nothing in your house that you don’t know to be useful or believe to be beautiful. Everything in my house is beautiful to me, apart from my telly – which is useful! I don’t wish I lived in the 50s. I love vintage style, not vintage values. When I’m reading magazines from that period, some of the adverts are so archaic. It’s all about buying the woman in your life a vacuum cleaner for Christmas. But I couldn’t live in modern surroundings, either. This trend for grey at the moment – I can’t bear it. Everything is grey. People are even painting the exterior of their houses grey! I need colour in my life. I’ve felt so fortunate to have this beautiful home during Covid. I get so much pleasure from every item in my home. It’s so lovely to sit at my bar and have a mai tai while I put some lounge music on. I feel so grateful to live here, look at everything and feel wowed by it – which I still do, every day. Grant  at his bar in Dunblane. Photographs: Nick Grant I didn’t have a fantastic childhood. My mum died when I was six, of a brain tumour. TV was my escape. Every Saturday evening, I lost myself in classic American shows like The Dukes of Hazzard, The A Team, Knight Rider. Those 80s shows often visually referenced the 60s and Americana. There’s definitely a bit of nostalgia there. I love that culture of hot rodding and classic cars My interest in the 60s started with cars. I’ve always driven classic cars. I have a ’57 Chevy – it’s black with a red roof. I love that culture of hot rodding and classic cars. It’s linked together, my love of cars and interiors. Living in Scotland, you need a bit of colour, especially at this time of the year. I looked at Chevrolet paint charts from the 60s. The dining room is painted in a turquoise colour that came from those charts. The dining chairs are Panton and the side tables are Bauhaus. I wouldn’t want to live in the 60s. I’ve always believed that things tend to get better, although the last few years have stretched that for me. I guess I’m a traditional person in that I like to work hard and live quietly. But, beyond that, I don’t really relate to 60s values. My wife and I, we’re equals. I like to combine modern conveniences with 60s styling. I’ve incorporated automation into the house, so all our lighting themes come on automatically at different times of the day. We have sound systems in every room. I love gadgets. But I make sure they’re all invisible. I don’t want them to change the look of the house, just make it easier to live in. I love things with a history. We put in double doors that I got from a salvage yard between the dining room and the kitchen. They were from a cruise liner built in 1959. They add layers of history to the house. When you touch them, it feels like there’s a story behind them. Being able to keep things going and give them a new life, instead of throwing them in landfill, feels right to me. Bilson  at home in Manchester. Photographs courtesy of Estelle Bilson My dad was an antiques dealer and cabinet maker, so I grew up with mahogany furniture – lots of Edwardian pieces and William Morris. I used to go to auctions with my dad from the age of three or four. I’ve always hunted for stuff – when I was a student, I’d go around picking furniture out of skips. I’m such a Womble! Back then, people would toss out G Plan – no one wanted it. I refuse to pay £300 for something I can find for £20 Everyone says to me: why the 70s? And I say: why not ?  It’s the colour, the shapes, the style. There’s some nostalgia there, too, because I’m just about old enough to remember the 70s. My grandparents kept all their 70s furniture well into the 80s. Back then, people bought quality and kept it for a long time, whereas now it feels as if everyone decorates their home at lightning speed to keep up with the latest Instagram trend. People treat their houses like fast fashion, whereas, 30 or 40 years ago, people had a style and stuck with it for 50 years. I have a Decca TV from the 70s that I found on Facebook Marketplace, three miles down the road. It’s ridiculous. The same model is on display in the Science Museum. It does turn on, but unfortunately the analogue signal was switched off in 2012, so I’m sending it to someone who specialises in making old appliances work on new systems. He’s going to make it compatible with Netflix and digital TV. I’m really tight. Everything is from Facebook Marketplace, car boot sales or eBay. I could go to specialist dealers, but I refuse to pay £300 for something I can find for £20 if I magpie about and keep looking. Sometimes, I’ll spend years looking for a specific piece. If I told you my search terms, I’d have to kill you. What I will say is that, if you want bargains, search broad. Type “coffee table” or “lamp”. It will take hours, but you’ll find gold for cheap. We have modern mattresses – I draw the line on that. And we have a modern TV. Oh, and a Dyson. Old vacuum cleaners are awful. My prized possession is a Marcel Breuer long chair. My dad had one when I was a kid, but he had to sell it in the 80s because he was short on money. Mine came up on eBay and the starting bid was £500. I had only £500 in my bank account, so I sat there shaking, waiting for the auction to run down. Then, with three seconds to go, I bid and won it. I felt sick. I cried and then called my dad. I wear 70s clothes, but not all the time. I’m a mum and I can’t swan around in a Jean Varon maxidress if there’s a four-year-old trying to smear yoghurt on me. Do I have vintage values? Absolutely not. I don’t sit about waiting for my partner to come home. I think a lot of things about the 70s were really bad. Thatcherism was shit, especially if you lived up north. If you watch Love Thy Neighbour, it’s so racist. If I had a time machine, I wouldn’t go back to the 70s. Actually – that’s a lie. I’d go back, stockpile a load of furniture and bring it back. But that’s about it. What I like the most about the 70s is the mindset. The roots of sustainable living started in the 70s. The quality of build and design is that much better. Nothing looks like it will fall apart in the next 10 minutes. There’s years of use left in this furniture. I’m so glad to be able to save it from landfill. •  This article’s main image was changed on 12 January 2021 for editorial reasons.
UK report reveals 'disgraceful' gender inequality in the arts:	Gender  inequality across the theatre industry is of rising concern and likely to grow in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic if it is not urgently addressed, warns a report published on Wednesday. The Women in Theatre Forum Report collates research from multiple organisations to reveal sustained levels of inequality for women. It warns that underrepresentation needs to “be taken seriously” and urges the government’s  Cultural Renewal Taskforce  and  Arts Council England (ACE)  to rethink their strategies on tackling gender disparity. The report flags up the underrepresentation of women on the Cultural Renewal Taskforce, which is responsible for supporting the culture sector in the pandemic. “Zero leadership positions are occupied by women, with only three women on the taskforce as a whole,” it states. To address this imbalance, seven prominent figures including actor  Maureen Beattie, president of Equity ; the artistic directors  Sue Parrish  and  Brigid Larmour ; and  Julia Pascal , the first woman to direct a play at the National Theatre, wrote to the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, last June but say they received no reply. Two months later, they approached  Neil Mendoza, the government’s Commissioner for Cultural Recovery and Renewal , through a third party, to discuss their findings about gender inequalities in the arts. Mendoza, who had engaged with previous reports from the group, responded by saying he did not have time. The report is a wide-ranging collaboration between  Sphinx Theatre ,  University Women in the Arts  and December Group in partnership with trade unions  Equity  and  Writers’ Guild of Great Britain , alongside  Black Womxn in Theatre ,  Stage Directors UK ,  Era 50:50  and  Parents and Carers in Performing Arts  (Pipa). Parrish, the artistic director of Sphinx, called the taskforce’s gender imbalance “disgraceful”. “They could be seizing the opportunity for new pathways to be set and to represent all of culture and society,” she said, “but they have failed. It’s astonishing a government taskforce could be so behind the curve and we will certainly be pursuing them.” A DCMS spokesperson said: “We are completely committed to ensuring a diverse and inclusive cultural sector and have been speaking with women from a broad range of cultural organisations throughout the pandemic to help understand the impact on the industry.” The report’s findings range from the unfair burden of care falling on female performers – eight out of 10 women are forced to turn down work due to parenting or caring responsibilities – to the lack of female leadership in theatre and imbalances in film, where 16% of working film-makers are female, and 14% of prime-time TV is written by women. In some instances, research shows that little had improved for women in the creative arts over the past decade. Equity found that 72% of female performers felt pressured to “look a particular way” in order to get work in comparison with 28% of male performers, while Stage Directors UK reported cases of inappropriate physical intimacy and the intimidation of female members of a company as well as bullying of female directors and “ghosting” of women returning to work from raising children. There were complaints from trans women of being undermined in the rehearsal room, about female directors being paid less for the same work than men, university students being sent on placements with known predatory males and told not to wear anything too revealing by their lecturers, and female directors needing counselling after abuse in work situations. “I started at Equity in 1971 and I’m fighting the same battles now as I faced then,” said Beattie. “It is endemic that women are under more scrutiny and are seen as not quite as good. It’s the same sexism. It has improved but it hasn’t gone away.” She felt that the report brought together powerful evidence that action had to be taken. “If people ignore this now then I don’t know what we are going to do next. We are subjected to lots of nodding and smiling but it leads to nothing. We need action.” Parrish said that while there had been some improvements over the years, particularly in the representation of female playwrights, their work was often confined to studio spaces rather than given the main stage. She also cited the lack of female artistic directors at the helm of the nation’s biggest venues. “These people are the gatekeepers who choose the programmes that define culture.” The report’s author, Jennifer Tuckett, who conducted research for Sphinx  Theatre  and University Women in the Arts at Cambridge University, also highlighted the omission of women as an underrepresented group in the Arts Council’s 10-year strategy, published in 2020, which pledged to meet the needs of those from lower socio-economic backgrounds, D/deaf or disabled people, and black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities. “Our research has found zero references to women and gender inequality in the body of the Arts Council’s next 10-year strategy,” writes Tuckett, adding that there are only fleeting mentions of women at the beginning and end of the plan. “This suggests gender inequality is not being considered equally alongside other areas of underrepresentation.” Parrish said that in a meeting with ACE last year, she got the impression that the arts body felt that “the woman problem had been done”, while Beattie added: “We have issued a public challenge to ACE. We are putting them and the industry on notice.” But Nicholas Serota, ACE’s chair, said the strategy  did  take sex into account and added that its “delivery plan”, launching this March, would acknowledge it explicitly. “Judge us on what we say in our delivery plan which sets out our targets for the next 12 months … I am absolutely certain we want to make a reference to women, for the avoidance of any doubt,” he said. He welcomed the report and said its findings on the pressures of childcare, the effects of career breaks and the lack of parity in leadership and on boards drew attention to continuing gender inequalities. “I think the work they have done helps to draw attention to these issues.” While gains had been made for women in the arts, he added, “there is absolutely no complacency about that progress and we need to go further.” The report states that women have been hit particularly hard by the pandemic, contending with greater childcare responsibilities and caring roles than their male counterparts.  April De Angelis , a playwright whose recent adaptation, My Brilliant Friend, was staged at the National Theatre, said “What’s clear [from the report] is that women are not seen as ‘safe box office’ and it makes me think: are they going to be more excluded after the pandemic? “I keep hearing how things have improved for women in theatre, and that it’s not a problem but the reality is that only 35% of new playwrights are women and 20% of adaptations are given to women. We get lulled into thinking that it’s much better, but this report reminds us that we should not be satisfied with these [unequal] figures. It’s ridiculous.” The full report is available from  Sphinx Theatre  and  University Women in the Arts .
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Anyone shocked by the US Capitol attack has ignored an awful lot of warning signs:	P erhaps the most powerful shocks, the most painful surprises, are the ones that we saw coming yet refused to believe would happen. Our ability to fear something and, at the same time, assume it will never occur is one aspect of human nature that seems particularly ill-suited to our continued wellbeing and survival. Throughout the 6 January  attack on the US Capitol , as journalists and politicians expressed their stunned astonishment, one couldn’t help wondering: hadn’t they heard about the hundreds of people, some of them armed, who stormed the Michigan state capitol building in  April , objecting to Governor Gretchen Whitmer’s stay-at-home order? Had they forgotten that a  young woman  was killed during the August 2017 Unite the Right march in Charlottesville, Virginia – a neo-Nazi event that Donald Trump declined to unequivocally condemn? Had their interns not been keeping up with – and informing their bosses about – the popular Twitter feeds and Facebook pages of far-right hate groups and extremist conspiracy theorists? Had no one explained that the Proud Boys’ T-shirt insignia – 6MWE – means “Six Million [Jews] Weren’t Enough”? During the assault on the Capitol, as I listened to the panic and horror in the voices of the journalists who, until now, had reported on Donald Trump with something closer to detached disapproval, I wondered: is this what it takes to finally make them understand  who this man is  – and what he wants for our country? What did they think he meant when he tweeted about the gathering planned for 6 January: “Be there. It will be wild.” Even as the “wild” rioters were scaling the walls of the Capitol, some news media persisted in calling them “protesters” and “demonstrators”. These insurgents were far more than that. Images of politicians sheltering in “safe locations” in the Capitol complex reminded me of how, on 13 November 2015, my son – whose band was playing at the Trianon theater in Paris that evening – sheltered backstage while jihadis murdered 89 people at the Bataclan auditorium, a few blocks away. The difference between protesters and terrorists is critical. Demonstrators are expressing their response to a policy, an event or a series of events – systemic racism, for example. But terrorists plot violent mayhem, rehearse, fail, come up with a new plan, try again and again until they succeed. We all recall that the destruction of the World Trade Center was preceded by a 1993 attempt to bomb the WTC parking garage. The attack on the Michigan state capitol and the Charlottesville march were rehearsals for what transpired in DC last week. Donald Trump  is clearly responsible for the 6 January attack. His speech to the crowd that day was an incitement to violence. But it would be a mistake to imagine that the fury and lawlessness of his supporters will disappear when he retires to Mar-a-Lago, goes to jail or begins campaigning for the 2024 presidential election. It’s important to recall that Trump has been the accelerant but not the fuel, not the kindling that has allowed the flames of hatred and bigotry, of anti-democratic rightwing fanaticism to blaze as brightly as they do now. Many of us have a film clip or photo, taken on 6 January, that most haunts us. A friend posted an image of some thugs trying to burn a heap of costly equipment – cameras, recorders, microphones – abandoned, during the rout, by Associated Press reporters. But the image I find most troubling is a short video clip of a dozen or so rioters idly wandering the Senate floor, picking up papers from the senators’ desk, then strolling on.  If these Trump loyalists believe – as they kept chanting – that the duly-elected, soon-to-be Biden-Harris administration is not their government, it’s not only because their president told them so. And the framed portraits, the statuary, the gleaming chandeliers they saw in the Capitol building were unlikely to change their minds. The interlopers on the Senate floor looked less triumphant than bewildered, and their bewilderment is not unrelated to the sources of their rage: the massive income inequality, the epidemic unemployment, the opioid and Covid pandemics, the sense of being excluded and forgotten that helps inspire xenophobia, racism, sexism and violence. The rapid decline of our public educational system and the rise of far-right media are not unrelated; among the things that education gives us is the ability to think, to distinguish the truth from the lie, to process and evaluate the information we’re given. These are the problems and the perils that the Biden-Harris administration will have to deal with, and which all the palliative talk about unity, reconciliation, and “working across the aisle” is not going to come remotely close to fixing. Let’s be clear: the Biden-Harris administration has exactly four years to repair some large part of the damage that’s been done – a short time to begin a massive and necessary project. Otherwise, these violent groups are going to rehearse, retry, recoup, try again and again – until they succeed. With or without Donald Trump, the violence, if it ever goes away, will come roaring back. Lawmakers like Josh Hawley, loudly voicing their objections to the 2020 election results, are already campaigning for the job of anti-democratic dictator in 2024. Unless some substantive changes are made – something more sweeping than the middle-of-the-road policy tweaks that seem to be in the offing – the next coup attempt may very well succeed. And we’ll be left to marvel at something else that we always suspected was possible, but that we never believed would actually happen here, and certainly not to us. Francine Prose is a novelist. Her new book The Vixen is out June 2021
From volunteering to building a memorial garden: how we are making lockdown work for us:	Interviews by Rosie Mullender  Thu 14 Jan 2021  16.16 GMT   Last modified on Thu 14 Jan 2021  16.19 GMT   When the UK was first plunged into lockdown in March 2020, many who weren’t key workers or overnight home school teachers were left with an unprecedented amount of free time on their hands – and just when they really needed the distractions of everyday life the most. With restrictions in place once more, we meet people across the four nations of the UK who have managed to find the positives of life being on pause. ‘I’ve been working on helping others’ Aqeel Ahmed, 22, is a civil servant from Glasgow I work in social policy for the Scottish government, and during lockdown, I started a postgrad course in community learning at the University of Dundee. It focuses on how we ensure there’s parity of access to services and learning, and opportunities to gain new skills, and both the course and lockdown have made me more aware of what goes on in the community. Among other things, I’ve been helping to tidy neglected community spaces, and working with a local organisation called the Village Storytelling Centre to help them set up a telephone befriending service that will connect with isolated and older people. I’ve also been working with a charity I helped to start called What About Me?, which helps tackle bullying within schools across Scotland. With young people learning at home, there’s a lot of cyberbullying going on that schools can’t tackle, so I’ve set up a Youth Advisory Group that’s looking at supporting people in lockdown. On a personal level, I’ve connected with volunteers and seen more of my friends, albeit virtually. There’s a lot more openness to virtual meetings now, which means we can meet up more regularly. Because one of the only things we’ve been allowed to do is exercise outdoors, I’ve also taken up walking every day. I think for me, walking is going to be the personal legacy that comes out of lockdown – it’s a great chance to get away from a screen. My heart goes out to those finding lockdown incredibly difficult, but better times are ahead. My advice would be to cherish the good things, stick to a routine, keep in touch with people, and reach out if you need help. We’ll get there. ‘I built a memorial garden for my dad’ Sharon Hughes, 51, is an on-set tutor from Penymynydd, Flintshire Renovating the garden over lockdown came about by accident. My business, Tutors on Location, teaches child actors while they’re working in TV and film, so when filming stopped due to Covid-19, work stopped too. Although I used the time to work out how to teach remotely via Zoom, I still had some free time. My husband, Pete, and I were sitting in the garden reading when we started looking around, thinking about what needed doing. We didn’t have a grand plan – it just started with painting the fence. But then I began working on one little section that evolved into a memorial to my dad. Dad died suddenly in 2015, when he and mum were on holiday, and we went into autopilot organising everything. I put my feelings in a box and pushed it to one side, which meant five years on, his death was still having a huge impact on my life. He was a very proud Welshman, so I found a local stonemason who creates signs out of Welsh slate. He made a marker with a heart carved through it, inscribed with “Dad” and I added it to the garden along with lights and hanging CDs – when the sun hits them it sends rainbows twinkling across his patch, which looks beautiful. My son Kristian got involved, too. Dad was always doing things like dismantling and restoring old tractors, and Kristian loved joining in. So when he decided the garden paving looked a mess, he took it all up, cleaned the slabs, hired a cement mixer and relaid it. That’s definitely Dad’s influence. This lockdown, I’m going to create some animated videos for my business that will help children learn maths. Without lockdown, I wouldn’t have had time to get to grips with the software, but surprisingly, I’ve found I quite enjoy being creative. Finding something, however small, to focus on is the best way to get through this. ‘I took up a host of new hobbies’ Janet Mullender, 67, is a retired nurse from Billericay, Essex When my husband John and I got married 46 years ago, we were living with my mum. Then we had our two children, and were both working – as a nurse I worked weekends, nights and most Christmases – so we’ve never had any time just for us. It was only when the first lockdown hit that John finally retired, at 68. Before, I’d be on my own all week, so I’d meet friends, visit museums, and volunteer in a charity shop. But when everything stopped, I had John at home with me instead – and it has been a revelation. We’ve worked on projects together, from sorting out the garden to doing a daily weights workout, and have our own hobbies too. When we cleared out the loft, we found lots of old china, so I tried my hand at making mosaics. I didn’t care how they turned out, but I’ve made a birdhouse and edged the garden paths, and really enjoyed it. I converted the spare room into a craft room, buying secondhand children’s books and turning them into cards and wrapping paper. I’ve also been writing my personal history, including details of my 30-year nursing career, for the family archive. Meanwhile, John has taken up sewing and makes face masks for the family. He’s also working on building a cigar-box guitar, learning to cook, and adding to his collection of musical instruments. As well as trying new things, exercising is an important part of getting through lockdown. After our morning workout, we go for a half-hour walk, and although we don’t always feel like doing it, we feel much better afterwards – I’ve even lost half a stone. ‘I’ve had time to enjoy my first year of married life’ Eileen Donaghey, 32, is an afternoon tea expert from Belfast I specialise in hosting luxury afternoon tea events and before lockdown, I’d travel from Belfast to London each week, where you’d find me on Park Lane with a cup of tea in hand, entertaining tourists. The business was really starting to take off in 2020, but then lockdown happened. I noticed afternoon tea deliveries were proving popular, and thought it would be useful to write a guide on how to prepare one at home, so I wrote an ebook, A Beginner’s Guide to Afternoon Tea at Home: Tips and Tricks to Teach You How to be the Host With the Most. I held a virtual book launch in December, and people attended from all over the world – people outside the UK are fascinated by all things afternoon tea. My husband, Peter, helped me test out my new sandwich recipes, too. Peter and I were very lucky to have gotten married in November 2019, because otherwise we might not have had the wedding we wanted. We saw being able to spend more time together during our first year of marriage as a blessing. It was lovely to be able to take lots of walks and go hiking around Belfast. Before Covid-19, I travelled a lot for work. I’d be away during the week and come back on a Thursday evening, so lockdown was a change of pace. Obviously it’s disheartening that we’re in another lockdown, but I tell myself there are brighter days ahead. I recommend making a list of things you’ve always wanted to do but never had the time for, and seeing which of them you can do at home. I never thought I’d write a book, but I surprised myself – I’m sure lots of other people have hidden talents they can uncover this time around, too. There are things we can all do to look after our mental wellbeing at this time. Every Mind Matters can get you started with a free NHS online plan, showing you simple steps to help manage anxiety, sleep better, and boost your mood. For your mental health action plan, search Every Mind Matters today. For NHS-approved free tools and support for getting active or losing weight visit:  nhs.uk/better-health For guidance on dealing with bullying and cyberbullying, go to:  youngminds.org.uk/find-help/feelings-and-symptoms/bullying For more information, visit: England:  gov.uk ; Scotland:  gov.scot ; Wales:  gov.wales ; Northern Ireland:  nidirect.gov.uk This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Stay at home) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit  gov.uk/coronavirus
Iran bans importation of Covid vaccines from the US and UK:	Vaccines produced by the US and UK will be banned from entering  Iran , its supreme leader has said, even though his country has suffered the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East. “Imports of US and British vaccines into the country are forbidden ... They’re completely untrustworthy,” Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said in a live televised speech. “It’s not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations. “Given our experience with France’s HIV-tainted blood supplies, French vaccines aren’t trustworthy either,” he added, referring to France’s contaminated blood scandal of the 1980s and 1990s. Khamenei’s comments reflected the tense relations between Iran and the west, which have not abated in the waning days of Donald Trump’s presidency. In his speech, Khamenei mocked American democracy and human rights in the wake of  the riot at Capitol Hill in Washington , and said Iran was in no hurry to negotiate with the incoming Biden administration. But he said if the US lifted sanctions, Iran would respond. He said the issue of compensation for sanctions could be pursued at a later date. His remarks came as Iran prepared to discuss a plan to purchase medical supplies by unlocking as much as $1bn (£735m) of $7bn in frozen assets held in two South Korean banks. The plan will be discussed when the South Korean vice-foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, travels to Tehran in an effort to secure the release of a   South Korean vessel  seized by the Iranian navy earlier this week . Some of the South Korean delegation reached Tehran on Friday. Iran’s central bank governor said Iranian oil revenues had fallen to $20bn, a drop of more than half, as a result of US sanctions. The Iranian foreign ministry claimed the diplomat’s visit was totally focused on the unlocking of Iranian assets, insisting it had been arranged before the ship seizure, although the official Iranian press has been reporting the US block on Iranian assets in Korea ever since the ship was stopped for allegedly polluting the marine environment. Tehran has been in lengthy negotiations with  South Korea  on how to access the assets held in South Korean banks without falling foul of US extraterritorial sanctions, something that is likely to happen if dollar transactions are involved. In the past Iran has exported oil and natural gas to South Korea using settlement accounts based on Korean currency. Owing to the imposition of US sanctions, Tehran has been unable to access its money, even though it insists the money could be transferred in South Korea currency and used exclusively for the purchase of sanction-exempt food and medicines. Seoul claims it has not received the necessary US Treasury assurances that the payments would not lead to fines. More recently, Iran has suggested the money would be used to buy vaccines using the UN-approved  Covax facility . Any payment via a dollar transaction might give the US Treasury leverage to fine the banks involved, and Seoul has said there is no safe way to transfer the money. In relation to the coronavirus, Iranian officials have previously said that importing the Pfizer vaccine, which must be shipped and stored at -70C (-94F), poses major logistical challenges for Iran. The country has struggled to stem the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East, which has infected nearly 1.3 million people and killed nearly 56,000. Iran launched human trials of its first domestic Covid vaccine candidate late last month.
Growing up, I heard about Australia's fictitious fair go. Now I know it's not the case:	Name : Tristan Williams Age:  24 Dreams of:  Being a social media account manager For me, 2021 is a year of starting again. Starting from the ground and building myself up. Towards the end of last year, I saw the ugly side of life. I saw society’s overindulgence, I learned the importance of keeping the important people close, and I started, like most people do at the closing of a year, asking myself the important rhetorical question of “Who am I?” In my last diary,  I relayed an experience I was having  where Centrelink cut my income completely in the lead-up to Christmas. I am excited to say this is a problem that no longer plagues me. On December 24, I had my payment reinstated. I was ecstatic. Actually, ecstatic is too small a word for what I was feeling. After being roughly three weeks without any source of income, this news was the best Christmas gift of all. I was thankful to be an Australian – and then it hit me. I had been very hard done by. I was wrongly cut from my payments, with no concession, no backup, no notice, and with zero reason that I can think of. Yes, I was happy at the prospect of getting my money back, but I was not thankful. I was angry. Should I be thankful? Is my anger justified? Many people in my immediate life who read my second diary said that Centrelink benefits are a privilege, not a right, and that got me thinking. And then I was even more angry. These people made it sound like it was somehow my fault for leaving myself so financially vulnerable, even though I lost work this year because of Covid. Some people made me feel guilty, and quite wrongly so, for actually needing the help of our government to survive the day-to-day.  Those who have never graced the halls of a Centrelink service centre cast aspersions in the direction of anyone seeking the government dollar to simply make ends meet. Even during the life and times of Rona, you heard of people feeling ashamed, distraught, “lower-class”, for needing the support of the government when they were made redundant or couldn’t find the hours to make ends meet. This mentality needs to change now if we as a nation are going to push through and survive. This mentality rubs off. When I first accessed Centrelink I thought “I can’t support myself”, “I can’t do what I need to do”, “I am a burden on society.” Many times I was made to feel like a lower-class citizen for my lack of contribution. But now, I’m content to say: to hell with that. Any functioning government which cares about its citizenship should offer a standardised safety net of support without judgment, without stigmatisation and without condemnation. The constant victimisation of the vulnerable members of our society has led Australia into a class system where a massive wealth divide is quite clear. It’s a scary notion and it’s happening all around us. Growing up, you hear all about this fictitious “fair go” and the social wealth hierarchy. That anyone, with enough hard work, can attain their comfortable life. However, I know first hand this is very much not the case. Social mobility is a term romanticised by the wealthy and the government to force the less fortunate and working class into the endless cycle of overworking to just make ends meet and essentially make someone else richer. I believed in this notion growing up. That my good grades, hard work and exceptional achievements would somehow lead me to a comfortable life. This is all fake. The rich are getting exemptions and concessions while the poor are being vilified and overworked. This needs to change now. Now this diary, yes. It has taken a bit more of a political tone than the last. There is a reason for this. Over the last few days, I have had a few great moments of personal reflection as to what the coming year means for me. Over my life I have been fortunate to wear many hats, undertake many roles and experience many opportunities. But with that, I haven’t learned who I am underneath all of that. When I strip away the layers, who is the real Tristan underneath? And that is what this year is going to be about for me. Political advocacy is something I have done before and will do again. Social justice is a great passion of mine, being an openly proud gay man. I am unapologetically me. I think the whole Centrelink debacle not only got my blood boiling, but in some ways, it reactivated a political energy that I have always felt there. Something that comes out every now and then in debates of passion, but never towards something as personal as standardised wealth and conditions of living. I am starting this year rebuilding who I am. Graduating from my masters. Creating a research manifesto. Becoming financially stable through the establishment of a more thorough freelancing venture. And hopefully, proving to all of the doubters that I can do it; nay, that young people can do it. There are times when society likes to count us young folk out, but I believe that 2021 is our year. The year where we can start to really see the world and life for what it is; a story in which we didn’t even know we were the authors – until now.
Australia has no new locally-acquired cases – as it happened:	With that, we’ll be closing the blog for today. Here’s a recap of the day’s big news stories: Organisers of the  Invasion Day rally in Melbourne  have told participants to wear a mask at all times and stay in groups of no more than 100, 10 metres apart, to comply with Covid-safe rules. Details of the march have  just been announced . It will begin at 10.30am at Parliament House in Spring Street on 26 January and march to Federation Square. Anyone who has cold or flu-like symptoms has been told to stay at home and participate in the protest online.  As well as wearing a mask, participants are told to bring hand sanitiser to use “frequently” throughout. They also said:  You must organise in groups of 100 and each group of 100 must stay 10 metres apart as directed by the marshals on the day.  Everyone must follow the directions of the marshals on the day who will implement the Covid safety plan. A racing pigeon that survived a 13,000km Pacific Ocean crossing from the United States to Australia now faces being euthanised as a quarantine risk. Kevin Celli-Bird says he discovered that the exhausted bird that arrived in his Melbourne backyard on Boxing Day had disappeared from a race in Oregon on 29 October. Experts suspect the pigeon that Celli-Bird has named Joe, after the US president-elect, Joe Biden, hitched a ride on a cargo ship to cross the Pacific. Celli-Bird says the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service called him on Thursday to ask him to catch the bird, after its arrival was  reported in the media . Air conditioning has been raised as a possible cause of transmission in the  Queensland   Grand Chancellor  Covid-19 cluster, prompting more questions about the safety of using hotels to quarantine returning travellers. Queensland premier   Annastacia Palaszczuk   said the air conditioning would be one aspect examined as part of a major investigation into how four travellers, who were all staying on the same floor, a hotel cleaner and her partner became infected. How did it get transmitted? Was it in the air conditioning? Was it movement? Was it picking up something? We just don’t know those answers yet. The investigation will go through that and we don’t know enough about this particular strain of the virus either, so we are dealing with something that is incredibly complex. Health  authorities are particularly concerned because those infected have the B117 variant of the virus, which was first identified in the UK and is highly transmissible. Outbreaks in the community linked to hotel quarantine have now occurred in several states including Queensland,  New South Wales , and Victoria, where more than 20,000 cases and 800 deaths have been reported throughout the pandemic. Hotel quarantine was “of national concern, not just to  Queensland , but everywhere else” Palaszczuk said. In the meantime, the Grand Chancellor has been closed and more than 120 people staying there have been moved to other accommodation to restart quarantine. The  Australian Open ’s organisers have released a statement about their decision to allow US player  Tennys Sandgren  to board one of its specially organised charter flights to Melbourne despite testing positive to Covid-19 on Monday.  More information on  #AusOpen  COVID-19 protocols. cc  @TennysSandgren   pic.twitter.com/frI9CohXn1 The statement essentially reiterates comments made from the tournament’s official Twitter account on Thursday afternoon, saying Sandgren’s infection was historic and that authorities have cleared him as no longer being infectious.  You can read more about the situation in this report from my colleagues  Luke Henriques-Gomes  and  Christopher Knaus: The four people found dead at a Melbourne home were three children and their mother,  Victoria  police have confirmed. Speaking about the discovery at the Tullamarine home, Victoria’s acting deputy commissioner,  Robert Hill , said the situation is “heart-wrenching”. The body of the mother, who was 42 years old, was found along with the bodies of her seven-year-old-daughter, five-year-old daughter and three-year-old son.  The 48-year-old father of the family was at the home when ambulance crews arrived at the Burgess Street home about 12.20pm today.  Police say he is assisting detectives with inquiries and they are not seeking anyone else in relation to the deaths. Hill said: These people died in suspicious circumstances.  As to who is culpable for the death of the four people, that is yet to be determined. But  we should not draw conclusions that that male may be culpable for this offending . We’ve got a long way to go before we can understand and appreciate exactly what occurred. Asked if the deaths had been a murder-suicide, Hill says: “That could possibly be relevant to this particular event.” Asked if the father is considered a suspect, Hill says it would be “grossly unfair” to “draw any conclusions” about the father’s culpability.  Patton also says he doesn’t expect to be laying charges this evening.  Police say there was no history of violence within the family and there is no further threat to the public from the incident. The  Flying Doctor  is urging Australians to take extra precautions when driving in outback areas after the rescue of a couple from Adelaide who drove through remote South Australia because their planned route was changed due to Covid-19 restrictions. The engaged couple had planned to drive from Cairns home to Adelaide through  New South Wales , but opted to drive through remote South Australia after a hard border was reintroduced to stop coronavirus spread from NSW. Jose, 29, and Nicky, 32, were travelling with their puppy when their Toyota RAV4 became stuck in sand on 3 January. They abandoned their car and, without phone reception, walked more than 40km while scrawling “SOS” in the dirt.  grim  pic.twitter.com/2I7bz5Ia8F At one point, Jose resorted to drinking his own urine. The pair spent two days without food or water until Craig, a remote worker from Santos, found them at a satellite station after seeing their SOS notes in the roadside. Their dog Loki also survived. Craig says he only takes the road once every six weeks, and the pair were 25km from the nearest town, Innamincka. Jose says: It was so hot, and we were scared, I thought we were going to die. My phone said SOS only, and I kept trying over and over again to call for help, but the call wouldn’t go through. We had a little food left but we couldn’t eat it because we had no saliva and couldn’t swallow. They said they “hardly spoke” to each other because their mouths were so dry. Here’s a quick recap of what’s happened over the past few hours: Western Australia  has recorded no new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19. However, the WA Department of  Health  has reported two new cases of Covid-19 – both returned international travellers who tested positive while in hotel quarantine in Perth. Four recent travellers to South Australia may have quarantined at Brisbane’s  Grand Chancellor hotel , now shut down over a Covid-19 scare, AAP reports. SA  Health  says two people who were at the hotel and later travelled to South Australia are no longer in the state. It says checks are still being made to confirm if two more people from the hotel had recently arrived in SA via  Victoria . The information comes after the Grand Chancellor was shut down when six people linked to the quarantine facility tested positive for the more contagious UK coronavirus variant. A cleaner and her partner, who are among the six, were contagious while in the community and triggered a three-day lockdown in  Brisbane  last weekend. South Australia’s chief health officer, Nicola Spurrier, says if any people who stayed at the Grand Chancellor are found to be in SA, they will be required to return to quarantine. South Australia reported no new Covid-19 cases on Thursday, leaving the state with 11 active infections, all returned travellers in hotel quarantine.
'Carbon-neutrality is a fairy tale': how the race for renewables is burning Europe's forests:	K alev Järvik stands on a bald patch of land in the heart of Estonia’s  Haanja nature reserve  and remembers when he could walk straight from one side of the reserve to the other under a canopy of trees. Järvik has lived in the Haanja uplands in the southern county of Võru for more than 10 years. His closeness to the forest has shaped his life as a carpenter and the fortunes of the surrounding villages, with their handicraft traditions – a substitute for farming on the poor arable land. Upcountry, travel literature promotes the region to city dwellers, promising its ancient woodlands as a place to rest and reinvigorate the mind. But in 2015, the Estonian government  allowed what is known as clear-cutting   in some parts of the Haanja nature reserve. The practice involves stripping entire areas of mature forest and removing whole tree trunks.  This relaxation of the logging rules came as international demand for Estonian wood soared – not just for furniture or construction, but because of an unlikely culprit: Europe’s renewable energy policies. “Sometimes I can’t bear to go outside,” Järvik says, standing by the stumps left on land stripped by the logging company Valga Puu. The firm is a subsidiary of Graanul Invest Group, Europe’s biggest producer of the wood pellets which are burned on an industrial scale as biomass for heat and light in many of Europe’s former coal-fired power stations. The days Järvik is spared the sound of harvesters have become rare. “You don’t want to leave home, because the landscape has become so impassable, it leaves you feeling anguished. But still the noise comes.” Forests cover  2m hectares  or more than half of Estonia. Around 380,000 hectares (939,000 acres) of that,  including the Haanja nature reserve , fall under the EU’s  Natura 2000  network, which is designed to protect Europe’s forests and offer a haven to rare and threatened species. Haanja is home to 29 protected species, including the black stork, the lesser-spotted eagle and the corncrake.  Natura-protected zones are managed under the legally binding provisions of the  1979 EU birds directive  and the  1992 habitats directive . But logging is governed by domestic laws, and Estonia permits it as long as it does not damage bogs and other special habitats, or fall within bird mating seasons.  Campaigners say   that by allowing intensive clear-cutting in Natura 2000 sites,  Estonia  is in breach of the habitats directive and undermining the EU’s climate goals. Siim Kuresoo of the non-profit Estonian Fund for Nature (ELF) doesn’t just blame the Estonian government. He says there is a direct connection between the subsidised growth in the biomass industry encouraged by EU renewable energy policies and the acceleration of unsustainable Baltic tree-felling.  “There is clear evidence that the intensification of logging is at least partly driven by higher demand for biomass for heat and power,” says a  report  co-authored by Kuresoo for the ELF and the Latvian Ornithological Society. “Given that over half of Estonia’s and Latvia’s wood pellet exports in 2019 went to Denmark, the Netherlands and the UK, ‘green energy’ use in those three countries contributes directly to increased logging in the two Baltic states.” The Council of Estonian Environmental NGOs (EKO), of which the ELF is a member, has made a complaint to the European commission alleging “systematic” breaches by Estonia of its forest conservation obligations. *** To investigate the subsidised European pellet trade and its impact on Baltic forests, we uploaded boundary files for Estonia’s Natura 2000 zones to Global Forest Watch, an online platform for monitoring forests, and found that per-hectare tree cover loss (the removal of the tree canopy rather than outright deforestation) in these areas accelerated after 2015. That was when the government adjusted park conservation rules to allow clear-cutting of up to one hectare at a time in some nature reserves. Across Estonia, between 2001 and 2019, Natura 2000 areas lost more than 15,000 hectares (37,000 acres) of forest cover, an area more than twice the size of Manhattan. The last five years account for 80% of that loss. Further alterations to rules in other Estonian national parks are planned. This acceleration appears to be taking a toll on bird species like the black grouse, woodlark and others. Woodland birds are declining at a rate of 50,000 breeding pairs a year, according to national  records . The clearances are also damaging the ability of Baltic forests to store carbon, and could be undermining climate goals by reducing the chance for Estonia and Latvia to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.  In a country where the overwhelming majority of peoplesay they regard nature as sacred, logging has led to protests or what the Estonian media calls the “forest war”. Residents of Saku, a small town 16 miles south of Tallinn, successfully fought to save an area of forest that was scheduled to be cut down this year by RMK, the state forest management company, which manages  around half  of Estonian forests. “We convert our trees into pellets and sell them to energy plants in your countries,” says Ivar Raig, one of the Saku campaigners. “This is considered to be sustainable, but we suffer.” **** Sustainability goes to the heart of the European renewable energy debate. The drive to replace coal, one of the world’s biggest sources of carbon emissions, with cleaner sources of power, is a top priority in the fight against climate change globally. A switch to burning wood in the form of pellets appears to offer a simple and in theory carbon-neutral alternative to coal-fired power stations because trees take up carbon dioxide from the air as they grow. As long as the burned trees are replaced with new plantings, there is no net addition to the stock of carbon in the atmosphere. However, that process of carbon take-up can take many decades. And in the furnace, burning wood  releases more carbon dioxide per unit of energy than burning gas, oil, or even coal . By accelerating carbon dioxide emissions in the short term, burning wood for electricity could be fatal for states’ ability to meet the Paris Agreement goal of keeping global heating to well below 2C by 2050. Demand for woody biomass or energy from wood as an alternative to coal in power stations took off from 2009, when the  first EU renewable energy directive  obliged member states to source 20% of energy from renewable sources by 2020 and classified biomass energy as carbon-neutral. A flaw in the legislation meant that woody biomass was fully categorised as renewable, even if it came not just from wood residues or waste, but from whole trees. This meant that companies could directly harvest forests for pellets – rather than making pellets from the by-products of timber cut for other uses – in the name of sustainable forest management. As the EU moved in 2018 to double the use of renewable energy by 2030,  scientists   warned  the European Parliament that this loophole in the sustainability criteria of the revised EU legislation would accelerate the climate crisis and devastate mature forests. But against the competing interests of the multibillion euro biomass lobby, it went unamended. Almost all European countries have recorded an increase in logging for energy.  Nearly a quarter  of the trees harvested in the EU in 2019 were for energy, up from 17% in 2000. Biomass, of which wood from forests is the main source, now makes up almost  60 % of the EU’s renewable energy supply, more than solar and wind combined, and a vast cross-border   industry has emerged to meet this demand. Taxpayer subsidies are driving much of the growth in this trade. Between 2008 and 2018, subsidies for biomass, of which wood is the main source, among 27 European nations increased by 143%. In the UK, g overnment support for biomass projects  is expected to total more than £13bn by 2027 – the date at which current subsidy agreements expire, according to the climate thinktank Ember. *** When Raul Kirjanen founded Graanul Invest in 2003, it was just him and his computer in a small office. By 2005 the company had opened its first factory in Imavere, Estonia, compressing sawdust and the waste wood from other processes into tiny pellets that could be bagged up and shipped overseas for burning in everything from domestic heaters to vast power plants to generate electricity. Today the European wood pellet trade is booming. Graanul Invest is the second biggest wood pellet maker in the world and Kirjanen is  one of the richest  people in the Baltics where the Estonian press call him  “the pellet king” . In 2019, the company manufactured 2.5m tonnes of pellets, up from 1.8m tonnes the previous year, across its plants in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the US. Every month tens of thousands of tonnes of wood pellets leave the port of Riga to cross the North Sea on Graanul Invest’s vessel, the MV Imavere. Much of this cargo is bound for the port of Immingham, where it is transported to UK power stations including Drax, which has converted four of its six units from coal to biomass since 2013 and is now the world’s largest biomass burning plant. The UK accounts for more than a third of Graanul’s annual revenue. Denmark, the Netherlands and Italy are also target markets. But electricity production from wood pellets would not be financially sustainable without public subsidies: the British government paid Drax the equivalent of €2.4m (£2.1m) a day in 2019. Drax will have received more than €11.2bn (£10bn) from the UK government since its conversion to biomass in 2012 until subsidies run out in 2027, researchers from the Ember have calculated. The UK is now the biggest subsidiser of bioenergy in Europe, spending more than  £1.9bn in 2019  primarily to pay for burning imported wood at Drax, according to new research by the  Natural Resources Defence Council  (NRDC) and  Cut Carbon Not Forests . Britain is no longer bound by EU renewable energy targets post-Brexit but has set a new target of cutting emissions by 68% by 2030 and is committed to the EU goal of net-zero carbon by 2050.  Other European governments are following suit. In the Netherlands, the government has promised energy companies RWE, Uniper and Onyx (formerly Engie) more than €3.5bn in subsidies to use biomass, making the country one of the biggest importers of wood pellets in Europe. Campaigners are anxiously watching  Germany , where Onyx Power, a subsidiary of the US hedge fund Riverstone, is examining the possibility of converting coal plants to biomass.  “Biomass only exists at the scale that it does because of subsidies,” says Duncan Brack, associate fellow at the London-based thinktank Chatham House. “We’re effectively paying to increase carbon emissions in the atmosphere, which is an absurd use of public money.” Brack says that the 2009  EU renewable energy directive  triggered a raft of subsidies for renewable power generation. “But since then solar and wind have really crashed in price. Now is the time to stop subsidising biomass.” “There’s huge infrastructure employing people and spending money, all based on subsidies,” says Michael Norton of the European Academies’ Science Advisory Council (EASAC). “The original simplistic idea of bioenergy from sustainable forestry suddenly blossomed into an industry achieving the opposite of what it was meant to do.” **** In November 2020 we   visited the Haanja nature park to verify the accelerated felling suggested by satellite data. Travelling south through the park, we passed small villages made up of wooden houses, wide black lakes and cows grazing in pastures. Near Vakari village our van took a left, passing wetlands surrounded by birch trees, and turned on to a stretch of road in a clearing. It was as if someone had carefully cut out rectangles of forest. A sign said the plot was owned by Valga Puu. Since 2016, more than 100 hectares (247 acres) of forest in the Haanja park have been felled on land owned by Graanul Invest Group, a significant increaseon the previous five years, when less than 20 hectares (49.4 acres) was felled, according to Global Forest Watch. We checked their data against our own analysis of high-resolution Google satellite images and corroborated it on the ground.  Graanul Invest collects  84% of its wood  by clear-cutting, according to its 2019 sustainability report. “Clear-cutting is the main harvesting method in Estonia that allows us to renew forests the fastest way,” the company told us. “Most trees in Estonia have quite a short lifespan and harvesting and planting a forest sublot as a whole means that all young trees will be at the same age and can start to grow together.” In practice, the method means leaving mostly stumps in the harvested patch. In the nature reserve, a few trees stand sentinel, part of Graanul Invest’s efforts to maintain biodiversity. The forest portfolio owned by Graanul Invest and its subsidiaries spans  55,000 hectares  (136,000 acres) across Estonia and Latvia and 12% of this is land protected under conservation programmes such as Natura 2000. Graanul has been able to accelerate tree felling on the protected lands because Estonia’s Nature Conservation Act divides it into three  zones : strict nature reserve, conservation zone, and limited management or buffer zone. Human intervention is prohibited in the first two; limited economic activities by landowners, including logging, are allowed in the buffer zones. Clear-cutting in buffer zones must still comply with the EU habitats directive.  Graanul Invest says the adjustment of the rules since 2015 hasn’t changed how much its forest management companies cut down, but makes them “more efficient”. The company also says their forest management companies do not directly harvest wood to be turned into pellets. “The main target is to harvest high-quality logs for sawmills or [the] plywood industry, then to pulp mills. Only material that is not suitable for other industries comes to pellet production,” a spokesperson said. Official literature from its logging subsidiary Valga Puu tells a different story. “Our goals for 2020 are related to the supply of Graanul Invest plants,” the company says in its latest annual report. We put this to Valga Puu’s chief executive, Andres Olesk. “Not the best wording,” he responded . But 40% of the wood that Graanul Invest harvests   on this land comes from whole trees deemed not straight enough or the right size, for such uses such as furniture or construction. This “low-quality wood”, as it is called in the trade, is crushed and turned into wood pellets. Harvesting old and poorly managed forests can increase the ability of the forest to hold carbon and improve the habitat for small birds and mammals,  according to the European commission . This could be the case in Estonia, where much of the woodland grew naturally 70 years ago on farmland left behind by Estonians who were killed or deported from rural areas during the second world war. “The share of low-quality timber in Estonian forests has always been high due to the fact that during the Soviet era the forests were not managed at all,” Marku Lamp, deputy secretary general of the Estonian ministry of the environment, says. “This has in some ways been an opportunity to sell the low-quality stock.” But Almuth Ernsting of climate activist group Biofuelwatch says the term “low-quality wood” is based on economic considerations only: “[It] takes no account of the ecological, climate or cultural value of the trees.” Robert Matthews, a UK climate scientist whose team carried out some of the research underpinning the revised EU Renewable  Energy  Directive, describes the idea of low-quality wood as “the sting in the tail”. “What is low-quality wood? It’s almost like a get out of jail free card.” On paper, Estonia’s forest stock seems to be  stable and even slightly increasing,  according to Estonia’s 2020 Forest Resources Assessment (FRA). On the ground, we found felled areas replanted with small spruces, which count towards forest area, even though the young trees will take decades to absorb the same amount of carbon as the old felled trees. These “temporarily unstocked or recently regenerated” forests have increased more than 20% since 2010,  FRA data says , with serious consequences for the capacity of Estonian land to store carbon. As a result, the Estonian land-use sector, which includes forestry, is expected to switch from being a carbon sink to an emitter of carbon by 2030,  according to Estonia’s National Energy and Climate report  – the same year by which, under the  EU’s updated Renewable Energy Directive,  Europe must have increased its energy from renewable sources to 32%. Graanul Invest  replanted 1.5m trees in 2019 , according to its annual report. Birch, a deciduous tree, is the dominant species across the 55,000 hectares (136,000 acres) in the company’s portfolio, but Graanul Invest replants  1.7 times more coniferous types such as spruce , a fast-growing species that the company says can “improve the carbon sequestration capability” of forests. Even so, it takes years for these tiny spruces to grow large enough to extract or sequester the carbon that is emitted by cutting them down – a problem known as carbon debt. It takes decades or even centuries for whole trees, unlike corn or other biomass crops, to regrow, says Massimiliano Patierno, an environmental engineer at the International Institute of Law and Environment. “If we count a period of, say, 40 years, in which the new trees have cancelled the carbon debt, then yes, that biomass can be seen as carbon-neutral,” he says. “But if we consider a very short period of time, it is likely that the carbon debt will not be cancelled.” Dr Mary Booth at the Partnership for Policy Integrity says that if the wood or forestry residues burned for electricity were instead left to decompose on the soil, they would emit carbon dioxide more gradually. “The accumulated net impact of such emissions likewise speeds warming,” she says. The latest felling in the Natura 2000 part of the Haanja nature park took place recently in a forest that was 70 years old and home to a number of different species, Siim Kuresoo says.  Experts hold that generally, the more diverse the forest, the greater the variety of animals and plants it can host. Žiga Malek, assistant professor in land use and ecosystem dynamicsat Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, says: “The vegetation that was there before protected the soil from being eroded.” Clear-cutting is allowed in Natura 2000 areas as long as it does not conflict with local conservation rules, Malek adds. “In this case it would mean minimum disturbance,” he says. “Which this is not.” Replanted forests can provide climate benefits, he adds, but they cannot fully replace the lost forest ecosystem.  Altering the forest type can also affect the amount of carbon stored in the ground. Mature and closer-to-natural forests sequester more carbon in the long run, due to a healthier ground biomass, Malek says. “Even if the clear-cut area is planted with one fast-growing species, it will not be as effective in terms of carbon sink as the more nature-like forest would in the long term.”  Kirjanen says his company is not doing anything out of the ordinary. In an email, he said that the “awesome” Estonian timber industry is the largest employer in rural areas because it has been able to grow and compete internationally. Almost all Europe’s existing forests are the result of “forest management” of a similar kind. “If we want our forests to be like this in the future, they must be managed,” he said. “Many protected areas in national parks are semi-natural communities, and without maintenance, conservation values often disappear.” *** There are signs that the EU intends to tighten the rules around what wood can be harvested as renewable energy. An  expert group  convened by the European commission recently recommended that biomass should be considered sustainable only if it comes from feedstocks listed in an annexe of the renewable energy directive, including bark and sawdust, and “pre-commercial forest thinnings”, apart from sawn logs.  Graanul Invest says that if there is demand for wood as in other fields, it makes sense to use the waste material both from forestry and the wood industry for useful applications – including energy. But scientists and campaigners say we simply don’t have time to cut down trees for energy production if we are going to meet climate goals.  “The urgency has completely changed in the last 15 years,” Michael Norton says. “We don’t have until 2070 – emissions have to come down sooner. Biomass that increases carbon emissions in the next 10 to 30 years is not compatible with climate change policy.” Back in the Haanja nature park, Kuresoo says it will take many decades for the trees that have been felled to date to grow back to their former size. “This idea of carbon neutrality is a fairy tale,” he says. “Climate change is already happening. We should be planting trees instead of taking them down.” This article is based on Money to Burn, a  cross-border investigative project  led by the Dutch public investigative journalism platform Argos and supported by Investigative Journalism for Europe. Additional reporting by  Catherine Joie ,  Piret Reiljan ,  Paul Toetzke ,  Sophie Blok ,  Ties Gijzel ,  Silvia Nortes  and  Ben Heubl . This article was amended on 14 January 2021. Drax has converted four of its six units from coal to biomass, not four power plants as an earlier version said.
UK bans travellers from South America and Portugal from Friday:	Travellers from South America and Portugal will be banned from arriving in the UK from Friday morning as a precautionary measure aimed at preventing the new Brazilian Covid variant from reaching the country, the government has announced. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said arrivals from more than a dozen countries including Argentina, Venezuela, Bolivia and Peru would be halted. He said Portugal had been included because of its close travel links with Brazil. UK residents will be exempt from the new rules – but they and their families will have to self-isolate for 10 days on arrival. The decision was made at a meeting of the ministerial Covid-O committee on Thursday morning, on the basis of evidence from experts on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group  ( Nervtag) on new viruses. Government sources said devolved administrations supported Shapps’s decision, with Wales and Scotland expected to take similar action.  Boris Johnson had hinted at fresh restrictions on Wednesday when he was grilled by MPs about the issue. The Labour MP Yvette Cooper asked the prime minister: “You were warned about the Brazil variant three days ago. We don’t know, yet, whether that variant could undermine the vaccination programme. Why aren’t you taking immediate action, on a precautionary basis?” Johnson told her: “We’re putting in extra measures to ensure that people coming from Brazil are checked: and indeed stopping people coming from Brazil.” It is unclear as yet whether the Brazilian strain may be vaccine-resistant. Direct flights between Brazil and the UK had already been banned last month, as the Brazilian government tried to prevent the highly transmissible Kent variant of the virus arriving on its shores. The government has been criticised throughout the pandemic for failing to act rapidly enough to control the UK’s borders. A new testing regime, which will oblige arrivals from overseas to have a negative Covid test, has been delayed at the last minute from Friday morning to Monday, after a backlash from travel companies and tourists who complained the government had failed to provide enough guidance to operate the scheme effectively. The prime minister’s spokesman defended the last-minute delay on Thursday, calling it a “grace period”. “We always said we would introduce the regulations on Friday, and the laws still come into force on Friday but we’ve implemented a grace period over the weekend, so that passengers can have a little bit more time to get access to the tests they need that meet our requirements,” he said.
Outrage as people in Coventry offered Covid jab over 100 miles away:	People in Coventry are being invited to travel more than 100 miles for their first Covid-19 jab, prompting politicians and GPs in the city to criticise the  government’s national programme of vaccinations . Residents aged over 80 received letters over the weekend saying they could travel to Manchester to get the jab, despite government policy that patients should not have to drive more than 45 minutes to a centre. The Coventry North MP, Taiwo Owatemi, said: “I was ecstatic that  Coventry  was the first in the world to administer the vaccine but it has been wholly disappointing that progress has stunted since. “I am outraged that patients in the high-risk category are having to choose between putting themselves at risk and travelling over 100 miles to Manchester or delay their receipt of the vaccine.” Other residents were invited to Birmingham’s Millennium Point, 20 miles away, one of seven mass vaccination centres that opened on Monday. Last week, GP practices were having to cancel scheduled vaccination appointments due to a lack of communication over supply. Only one out of the city’s seven primary care networks (PCN) was distributing the vaccine at the time.Five PCNs are now distributing jabs, but Owatemi said  GPs  were left frustrated that vulnerable patients were being forced to travel excessive distances, often by public transport, to get the vaccine more quickly. “We have brilliant local GPs who are ready to go, so the government must ensure a steady and continuous supply with no delays,” she added. Dr Gavin Shields, a GP and vice-chair of the Coventry local medical committee, said he had been told vaccines would be arriving at his practice on Wednesday, more than three weeks after vaccines were originally due to arrive the week before Christmas. The government’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) says its priority is to prevent Covid-related deaths and protect health and social care staff and systems. Elderly care home residents and their carers are first on the JCVI’s list because their risk of exposure to the virus is higher and because the risk of death closely correlates with older age. They are followed in priority by anyone else over 80 and frontline health and social care workers. Even so, for pragmatic reasons  NHS  staff are likely to be the first group to receive the Pfizer/BioNTech jab. This is because the vaccine needs to be stored at ultra-cold temperatures, which can be achieved more easily by using hospital facilities Together, care home residents, their carers and the over-80s make up nearly 6 million people, and frontline NHS staff a further 736,685. Matt Hancock, the health secretary, has said he expects 10m doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine to be available this year, so if this is the only vaccine authorised, everyone else would have to wait until further doses become available next year.  Covid-19 vaccines are expected to be delivered at three types of venue: NHS trust “vaccine hubs” at hospital sites; mass vaccination centres, which are in the process of being set up at places such as  football stadiums, conference buildings  and racecourses – these are expected to vaccinate up to 5,000 people a day; and at GP surgeries and pharmacies. GPs can also visit care home residents and housebound patients at home without them needing to travel. While there is some evidence to indicate high levels of short-term protection from a single dose of vaccine, a two-dose schedule is what has been approved by the  MHRA . The second dose will need to be delivered at least 21 days after the first, and both will be injected into the deltoid muscle – the thick triangular muscle we use to raise each arm. For the Pfizer vaccine, its efficacy rate was calculated seven days after the second shot. It is likely that people will have some protection before this, but this is how long it will take for full protection to kick in. We will learn more about the extent of protection and how long it lasts as data from ongoing clinical trials comes in. Unlikely. England’s deputy chief medical officer, Jonathan Van-Tam, has said he believes Covid-19 vaccines should be delivered according to clinical priority rather than allowing people to jump the queue if they can afford it. Also unlikely, at least in the short to medium term. Assuming more than one vaccine is approved, the priority will be distributing any available doses to the people who need it as quickly as possible. Linda Geddes “We were all geared up and we had a site ready. We started booking people in and then it got cancelled. That happened to a lot of sites,” Shields said. “I am so proud Coventry was up there as the first hospital to deliver the vaccine but I’m just terribly disappointed with the national communications, with the honesty and the transparency since. It’s worrying for our patients, they are very tense.” He said elderly residents were distressed by the letters sent over the weekend directing them towards mass vaccination centres instead. “The phones were ringing off the hook on Monday morning with people confused, asking whether they were getting their vaccine here or whether they should go to Birmingham, not knowing what to do.” At University hospital in Coventry,  Margaret Keenan, 90, became the first patient in the world  to receive the Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccine after its approval in the UK, with the health secretary, Matt Hancock, hailing the moment as “the start of the fightback” against Covid-19. GPs and pharmacists have been putting pressure on the government to speed up the distribution of jabs across the country. In its vaccine delivery plan announced on Monday, the government said 1,200 community service sites would be delivering vaccines by the end of the month, but as of Sunday only 785 were up and running. A spokesperson for NHS England and NHS Improvement in the Midlands said: “Patients in this area have a choice about where to be vaccinated; they can opt to attend one of their local vaccination centres or attend Birmingham’s Millennium Point. “There are seven local vaccination service sites in Coventry, which are jointly run by 54 GP practices in the area, deliveries of the vaccines go to the sites and not individual practices and by Friday all seven sites will have received vaccine supply.”
Coronavirus UK: Covid cases and deaths today:	Coronavirus  has hit the UK hard, with the country recording more than 3m cases and 80,000 deaths linked to the disease. The government figures below include confirmed cases only – some people who have the disease are not tested. At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. After that, the centre of the virus shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland before rising again in London and the south-east. Everyday life in the UK has been subject to varying degrees of restriction since March, and various national lockdowns currently apply in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland. These regulations are set by the legislative body in each nation so there are local differences.  Details of the  English lockdown are listed here ,  Scottish lockdown here ,  Welsh here  and  Northern Irish here . The government plans to offer 13.9 million people (21% of the population) a first dose of the vaccine by the middle of February. This group includes the top four priority groups: everyone in care homes, all over-70s, frontline health and social care workers and clinically extremely vulnerable individuals. Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before falling in late spring and summer. But they then increased again and passed the earlier peak in September, reaching record levels in December after a dip in November. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising since September and has reached a new record. Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases. There have been more recorded cases in the second wave of the pandemic, and this can be partly attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring. In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave. More tests were available during the second wave and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms are now being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total. However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above. In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. This data comes comes from  Public Health England , working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Differences in data collection and publishing schedules may lead to temporary inconsistencies. 3 and 4 October cases totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault. The government figures for deaths that are used in this tracker incorporate any deaths that have occurred within 28 days of a positive test. This means that they they are able to quickly capture those deaths occurring in hospitals and care homes, both settings where testing is widespread. The ONS, along with its counterparts in Scotland and Northern Ireland, captures deaths data differently. They count all deaths where Covid is on the death certificate. About 90% of these deaths are directly due to Covid while it is a contributory factor in the remaining deaths. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as  well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Covid vaccinations: London and East of England lag behind other NHS regions:	London and the East of England regions have vaccinated the lowest proportion of people aged over 80, amounting to a little under the third of their total population in that age group, according to the first regional figures published by the  NHS  in England. An analysis of the newly released data by the Guardian highlights marked regional discrepancies with the two areas well behind the NHS region North East and Yorkshire, where nearly 50% of the over 80s have received at least one dose. A total of 29% of the over-80s in the East of England region and 31% in London have received a first dose of either the Pfizer/BioNTech   or  Oxford/AstraZeneca   vaccine. By contrast, the proportion in North East and Yorkshire is more than 46%. The reasons for the discrepancies are not immediately clear, although  GPs and MPs have complained that there is not enough consistent supply  of the two vaccines across England, making it difficult to plan ahead. Some of the discrepancy could be due to differing population levels among the 80-plus age category, one of the highest-priority groups: 3.4% of Londoners are aged 80 or more, compared with 5.2% in the north-east and Yorkshire. Doctors’ surgeries offering vaccinations have had to cancel appointments, restrict bookings and plead for more supplies, as the NHS manages supply of the potentially life-saving vaccinations around the country. Some  GPs  have reported that they have been told they cannot start vaccinations of the next target group of people (those between 75 and 80 years) until other parts of the country have caught up – prompting complaints that some areas are being “levelled down”. The four remaining English regions have been vaccinating the over-80s at a roughly similar rate, with the Midlands achieving 36%, the South East and South West each on 37%, and the North West 38%. A total of 2.49m people in England received a first dose of either vaccine by 13 January, an increase of 239,815 on the previous 24 hoursThis amounts to 1.68m a week if maintained over seven days. On Wednesday, Boris Johnson acknowledged that the vaccine distribution was uneven while giving evidence to the Commons liaison committee. Reflecting more up-to-date data, the prime minister said the over-80s vaccination rate was “more than 50%, well over 50% now in the north-east and Yorkshire”. But he added it was “less good in some other parts of the country”. The government’s  joint committee on vaccination and immunisation  has published a list of groups of people who will be prioritised to receive a vaccine for Covid-19 in the UK. The list is: 1 All those 80 years of age and over and health and social care workers. 2 All those 75 and over. 3 All those 70 and over. 4 All those 65 and over. 5 Adults under 65 at high at risk of serious disease and mortality from Covid-19. 6 Adults under 65 at moderate risk of at risk of serious disease and mortality from Covid-19. 7 All those 60 and over. 8 All those 55 and over. 9 All those 50 and over. 10 Rest of the population. The UK needs to reach 2m doses a week in order to reach the 15m most vulnerable people by mid-February. The government aims to offer a first dose to all people in the four most vulnerable categories by 15 February. The four categories include the over-70s, people who live in care homes, NHS and care workers, and those with serious underlying health conditions.
'A memory bobbing around the ocean': message in a bottle found after two years:	This bottle was different. Glass, with its lid sealed tight, it contained a handful of rice grains and a few seashells. And a note. In November, on the remote Conflict Islands of Papua New Guinea, conservation ranger Steven Amos was cleaning the beachfront on Panasesa island when he stumbled across something that was not thoughtlessly thrown away, but consciously sent as a  message to an unknown recipient , somewhere in the world. Nearly two years earlier, then 17-year-old American Niki Nie had dropped the message overboard as she crossed the equator, sailing with her family between Vanuatu and the  Marshall Islands . “I suppose if you are reading this, it means that this bottle has survived its long journey and managed to safely land in your hands. I hope it finds you well! “I am extremely curious to know where this bottle landed and how long it took to get there.” Amos, who has been working with the Conflict Islands Conservation Initiative for four years, involved in turtle conservation and plastic collection, told the Guardian he was ecstatic when he found the bottle. “When I read the letter, I tried my best to get in touch with Miss Nie and with my colleague’s assistance – I was able to do that. I was so excited, I couldn’t sleep when I was told I was to meet her via Zoom,” Amos said. It almost didn’t happen. The email address on the letter bounced, but a social media post found its way to Nie, who responded online. The pair were eventually able to meet online. Nie told the Guardian: “When I threw the bottle overboard, I never imagined that I would actually meet the person who found my message. “I also would never have guessed that it [bottle] would have landed in Alotau,  Papua New Guinea  – but it’s incredibly amazing.” Amos has invited Nie to the Conflict Islands when Covid-19 restrictions ease. Nie and her family were sailing from  Vanuatu  to the Marshall Islands after working for six years on humanitarian missions across the Pacific, when she threw the bottle overboard on 8 January 2019 as she crossed the equator from the southern hemisphere to the north. “I just wanted to leave a little piece, a memory bobbing around the ocean that we spent so much time in.” She had since returned to the US to begin college, when her note found its way back into her life. The note, in its tightly sealed bottle, had travelled more than 2,500km to the remote Conflict Islands. Amos said it was vital to conserve the remote and fragile ecosystem of the Conflict Islands, a nesting ground for numerous turtles. “It is very important to do  plastic collection on the beaches  to conserve turtles and other marine life. We ensure turtles are relocated during nesting season from outer islands to where it’s safer and release them later. The increased plastic pollution has seen a decrease in the number of turtles coming to nest on the islands,” he said. Marine biologist and zoologist at the Conflict Islands Conservation Initiative Hayley Versace told the Guardian nearly 900 female nesting Hawksbill sea turtles had been tagged since 2017 – but only three have returned. “From the tagging, we’ve discovered that the turtles actually go back to the Great Barrier Reef in Australia to feed and forage, and only use the islands as a nesting ground.” The Hawksbill, threatened by a degraded environment and increased levels of poaching, faces extinction within a decade on current trends. “If we don’t change, turtles will become extinct, and without them the future won’t get to see them, and more importantly, they will be lost forever and their important role in the food chain and ecosystems in the ocean will be lost as well.” According to PNG’s Conservation Environment and Protection authority (CEPA), the country has the highest rate of  plastic mismanagement in the Pacific , with about 10 tonnes of plastic waste disposed of every day and 3,719 tonnes annually, none of which is recycled.
Indian court suspends new agriculture laws after mass protests:	India’s supreme court has suspended a series of controversial new agriculture laws that had prompted hundreds of thousands of farmers to stage a months-long protest in Delhi over fears their livelihoods were at stake. Since November,  upwards of half a million farmers had marched to the peripheries of Delhi  and occupied roads and highways going into the capital, setting up a 24-hour protest camp and refusing to move until the new laws were repealed. Farmers, mainly from the states of Punjab and Haryana, had argued that the new laws were passed by the government without consultation, had exposed them to the mercy of large corporations for crop prices and put them at greater risk of poverty and losing their land. The farmers’ protests have proved to be  one of the greatest political challenges to face prime minister, Narendra Modi , since he came to power in 2014. It was one of the first times the government had been forced to the negotiating table following mass agitation and, despite eight rounds of talks, had remained in deadlock. After two days of deliberation, the supreme court ruled on Tuesday to suspend the laws. Judges ordered the creation of a four-man committee to look into farmers’ grievances over the laws, saying they were “extremely disappointed” with how negotiations had gone so far. The judges also expressed concern at the lack of consultation with farmers when passing the law. “These are matters of life and death. We are concerned with laws. We are concerned with lives and property of people affected by the agitation. We are trying to solve the problem in the best way. One of the powers we have is to suspend the legislation,” SA Bobde, the chief justice, told the court. While many politicians who had expressed anger at the farm laws celebrated the ruling, it was met with derision by farmers’ leaders who said “now is not the time for a committee”. Farming  unions reiterated that they would not participate in any court-ordered committee process and would not call off their protest until the new legislation was repealed. “The members of the supreme court-appointed committee are not dependable as they have been writing on how agri laws are pro-farmer. We will continue our agitation,” said farmer leader Balbeer Singh Rajewal at a press conference. The farmers said they still intended to go ahead with a planned protest tractor rally through Delhi on India’s Republic Day on 26 January. So far 60 farmers have died while taking part in the protests, which have involved camping out in make-shift tents in icy winter temperatures. Some described the ruling as a setback for Modi, who can usually rely on the backing of the supreme court, which is widely seen as favourable to the ruling government. However, other observers noted that the court’s decision to suspend the farm laws gave the government a way out of the negotiation deadlock without appearing to have bowed to the demands of the farmers.
Coronavirus live news: Sweden reports record number of daily Covid deaths; Lebanon begins 11-day, 24-hour curfew:	  Lebanon  has enforced an all-day curfew in a bid to contain a spiralling coronavirus outbreak.  This report from Zeina Karam of the Associated Press, with additional reporting by Fadi Tawil and Bilal Hussein. It’s an excellent report, so I’ve posted the whole thing: AP:  It was a choice between containing a spiraling virus outbreak and resuscitating a dying economy in a country that has been in steady financial and economic meltdown over the past year. Authorities in Lebanon chose the latter. Now, virus patients struggling to breathe wait outside hospitals — hoping for a bed or even a chair to open up. Ordinary people share contact lists of oxygen suppliers on social media as the the critical gas becomes scarce, and the sound of ambulances ferrying the ill echoes through Beirut. Around 500 of Lebanon’s 14,000 doctors have left the crisis-ridden country in recent months, according to the Order of Physicians, putting a further strain on existing hospital staff. On Thursday, Lebanese authorities swung the other way: They began enforcing an 11-day nationwide shutdown and round-the-clock curfew, hoping to blunt the spread of coronavirus infections spinning out of control after the holiday period. The curfew is the strictest measure Lebanon has taken since the start of the pandemic. Previous shutdowns had laxer rules and were poorly enforced. Now, residents cannot leave their homes, except for a defined set of reasons, including going to the bakery, pharmacy, doctor’s office, hospital or airport — and for the first time they must request a permit before doing these things. Even supermarkets can only open for delivery. While Lebanon still somehow managed to keep cases to an average of fewer than 100 per day until August, it now leads the Arab world in number of cases per million people. Today, the number of daily COVID-19 deaths is more than 13 times what it was in July. On Jan. 9, over 5,400 infections were reported, a record for the small country. Overall, Lebanon has registered nearly 232,000 cases and 1,740 deaths, according to the Health Ministry.  While its neighbors begin vaccinating their populations — including Israel whose campaign promises to be among the world’s speediest — Lebanon has yet to secure a first batch of shots. Once a leader in the health sector among Middle Eastern countries, Lebanon has been stymied in its effort to get vaccines by repeated bureaucratic delays partly due to the fact that it has a caretaker government. Parliament is expected to meet Friday to vote on a draft law to allow importing the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine, with the first deliveries expected to arrive next month. Sami Hanna, a 42-year-old businessman who was waiting for his turn to enter a pharmacy earlier this week, looking for pain relievers, anti-depressants and blood pressure medicine for his elderly parents, said: This is the result of deliberate decisions made by irresponsible and immoral politicians. It is too little too late. The surge in coronavirus cases began in late August, a few weeks after the massive explosion at the Beirut port that destroyed parts of the capital, including several hospitals with virus patients. The explosion was caused by a fire that detonated nearly three tons of poorly stored ammonium nitrate that had been sitting in a port warehouse for years — the kind of mismanagement that is typical of a corrupt political class that fails to provide even basic services for its people. The virus surged in the chaos of inundated hospitals, funerals and protests that followed. Further complicating efforts to rein in the virus, politicians have been unable to agree on a new government since the old one resigned in the wake of the port explosion, effectively ensuring the country’s continued unraveling. But in December, as most governments around the world tightened lockdowns, Lebanon went the other way, allowing restaurants and nightclubs to reopen with barely any restrictions in place. An estimated 80,000 expats flowed to the country to celebrate Christmas and New Year with loved ones — many of them Lebanese who skipped visiting in the summer because of the devastation wrought by the explosion. Hanna Azar, owner of a money transfer and telephones shop, said:  The holiday season should have been the time for lockdown. The season of crowds, shopping and parties. They opened it to allow dollars into the country and now they want to close. Especially in this economic crisis, people don’t have money to eat.” Many hospitals have now reached maximum capacity for coronavirus patients. Some have run out of beds, oxygen tanks and ventilators. Others have halted elective surgeries. Last week, Lebanon imposed a 25-day nationwide lockdown and a nighttime curfew to limit the spread of the virus, but many sectors were exempted and enforcement was lax, as in the past. Many businesses, including hair salons, welcomed customers behind shuttered storefronts. In some areas of north and south Lebanon, it was business as usual. With hospitals on the brink of collapse, the government then ordered an 11-day nationwide curfew starting Thursday, triggering three days of mayhem as crowds of shoppers emptied shelves in supermarkets and bakeries. On Thursday, police manned checkpoints around the country, checking motorists’ permission to be on the road. Halim Shebaya, a political analyst, said the government still has no clear strategy and cautioned that it would be difficult to bring the numbers down this late in the game. He said: The main issue now is the absence of trust in the government and authorities and managing a pandemic necessitates the presence of public trust in measures taken by the authorities. Still, Rabih Torbay, who heads Project HOPE, an international global health and humanitarian organization, said time is of essence and urged authorities to take any step that might help curb infections. He said: Every day that goes by the country is sliding further into the abyss.  More than 30 inmates have tested positive for the coronavirus in a prison in Palermo,  Sicily , writes my colleague Lorenzo Tondo. The news has sparked a row in Italy, where many of the prisons are overcrowded. According to a report from the prison administration department, there are currently over 600 inmates who have tested positive for covid in Italy.  There are also 650 prison officers who are currently positive. The mayor of Bergamo, one of the cities most affected by Covid during the first wave, has urgently asked the government to vaccinate the inmates before the outbreaks take hold inside the prisons.  During the first wave, more than 70 prisons were struck by fire and destroyed, in just one weekend - March 7-9, after the government announced a ban on visits between inmates and their relatives, due to the pandemic. The riots caused 13 deaths among inmates and dozens of injuries. Several media in the country, citing sources within the prisons, suggested the riots were orchestrated by the mafia. The  UK  has taken the “urgent decision” to ban arrivals into the country from Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana, Guyana, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay and Venezuela. Incoming flights from these countries will stop tomorrow, said UK transport minister Grant Shapps.  Travel from Portugal to the UK will also be suspended “given its strong travel links with Brazil – acting as another way to reduce the risk of importing infections”, said Shapps. There will be an exemption for hauliers travelling from Portugal to allow transport of essential goods. I’ve taken the urgent decision to BAN ARRIVALS from ARGENTINA, BRAZIL, BOLIVIA, CAPE VERDE, CHILE, COLOMBIA, ECUADOR, FRENCH GUIANA, GUYANA, PANAMA, PARAGUAY, PERU, SURINAME, URUGUAY AND VENEZUELA – from TOMORROW, 15 JAN at 4AM following evidence of a new variant in Brazil. 1/3 Travel from PORTUGAL to the UK will also be suspended given its strong travel links with Brazil – acting as another way to reduce the risk of importing infections. However, there is an exemption for hauliers travelling from Portugal (only), to allow transport of essential goods. This measure does not apply to British and Irish Nationals and third country nationals with residence rights – but passengers returning from these destinations must self-isolate for TEN DAYS along with their households 🏠 3/3 The speed of the COVID vaccination campaigns – measured as doses per 100 people, averaged over the last 7 days. [→ more countries, more metrics on our page on COVID vaccinations:  https://t.co/cMpTPb4B41 ]  pic.twitter.com/jRV57GWW5G Where does your country fit in this table? Are you happy about vaccine rollout?  UK did more vaccinations yesterday than the French have done in total so far.  https://t.co/tqpn4UbmTZ In  Russia , some regions are proposing to relax Covid-19 restrictions such as mandatory mask-wearing and other incentives for Russians who receive the vaccine made in the country. From Reuters: Russia, which has the world’s fourth highest number of COVID-19 cases, began large-scale inoculations with its Sputnik V vaccine last month and President Vladimir Putin has said the programme should be made available to all Russians next week. On Thursday, the governor of the far eastern Sakhalin region proposed distributing badges to people who have had the vaccine allowing them to no longer wear face masks. Businesses such as hairdressers or fishing plants could also be officially declared “green zones” once all of their staff have had the jab, the governor, Valery Limarenko, said. On social media he added: We have to return to life as fast as possible. In Moscow, Mayor Sergei Sobyanin has told students and pensioners that their social cards, which grant them free or cheaper public transport but were frozen during the pandemic, will be unblocked once they have the vaccination. Moscow residents say the number of people signing up for the vaccine is picking up, having been slow just a few weeks ago. Pavel, a 34-year-old Muscovite, told Reuters there was no queue when he arrived for his first jab of the two-dose vaccine in late December, but that the clinic was packed when he returned for the second jab on Wednesday. Russia on Thursday reported 24,763 new COVID-19 cases in the previous 24 hours, pushing the national tally to almost 3.5 million since the pandemic began. The death toll stands at 63,940 people. Turkish  president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan will be vaccinated for Covid-19 live on television later on Thursday, a spokesman for his ruling AK party said, in the hope that it will combat any public doubts over the effectiveness of the vaccine. Reuters reports: Turkey began administering the shots developed by China’s Sinovac to health workers on Thursday, as it rolls out a nationwide vaccination programme against the disease that has killed more than 23,000 people in the country. It has so far vaccinated more than 200,000 health workers. Erdoğan will receive the vaccine on live television after meetings with AK party officials, spokesperson Omer Celik told a news conference in Ankara. The state government of  Para  in northern  Brazil  is banning the entry of vessels from neighbouring  Amazonas  state in a bid to contain the spread of Covid-19, citing a rise in cases and identification of a new variant of the virus in Amazonas. Amazonas state capital  Manaus  was one of the worst-hit Brazilian cities in the first wave of the virus last year and is creaking badly again in the second wave. Concern is also mounting for the state’s indigenous people in remote areas up and down the Amazon River. “We are publishing a state decree tomorrow prohibiting the circulation of boats with passengers from the neighboring state of Amazonas,” Para governor Helder Barbalho said in a video messaged published on social media late on Wednesday. “This is a preventive and fundamental measure so that we can prevent the spread of contagion within the state of Para and subsequent health problems in the face of the pandemic. Therefore, I inform everyone that starting tomorrow [Thursday] our borders will be closed to the state of Amazonas,” he added. Para’s state government said there are still no restrictions on air travel to and from Amazonas, but this is under discussion. The decree published Thursday in the official state gazette did not mention overland travel. The state of Amazonas, where nearly 6,000 people have died from Covid-19, is now suffering a devastating second wave that is pushing emergency services to a breaking point. So many were infected in Manaus during the first wave that some scientists thought the city of two million people might have been approaching herd immunity. But that projection has proved well wide of the mark. Brazil’s president,  Jair Bolsonaro,  has consistently downplayed the gravity of Covid-19, calling it “a little flu” and criticising lockdowns and social distancing measures. He has argued that lockdowns damage Brazil’s economy and leave many out of work. Many states issued tough lockdown and quarantine measures last year but have since relaxed them. Brazil  is to start its coronavirus vaccine programme next Thursday, senator  Nelsinho Tra d said, the most concrete forecast yet for the country’s widely criticised vaccine rollout. Trad told Reuters he had been informed by mayors who had spoken with the health minister  Eduardo Pazuello . The Brazilian president,  Jair Bolsonaro , who has been lambasted for overseeing the world’s second deadliest coronavirus outbreak after the  US , is under mounting pressure as a second wave of infections surpasses the first. The health ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The government has declined to give an official start date, but has said inoculations could not begin before 20 January. Two vaccines – one made by AstraZeneca and another developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech – will form the bedrock of the government’s vaccination plan. Both have applied for emergency use in Brazil, with health regulator Anvisa expected to decide on Sunday whether to authorise them. Vaccination of the country’s population will take 16 months at most, the deputy health minister  Elcio Franco  said at a news conference on Wednesday. Brazil is sending a plane to import 2m doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine, made by India’s Serum Institute, and has already imported 6m doses of the Sinovac vaccine.  Sweden , whose unorthodox pandemic strategy placed it in the global spotlight, reported a record number of Covid-19 deaths for a single day on Thursday, taking the total toll above 10,000, although new infections appear to be easing. The country of 10 million inhabitants registered 351 more deaths since Wednesday, statistics from the public health agency showed, and reported 6,580 new coronavirus cases, with the daily number trending lower since late December. Some 10,185 people have now died in Sweden from Covid-19 since the pandemic began, it said. The latest number of deaths are likely to have occurred over several days and weeks, with many from the Christmas period being registered with a significant delay. Public health agency official Karin Tegmark Wisell told a news conference that while the number of new cases showed some signs of having plateaued, the death toll would continue to mount. We sadly expect that the increase will continue given the high level of contagion in the country. Authorities said that the situation was still strained in the healthcare system around the country with a few exceptions where there has been an improvement. Around 20% of available intensive care beds are free, though the situation varies in different regions. The death rate per capita in Sweden, which avoided harsh lockdowns, is several times higher than that of its Nordic neighbours but lower than several European countries that opted for lockdowns.
Up to 1m Hindus gather in India as festival goes ahead amid Covid fears:	Up to a million Hindu pilgrims have gathered on the banks of the River Ganges in northern  India , marking the start of a major religious festival that is taking place despite the risks of Covid infection. Millions more are expected to descend on Haridwar in the coming weeks for  Kumbh Mela , one of the world’s biggest religious gatherings. Pilgrims bathe in the Ganges in the belief that the sacred waters will cleanse them of their sins. Officials have said measures to prevent a surge in Covid infections include pre-booking to control numbers, strict social distancing and colour-coded bathing areas. “The pandemic is a bit of a worry, but we are taking all precautions,” said one of the organisers, Siddharth Chakrapani. Most of those walking into the freezing river on Thursday morning were not wearing masks and social distancing was hard to maintain. Senthil Avoodai K Raj, a senior police official, said thousands of security forces were present and fines could be imposed for breaching Covid regulations. India has recorded more than 10m Covid cases – the second highest number in the world after the US – and has recorded more than 150,000 deaths. On Saturday, the government will launch a  vaccination drive , aiming to inoculate 300 million people by early August. Healthcare and frontline workers will be vaccinated first, followed by people over 50 and those with underlying health conditions. Some pilgrims in Haridwar dismissed the threat from the virus. “India is not like Europe … when it comes to immunity we are better,” said 50-year-old Sanjay Sharma. “It’s really sad to see people not gathering at Kumbh in the same numbers as they would earlier … The greatest truth on Earth is death. What’s the point of living with fear?” Unesco has recognised  Kumbh Mela  as intangible cultural heritage. According to Hindu mythology, gods and demons fought a war over a sacred pitcher containing the nectar of immortality. Drops fell at four different locations, which now alternate as hosts. Several other religious festivals are taking place in India this week, including the Gangasagar Mela in Kolkata, where officials expect about 15,000 people. Madurai in the southern state of Tamil Nadu is due to host a bull-chasing carnival known as  Jallikattu , where revellers grab hold of the beasts’ horns as they run through crowds of people. Many religious gatherings across the world have been cancelled or scaled back because of Covid. Only a few thousand Muslims took part in  last year’s hajj , the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, compared with more than 2 million in normal years. The pope celebrated midnight mass on Christmas Eve with fewer than 100 participants instead of the usual 10,000. In nearly all countries, Christians, Muslims, Jews and those of other faiths have curtailed or cancelled events marking religious festivals in the past 10 months.
Donald Trump's second impeachment: five key takeaways:	Democrats in the House of Representatives made good on their vows to  impeach Donald Trump for a historic second time  on Wednesday in the wake of last week’s attack on the Capitol by a pro-Trump mob. The chamber voted for impeachment by 232 to 197 and the process now moves to the Senate, where it’s unclear whether any Republicans will join Democrats in voting to convict Trump in a trial for his incendiary remarks before the attack. Here are five key takeaways from a day of high drama: Some of the most high-profile members of Republican leadership aren’t denouncing the Democratic effort. Quite the contrary. Congresswoman Liz Cheney of Wyoming, the chairwoman of the House Republican Conference, announced on Tuesday that she would join Democrats and a handful of House Republicans in voting to impeach Trump. On Wednesday, Senator Mitch McConnell, the highest-ranking Republican in his chamber, indicated to his colleagues that he is undecided on which way he would vote. Privately, McConnell has left associates with the impression that he’s glad Democrats are moving to impeach Trump a second time. Elsewhere, freshman lawmakers are feuding with each other. Congresswoman Nancy Mace of South Carolina and congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene, who has supported the QAnon terrorist movement, got into a heated exchange, according to Axios. Mace blamed Greene and other QAnon supporters for the attack on the Capitol. An ongoing question among members of Congress is if any of the 10 House Republicans who split with their party and voted to impeach Trump will face any kind of blowback. Some lawmakers privately supported impeachment but worried voting for impeachment could physically endanger them or their families from outraged Trump supporters. Unlike the last time Democrats impeached Trump, there’s a higher level of bipartisan support for the move. Congressman Kevin McCarthy, the House minority leader and top-ranking Republican in that chamber, said during a speech on Wednesday that Trump was partially to blame for the mob assault on the Capitol last week. Ten House Republicans also joined Democrats in voting in favor of impeaching Trump. It’s unclear how many Republicans are willing to convict Trump in the Senate. A two-thirds majority of the Senate is needed. McConnell’s potential openness to convict suggests there may be more than one or two senators willing to vote to convict him. That’s all a far cry from the last time Trump was impeached where it was almost completely a party line vote. Trump was not convicted then. Throughout the debate on Wednesday two patterns emerged among the arguments Republicans made: deflect and denounce. Republicans repeatedly denounced the mob attack last week. “Violence has no place in our politics. Period. I wholly condemned last week’s senseless acts of violence, and I strongly reiterate the calls to remain peaceful in the weeks ahead,” the Republican National Committee chairwoman, Ronna McDaniel, said in a statement. Trump himself also released a statement saying that he wanted to see a peaceful transition and inauguration for Joe Biden, the president-elect. Republicans also cried hypocrisy against Democrats for, in their words, ignoring the damage inflicted during Black Lives Matter protests this past summer. “Democrats are on record supporting violence when it supports their cause,” Greene said during a floor speech. “Democrats will take away everyone’s guns just as long as they have guards with guns.” How things will shake out in the Senate is a mystery. McConnell wrote in a letter to colleagues that he has not “made a final decision on how I will vote and I intend to listen to legal arguments when they are presented to the Senate”. When Trump was impeached the first time, only Senator Mitt Romney of Utah joined Democrats in voting to convict. This time it’s conceivable a few more Republicans could join Democrats, though they need 17 to convict. McConnell himself said in another statement after the House vote that the earliest a trial could begin would be after Biden is sworn in on 20 January. That’s at odds with a statement from McConnell’s Democratic counterpart, Chuck Schumer. “A Senate trial can begin immediately, with agreement from the current Senate majority leader to reconvene the Senate for an emergency session, or it will begin after January 19. But make no mistake, there will be an impeachment trial in the United States Senate; there will be a vote on convicting the president for high crimes and misdemeanors; and if the president is convicted, there will be a vote on barring him from running again,” Schumer said in a statement. Reporters and lawmakers noted the increased security presence around the Capitol. Congressman Seth Moulton of Massachusetts noted in his floor speech that there were more US soldiers patrolling the Capitol than were stationed in Afghanistan. In general there is a high sense of concern of another attack. Biden was briefed by officials from the Secret Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation on security concerns for his inauguration. In a report from the  Boston Globe , congresswoman Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts found during the mob attack that the panic buttons were ripped out of her office.
Donald Trump impeached a second time over mob attack on US Capitol:	The  House of Representatives  on Wednesday impeached Donald Trump for inciting a violent insurrection against the government of the United States a week after he encouraged a mob of his supporters to storm the US Capitol, a historic condemnation that makes him the only American president to be charged twice with committing high crimes and misdemeanors. After an emotional day-long debate in the chamber where lawmakers cowered last week as rioters vandalized the Capitol, 10 House  Republicans  joined Democrats to embrace the constitution’s gravest remedy after vowing to hold Trump to account before he leaves office next week. The sole article of impeachment charges the defeated president with “inciting an insurrection” that led to what the House speaker,  Nancy Pelosi , said would be immortalized as a “day of fire” on Capitol Hill. The president, Pelosi said, represented a “clear and present danger to the nation we all love”. The final count was 232 to 197, with  10 members of the president’s party  supporting his unprecedented second impeachment. Among them was Liz Cheney, the No 3 House Republican and daughter of Dick Cheney, George W Bush’s vice-president. Though she did not rise to speak on Wednesday, she issued an unsparing statement announcing her support for impeachment, in which she said that there had “never been a greater betrayal by a president of the United States” than Trump’s conduct on 6 January. “The president of the United States summoned this mob, assembled the mob, and lit the flame of this attack,” said Cheney in a statement. Kevin McCarthy, the House Republican leader, attempted to carve a middle path for his caucus. He said Trump “bears responsibility” for Wednesday’s attack, while warning that impeachment would “further fan the flames of partisan division”. As an alternative, he proposed a censure. The result of the lightening-fast proceedings was the most most bipartisan presidential impeachment vote in US history,   a stunning end to the Trump presidency. The House was prepared to immediately transmit the article of impeachment to the Senate after Wednesday’s vote. In a statement, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, said there was “simply no chance” of concluding a trial before Trump leaves office, ensuring that the affair would begin during the inaugural days of Joe Biden’s presidency. In a statement, Biden said the House had exercised its power to “hold the president accountable”, and that he hoped “the Senate leadership will find a way to deal with their constitutional responsibilities on impeachment while also working on the other urgent business of this nation”. Though consequences for Trump will not include premature removal from office, the Senate trial would not be entirely symbolic. Two-thirds of the 100-member body are required to convict a president, meaning 17 Republicans would have to join  Democrats  to render a guilty verdict. If convicted, it would then require only a simple majority to disqualify him from ever again holding public office. “Make no mistake,” said New York senator Chuck Schumer, who will become the majority leader when his party takes control of the chamber later this month, “there will be an impeachment trial in the United States Senate; there will be a vote on convicting the president for high crimes and misdemeanors; and if the president is convicted, there will be a vote on barring him from running again.” While it is currently considered unlikely that enough Senate Republicans would break with Trump, two have called on the president to resign, and the New York Times reported that McConnell believes the president had committed impeachable offenses. McConnell’s souring on Trump is significant, because as Washington’s most powerful Republican his view could make it easier for others in his party to turn against the president. In a letter to colleagues on Wednesday, McConnell said he had “not made a final decision on how I will vote, and I intend to listen to the legal arguments when they are presented to the Senate.” The deadly assault a week ago   came as the House and Senate were in session to certify Biden’s victory in November’s presidential election, a result Trump refused to accept. Five people died during the siege, including a police officer. “We are debating this historic measure at an actual crime scene, and we wouldn’t be here if it weren’t for the president of the United States,” said Jim McGovern, a Democratic congressman from Massachusetts and the chair of the rules committee, opening Wednesday’s session. The president summoned this mob, assembled the mob, and lit the flame of this attack All around as members argued the merits of impeaching a defeated president were reminders of the the destruction wrought by rioters – the first occupation of the US Capitol since British troops burned the building during the war of 1812. The building lawmakers call the People’s House, poorly defended last Wednesday, had been turned into a fortress, protected by thousands of national guard troops and with metal detectors stationed outside the chamber doors. Some Republicans rebelled against the new safety protocols, evading the security check. A remorseless Trump on Tuesday called his inflammatory language at a rally immediately before the mob marched on the Capitol “totally appropriate”. Efforts to hold him accountable were nothing more than a “continuation of the greatest witch-hunt in the history of politics”, he said. After his impeachment, Trump released a  video statement  belatedly condemning the violence and appealing to his supporters for calm ahead of Biden’s inauguration next week – remarks lawmakers implored him to make during the hours-long siege of the Capitol. “There is never a justification for violence, no excuses, no exceptions,” he said, asking his followers to “ease tensions and calm tempers”. “Mob violence goes against everything I believe in and everything our movement stands for. No true supporter of mine could ever endorse political violence,” he said. The  Washington Post reported  that Trump’s daughter Ivanka and her husband Jared Kushner, along with Pence and deputy chief of staff Dan Scavino, had persuaded Trump to record the video in order to boost his support among Republicans likely to desert him. Few Republicans were willing to defend Trump’s incendiary behavior last week. But those who oppose impeachment objected to the rushed nature of the proceedings. “I can think of no action the House can take that is more likely to further divide the American people,” said Tom Cole, a Republican of Oklahoma, who was among the more than 120 House Republicans who voted last week to reject the electoral votes of key swing states that Biden won, despite officials at every level calling November’s vote the most secure election in US history. Democrats were incensed by calls for bipartisanship, particularly from Republicans who refused to recognize Biden’s election victory and voted to overturn the results of a democratic election even after the assault on the Capitol. “It’s a bit much to be hearing that these people would not be trying to destroy our government and kill us if we just weren’t so mean to them,” said Jamie Raskin, a Democratic Maryland congressman who will serve as the lead impeachment manager. The House proceeded with impeachment on Wednesday after Mike Pence formally rejected calls to strip Trump of power by invoking the 25th amendment to the US constitution, which allows for the removal of a sitting president deemed unfit to perform his job. Pence’s signal came just hours before the House passed a resolution calling on him to take the unprecedented action. Trump’s day of reckoning on Capitol Hill comes less than a year after he was acquitted in a Senate impeachment trial for pressuring Ukraine to open investigations into Biden and his son. But with just days left in his presidency, the political landscape had shifted dramatically. No House Republicans voted in support when Trump was impeached in 2019 over his attempts to persuade the leader of Ukraine to investigate the family of Biden, then his election rival. But as fear turned to fury in the days since the attack on the Capitol, senior Republican leaders signaled – tacitly and explicitly – a desire to purge the party of Trump. Their break with the president came only after months of tolerating and indulging his campaign of lies about a stolen election, long after it was undeniably clear he had lost.
The 10 Republicans who voted to impeach Donald Trump:	Ten Republican members of the US House of Representatives  voted to impeach  Donald Trump over the deadly insurrection at the Capitol, making it the most bipartisan presidential impeachment in US history. The break with the president stood in sharp contrast to the unanimous support for Trump among House  Republicans  when he was first impeached by Democrats in 2019. All Democrats who voted supported impeachment, while 197 Republicans voted no. The Republican votes made it a historic moment. In comparison, five Democrats voted to impeach Bill Clinton in 1998. How the Senate will fall on Trump’s second impeachment trial vote remains to be seen. Two-thirds of the 100-member body are required to convict a president, meaning 17 Republicans would have to join  Democrats  to render a guilty verdict. So far only a small number of Republican senators have indicated an openness to convicting the president in a senate trial, which is  now set to begin  after Biden’s inauguration. Mitch McConnell, the top-ranking Republican in the Senate, indicated to colleagues that  he is undecided  on how he would vote. Below are the Republicans who voted for impeachment in the House of Representatives: The No 3 House Republican, Cheney was also the most senior member of her party to vote against efforts to challenge electoral college results confirming Trump’s loss. The daughter of the former Republican vice-president Dick Cheney is a rising star in the party. In a statement released on Tuesday, Cheney said: “There has never been a greater betrayal by a president of the United States of his office and his oath to the constitution.” Gonzalez is an Ohio Republican. In his statement, Gonzalez accused Trump of having “abandoned his post” amid the violence at the Capitol. Gonzalez argued that the president’s failure to act further endangered those present at the Capitol, and described the president’s actions as “fundamental threats” to American democracy. “When I consider the full scope of events leading up to January 6th including the president’s lack of response as the United States Capitol was under attack, I am compelled to support impeachment,” he wrote on Twitter. Meijer, a new member of Congress from Grand Rapids, Michigan, said he was voting for impeachment with a “heavy heart”. “The president betrayed his oath of office by seeking to undermine our constitutional process, and he bears responsibility for inciting the violent acts of insurrection last week,” he said in a statement. Newhouse, from Washington state, announced his intention to vote to impeach on the House floor during Wednesday’s debate, drawing applause from the roughly two dozen Democrats on the floor. “There is no excuse for President Trump’s actions,” he said. Kinzinger, an air force veteran who has emerged as a leading Trump critic, said he had no doubt that Trump “broke his oath of office and incited this insurrection”. Trump “used his position in the executive” branch to attack the legislative branch, said Kinzinger, who is in his sixth term representing northern Illinois. Katko, from New York, was the first member of the House Republican caucus to say he would vote for impeachment. Katko, a former federal prosecutor, said in a statement on Tuesday that he had not made the decision lightly, adding: “To allow the president of the United States to incite this attack without consequence is a direct threat to the future of our democracy. I cannot sit by without taking action.” Upton, from Michigan, in November said Trump had shown no proof of his claims that his election defeat was the result of widespread fraud. Upton said he would have preferred a bipartisan, formal censure rather than impeachment, but that Trump’s refusal to take responsibility for the riot left him no choice. “The Congress must hold President Trump to account and send a clear message,” he said. Herrera Beutler is a moderate from Washington state. In a statement, she said that the president’s offenses were “impeachable based on the indisputable evidence we already have”. Herrera Beutler, who is in her sixth term, said that while many lawmakers fear Trump, “truth sets us free from fear. My vote to impeach a sitting president is not a fear-based decision,” she said. “I am not choosing a side. I’m choosing truth.” Rice may have cast the most surprising vote. His coastal South Carolina district strongly backed Trump in the election and he voted last week to object to certification of electoral votes in Arizona and Pennsylvania. “I have backed this president through thick and thin for four years. I’ve campaigned for him and voted for him twice. But this utter failure is inexcusable,” Rice said in a statement after the vote. Rice said he was disappointed that Trump has failed to show remorse over the riot or address the nation to ask for calm. Valadao in November reclaimed his former California seat from the Democrats. In a statement  posted to Twitter , Valadao said that Trump “was, without question, a driving force in the catastrophic events that took place on January 6 by encouraging masses of rioters to incite violence on elected officials, staff members, and our representative democracy as a whole”.
Donald Trump becomes the first US president to be impeached for a second time – as it happened:	From me and Joan E Greve: Read more about today’s historic events:  1. There are signs of a deep split within the Republican party Some of the most high-profile members of Republican leadership aren’t denouncing the Democratic effort. Quite the contrary. Congresswoman Liz Cheney of Wyoming, the chairwoman of the House Republican Conference, announced on Tuesday that she would join Democrats and a handful of House Republicans in voting to impeach Trump. 2.  The most bipartisan impeachment in American history Unlike the last time Democrats impeached Trump, there’s a higher level of bipartisan support for the move. Congressman Kevin McCarthy, the House minority leader and top-ranking Republican in that chamber, said during a speech on Wednesday that Trump was partially to blame for the mob assault on the Capitol last week. 3.  The vast majority of Republicans refused to concede any  fault Throughout the debate on Wednesday two patterns emerged among the arguments Republicans made: deflect and denounce. Republicans repeatedly denounced the mob attack last week. 4.  The Senate is a mystery How things will shake out in the Senate is a mystery. McConnell wrote in a letter to colleagues that he has not “made a final decision on how I will vote and I intend to listen to legal arguments when they are presented to the Senate”. 5. Democrats’ security concerns seem well-founded Reporters and lawmakers noted the increased security presence around the Capitol. Congressman Seth Moulton of Massachusetts noted in his floor speech that there were more US soldiers patrolling the Capitol than were stationed in Afghanistan. Read more: A guillotine outside the state capitol in Arizona. A Democratic governor burned in effigy in Oregon. Lawmakers evacuated as pro-Trump crowds gathered at state capitols in Georgia and New Mexico. Cheers in Idaho as a crowd was told fellow citizens were “taking the Capitol” and “taking out”  Mike Pence , the vice-president. As a mob of thousands invaded the US Capitol on 6 January, Trump supporters threatened lawmakers and fellow citizens in cities across the country. Compared with the violent mob in Washington, the pro-Trump crowds elsewhere in the country were much smaller, attracting dozens to hundreds of people. But they used the same extreme rhetoric, labeling both Democratic politicians and Republicans perceived as disloyal to Trump as “traitors”. As the FBI warns of plans for  new armed protests  in Washington and all 50 state capitols in the days leading up to Biden’s inauguration, and   fresh   calls for extreme violence circulate on  social media forums , the intensity of the nationwide pro-Trump demonstrations and attacks last week offer evidence of what might be coming next. Some of the pro-Trump demonstrations on Wednesday did not turn violent. The dozens of Trump supporters who entered the Kansas state capitol remained peaceful, according to  multiple   news reports . In Carson City, Nevada, hundreds of Trump supporters  drank beer and listened to rock music  while denouncing the election results, the Reno Gazette Journal reported. But in Los Angeles, white Trump supporters assaulted and  ripped the wig off  the head of a young black woman who happened to pass their 6 January protest, the  Los Angeles Times reported . A white woman was  captured on video  holding the wig and shouting, “Fuck BLM!” and, “I did the first scalping of the new civil war.” In  Ohio  and  Oregon ,   fights broke out between counter-protesters and members of the Proud Boys, the neo-fascist group Trump directed in September to “ stand back and stand by ”. Proud Boys also reportedly demonstrated in  Utah ,  California ,  Florida  and  South Carolina . And in Washington state, Trump supporters, some armed,  pushed through the gate  of the governor’s mansion and  stormed on to the lawn  of Democrat Jay Inslee’s house. In Georgia, where lawmakers were  evacuated  from the state capitol, members of the  III% Security Force militia , a group known for its anti-Muslim activism, had gathered outside. Militia members, neo-Nazis, and other rightwing extremists have discussed multiple potential dates for armed protests in the coming days, researchers who monitor extremist groups say, with proposals ranging from rallies or attacks on state capitols to a “million militia march” in Washington. The FBI’s  intelligence bulletin  has warned of potential armed protests from 16 January “at least” through inauguration day on 20 January, but researchers say that energy had not yet coalesced around a single event. Public social media forums where Trump supporters have gathered to discuss plans are full of dramatic, contradictory rumors, but experts say that more concrete plans are likely being made in private and in smaller forums that are more difficult to infiltrate. Read more:  The former Democratic presidential candidate was expected to make this announcement.  I moved to New York City 25 years ago. I came of age, fell in love, and became a father here. Seeing our City in so much pain breaks my heart.  Let’s fight for a future New York City that we can be proud of – together. Join us at  https://t.co/TGnxwuBiHB   pic.twitter.com/n9zxPybgbh Analysis: Second impeachment puts Trump in first place among lords of misrule It was always going to end this way. A presidency centered on fear, rage and division is climaxing in a Grand Guignol of three acts at the US Capitol in Washington: last Wednesday’s insurrection, this Wednesday’s impeachment, next Wednesday’s inauguration. As Barack Obama noted after act one, “we’d be kidding ourselves if we treated it as a total surprise”. What remains uncertain is whether this is the moment that the fever breaks and the nation gets back on track or merely a harbinger of further polarisation, violence and decline. Liz Cheney and nine other  Republicans  who joined Democrats in a 232-197 bipartisan vote to impeach Trump did not provide a comprehensive answer to that question. Yes, it was 10 more than the first impeachment just over a year ago and, yes, there are cracks in the dam. But it has not yet burst. And certainly on this Wednesday, with its besieged capital being prised from the grasp of a would-be autocrat, America resembled the sort of fragile state that it used to think it was in the business of rescuing and rebuilding. Barriers, checkpoints and a ring of steel had been erected on Capitol Hill. Members of the national guard, with masks, guns and military garb, could be seen sleeping on hard floors in the hallways of the Capitol. The last time troops were quartered here was during the American civil war; there were more of them than in Afghanistan or Iraq today. Inside the chamber, where members wore masks under strict new coronavirus rules, the historic day began with a prayer from R Adm Margaret Grun Kibben, the House chaplain. She noted that last week “we found ourselves seizing the scales of justice from the jaws of mobocracy”. But it did not take long for partisanship to bare its teeth. Although this process has been much speedier than Impeachment One, which sanctioned Trump for pressuring Ukraine for political favours, there were again angry speeches from both sides. Read more:  “Today, the members of the House of representatives exercised the power granted to them under our constitution and voted to impeach and hold the president accountable,”  Joe Biden  said in a statement. “This nation also remains in the grip of a deadly virus and a reeling economy. I hope that the Senate leadership will find a way to deal with their constitutional responsibilities on impeachment while also working on the other urgent business of this nation.”  Earlier today Senator  Mitch McConnell  said that the impeachment trial will not take place until after Biden is inaugurated.  After several Republican members of Congress protested the metal detectors installed after the deadly attack on the US Capitol, House Speaker  Nancy Pelosi  introduced a rule change to fine members who evade the detectors.  The House will vote on the fines when Congress returns to session on 21 January.  “On behalf of the House, I express my deepest gratitude to the US Capitol police for the valor that they showed during the deadly insurrection on the Capitol, as they protected the lives of the staff and the Congress,” Pelosi said. “Sadly, just days later, many House Republicans have disrespected our heroes by verbally abusing them and refusing to adhere to basic precautions keeping members of our congressional community, including the Capitol police, safe.” Members, including QAnon conspiracy theory supporter  Lauren Boebert , refused to comply with new safety protocols yesterday, clashing with officers. The newly-elected congresswoman of Colorado has drawn criticism for tweeting Pelosi’s location during the violent riot last week.  Snapchat will permanently ban  Donald Trump , per multiple reports.   “Last week we announced an indefinite suspension of President Trump’s Snapchat account, and have been assessing what long term action is in the best interest of our Snapchat community,” a spokesperson told Axios. “In the interest of public safety, and based on his attempts to spread misinformation, hate speech, and incite violence, which are clear violations of our guidelines, we have made the decision to permanently terminate his account.”  Twitter’s CEO, meanwhile, has weighed in for the first time on the company’s decision to de-platform Trump following the US Capitol attack last week:  I do not celebrate or feel pride in our having to ban  @realDonaldTrump  from Twitter, or how we got here. After a clear warning we’d take this action, we made a decision with the best information we had based on threats to physical safety both on and off Twitter. Was this correct? Read more analysis of social media companies’ bans and restrictions on Trump’s accounts, from the Guardian’s  Kari Paul :  Former governor  Rick Snyder  has been charged with willful neglect of duty, for his role in the Flint water crisis.  In 2014, the city of Flint, Michigan had its water supply switched to the Flint river to save costs. Some 9,000 children, who are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning, were exposed to lead-contaminated drinking water.  The AP reports:  The charges, shown in an online court record, are misdemeanors punishable by up to a year in jail and a $1,000 fine. The indictment filed by the attorney general’s office is groundbreaking: No governor or former governor in Michigan’s 184-year history had been charged with crimes related to their time in that office, according to the state archivist. Besides Snyder, a Republican who served until 2019, charges are expected against other people, including former officials who served as state health director, Michigan’s chief medical executive, Snyder’s communications chief and a senior adviser. Flint was in chronic financial trouble in 2014 when a Snyder-appointed manager who was running the majority Black city carried out a money-saving decision to use the Flint River for water while a regional pipeline from Lake Huron was under construction. The corrosive water, however, wasn’t treated properly and released lead from old plumbing into homes in one of the worst manmade environmental disasters in U.S. history. Despite desperate pleas from residents holding jugs of discolored, skunky water, the Snyder administration took no significant action until a doctor reported elevated lead levels in children about 18 months later. Micah Loewinger and Hampton Stall report:  Audio and chat logs reveal that at least two insurrectionists who broke into the Capitol on 6 January used Zello, a social media walkie-talkie app that critics say has largely ignored a growing far-right user base. “We are in the main dome right now,” said a female militia member, speaking on Zello, her voice competing with the cacophony of a clash with Capitol police. “We are rocking it. They’re throwing grenades, they’re frickin’ shooting people with paintballs, but we’re in here.” “God bless and godspeed. Keep going,” said a male voice from a quiet environment. “Jess, do your shit,” said another. “This is what we fucking lived up for. Everything we fucking trained for.” The frenzied exchange took place at 2.44pm in a public Zello channel called “STOP THE STEAL J6”, where Trump supporters at home and in Washington DC discussed the riot as it unfolded. Dynamic group conversations like this exemplify why Zello, a smartphone and PC app, has become popular among militias, which have long fetishized military-like communication on analog radio. After years of public pressure, Facebook, Twitter, and Discord have begun to crack down on inciting speech from far-right groups, but Zello has avoided proactive content moderation thus far. Most coverage on Zello, which claims to have 150 million users on its free and premium platforms, has focused on its use by the Cajun Navy groups that send boats to save flood victims and grassroots organizing in Venezuela. However, the app is also home to hundreds of far-right channels, which appear to violate its policy prohibiting groups that espouse “violent ideologies”. Responding to a list of over 800 far-right channels, Zello said it was “prepared to take action on those”. The company also said it was working on a more elaborate response. In addition to locking some public features that would help researchers uncover more extremist content, Zello had begun purging some far-right groups as of Wednesday. Read more:  The violent attack on the US Capitol last week followed a  Donald Trump  speech in which he told his supporters to “fight” for him. “If you don’t fight like hell, you’re not going to have a country anymore,” Trump told his supporters. “You’ll never take back our country with weakness. You have to show strength.” And yet yesterday, in Alamo, Texas, Trump again insisted: “If you read my speech … people thought that what I said was totally appropriate.” But with an impeachment trial coming up, the president seems to have slightly shifted his rhetoric.  Trump, as others in his party have done, also tried to chastise both sides for the violence, despite the fact that it was his supporters who led the attack last week.  This year, he said, “we have seen political violence spiral out of control. We have seen too many riots, too many mobs too many acts of intimidation and destruction. It must. Whether you are on the right, or on the left, a Democrat or Republican. There is never a justification for violence. No excuses. no exceptions.”  Banned from social media,  Donald Trump  has released a video statement condemning violence but making no mention of his impeachment and without taking any responsibility for inciting the attack on the Capitol last week. “Those who engaged in the attacks last week will be brought to justice,” Trump said.  pic.twitter.com/FIJbvCYGJ6 “Sadly and with a heart broken,” House speaker  Nancy Pelosi  said, as she signed the impeachment article that will be sent to the Senate.  “Donald Trump is a clear and present danger to our country,” she said, and that she was sad about “what this means for our country” as she signed the article accusing Trump of incitement of insurrection.  Meanwhile, the Democrats are huddling on how they’d prosecute.  CNN’s Manu Raju:  Pelosi is meeting with impeachment managers. Lead manager Jamie Raskin told me it was uncertain how many witnesses they would seek and how long trial would be. “We’re still just getting organized, but if it comes to it, we'll get you answers as soon as we've got some answers.” A lot could happen between now and the impeachment trial... But it remains unclear whether enough Republican senators will vote to convict the president.  Pat Toomey , a Republican senator of Pennsylvania, who condemned Trump’s role in inciting violence and called on him to resign, has nevertheless hedged on whether he’d vote to convict.  Whether the Senate can convict a president after leaving office is “debatable” Toomey said in a statement. “Should the Senate conduct a trial, I will again fulfill my responsibility to consider arguments from both the House managers and President Trump’s lawyers,” he said.  Trump’s second impeachment has led to some  strong responses from political commentators , including former US labor secretary and Guardian US columnist Robert Reich:  In case you weren't clear about the state of today's GOP: Only 10 House Republicans voted to impeach a president who incited an attempted overthrow of the U.S. government. Especially white Americans don’t like to hear it, but we got to the “coup” stage of fascism because we didn’t impeach at the concentration camps, cages, family separations, beatings, gassing, disappearances. Fascism’s a pattern of escalation and nobody tried to really break it The bottom line is that after everything, ten House Republicans voted to impeach Trump, two Cabinet officers quit, Twitter banned Trump, Lindsey Graham got off the train and back on again, and Trump is staying in office. For a week. We all know that the Republicans are going to try to impeach Biden at some point, right? To do another one of their "sorry, these are the new rules. See how you like it," things. The Senate’s leading Democrat,  Chuck Schumer  responds to the Trump impeachment: “A Senate trial can begin immediately, with agreement from the current Senate Majority Leader to reconvene the Senate for an emergency session, or it will begin after January 19th. But make no mistake, there will be an impeachment trial in the United States Senate”  “Despite the efforts of  Donald Trump  and violent insurrectionists, America is not a dictatorship,” Schumer said.” We have been and will forever remain a Democracy that respects and reveres the rule of law, including the bedrock principle that the voters choose our leaders – that just power can only derive from the consent of the governed.”
'There is no noise': inside the controversial Bhasan Char refugee camp – a photo essay:	I wanted to come here. No one forced me, and my wife also agreed in a snap. To be honest, though, I didn’t tell my brother. He lives where I used to live – Kutupalong camp. He is very against this island for some reason. He might have tried to stop me coming if I dared to discuss the topic. So I didn’t. I only told him after I arrived. I was amazed that he didn’t yell at me. Instead he wondered if he would ever see me again and even got a bit emotional. ‘The children have nothing to do but play. They said school will start soon’ Now when we phone each other, we compare facts and figures. On the island, we get 15kg of rice per head. They get only 13kg in the camps. We get 500g more dal and 1kg more potatoes here too. I am winning so far in our comparisons. We have been here just over one month. We are getting used to it. ‘I heard from one journalist that they spent $350m on this island. He told me I should be happy. I should not complain about anything’ For some reason, I don’t sleep properly. When I lie awake, in the dead of night, I can hear the sea and sometimes the horn of berthing ships. I feel a bit strange then but by the morning that feeling goes away. My children ask if their little friends from our neighbourhood back in the camp will come to the island. I really don’t know what to tell them. I guess they will find new friends here soon when their school starts.  There are tall buildings here. Refugees are not permitted in upper floors. Maybe they think we will kill ourselves? There are a lot of children here, and when they play and get noisy it makes this island feel better, to tell you the truth –and less abnormal. The buildings are all the same here. We live on the ground floor. There are some tall buildings.  Refugees  are not permitted on the upper floors. Maybe they think we will kill ourselves? ‘Right now this place is OK. But with thousands more, I am not sure’ We can only ascend if there is a cyclone. Those floors are used by administration and [for] other purposes. When I think of the camp, I miss getting together with my mates in our favourite tea stalls after Maghrib or Isha prayers. I miss the Burmese tea and coffee mixes we get in the camps like Rich Mix. And I miss  boma   lapase , which you mix with water. That stuff is addictive. ‘Most of the refugees here I think are children. Without children this place would seem even more abnormal’ I feel sad and guilty about my parents. I guess I also abandoned those kids I used to give private tuition to. I worry about them. If I hadn’t fallen into debt and if the thugs in the camp didn’t harass me like they used to – so much so that I feared for my life – I guess I wouldn’t be here. God knows. Most of all, I hope my parents will forgive me some day.  ‘In the camp, there is a lot of noise. Here there is no noise. Sometimes we hear a ship sound. It is very strange’
Trump impeachment: attention turns to Senate after House votes to impeach – live:	Letitia James,  the attorney general of New York, announced she is filing a lawsuit against the New York City Police Department over its treatment of protesters during last year’s demonstrations in response to the police killing of  George Floyd.  James said the NYPD violated protesters’ rights as part of a “longstanding pattern of brutal and illegal force” by the department’s officers. #BREAKING : I’m filing a lawsuit against the New York City Police Department to bring an end to its pattern of repeatedly and blatantly violating the rights of New Yorkers. No one is above the law — not even the individuals charged with enforcing it. “There is no question that the NYPD engaged in a pattern of excessive, brutal, and unlawful force against peaceful protesters,” James said in a statement.  “Over the past few months, the NYPD has repeatedly and blatantly violated the rights of New Yorkers, inflicting significant physical and psychological harm and leading to great distrust in law enforcement. With today’s lawsuit, this longstanding pattern of brutal and illegal force ends. No one is above the law — not even the individuals charged with enforcing it.”  In the statement, James’ office outlined several specific offenses allegedly committed by the NYPD, saying officers “effectuated mass arrests without probable cause; unjustifiably deployed pepper spray, batons, and other force against protesters; and targeted and retaliated against First Amendment activity so frequently and pervasively as to constitute customs or usages of the NYPD.” The lawsuit comes after  Andrew Cuomo,  the governor of New York, asked the office of the attorney general to conduct an investigation into police misconduct amid the protests. In response, James said her office has received more than 1,300 complaints and pieces of evidence since late May. Doug Ducey, the Republican governor of Arizona, said he would attend Joe Biden’s inauguration next week. In America, we believe in the peaceful transition of power. It doesn't matter who you supported in the election — once the election is over, we put country before party. Never has it been more important than right now to observe these traditions for the whole world to see. 1/ “In America, we believe in the peaceful transition of power. It doesn’t matter who you supported in the election — once the election is over, we put country before party. Never has it been more important than right now to observe these traditions for the whole world to see,” Ducey said in a statement.  “I was honored to represent Arizona at the inauguration of President Trump in 2017, and I am honored to represent our state at the 59th Inaugural Ceremonies next week.” Ducey added, “President-elect Biden is assuming office at a critical time in our nation’s history, and I wish him well. I will not agree with him on everything and I certainly will not hesitate to share my views on the public policy issues that matter to Arizonans, but I believe President-elect Biden is a good man and wants to serve his country. I look forward to working with his administration and advocating for the people of Arizona.”  Ducey has been an ally of  Donald Trump,  but the two have been at odds since  last month , when the Republican governor certified Biden’s Arizona victory and defended the integrity of his state’s election system. Trump has claimed, with zero evidence, that Biden narrowly won Arizona because of fraud. Joe Biden plans to name Jaime Harrison, the former South Carolina Senate candidate, as his pick to lead the Democratic National Committee,  according to a new report. The New York Times  reports :  A former chairman of the South Carolina Democratic Party, Mr. Harrison became a national political star last year as he shattered fund-raising records in his race against Senator  Lindsey Graham , who was up for re-election. While Mr. Harrison lost in November, drawing 44 percent of the vote to Mr. Graham’s 55 percent, he developed a broad bench of support across the party.  He is also well-known to staff and members of the D.N.C., a result of his work heading the South Carolina state party and a failed bid to become chairman of the committee in 2017. ( Tom Perez , the outgoing D.N.C. chair, won that race.) Mr. Harrison has been championed by Representative  Jim Clyburn  of South Carolina, an influential Biden ally who helped the president-elect win the primary race in Mr. Clyburn’s home state. Mr. Perez opted against running for a second term.  Incoming presidents traditionally take control of the party committees, installing their own chair and staffers. Former President  Barack Obama  chose to try establish his own political operation outside of the committee, a decision that many D.N.C. members say damaged state parties and led to years of dysfunction at the national level. Far more of a party institutionalist, Mr. Biden has promised to rebuild state parties and deepen investments in the committee. The DNC is expected to pick its new chair at its virtual winter meeting next week, a day after Biden’s inauguration. Perez has already said he does not intend to serve another term. Peter Meijer,  a Republican congressman who voted in favor of impeaching  Donald Trump,  said some of his colleagues are hiring armed escorts and acquiring body armor out of fear for their safety. “When it comes to my family’s safety, that’s something that we’ve been planning for, preparing for, taking appropriate measures,” Meijer, a Republican of Michigan, told MSNBC.  “Our expectation is that somebody may try to kill us.” — Rep. Peter Meijer (R-MI), who voted to impeach Trump, says he and other lawmakers believe their lives are in danger following yesterday’s impeachment. He also says they are altering their routines and buying body armor.  pic.twitter.com/stOO00OKYD “I have colleagues who are now traveling with armed escorts, out of the fear for their safety. Many of us are altering our routines, working to get body armor.” Meijer noted that body armor is a reimbursable expense for members of Congress. He added, “It’s sad that we have to get to that point, but our expectation is that somebody may try to kill us.” Meijer was one of ten House  Republicans  who voted to impeach Trump for incitement of insurrection yesterday, after the president incited a violent mob to attack the Capitol, resulting in five deaths. Members of the mob echoed Trump’s baseless claims that  Joe Biden  won the presidential election because of widespread fraud. “This wasn’t a landslide re-election for  Donald Trump . This wasn’t a stolen election,” Meijer said. “None of those claims played out in court, and it’s time we settle that once and for all.” Julia Letlow, the widow of congressman-elect Luke Letlow, is running for his House seat,  after her husband died of coronavirus. “Everything in my life and in my marriage has prepared me for this moment,” she said in a statement,  per the Monroe News-Star . “My motivation is the passion Luke and I both shared: to better this region that we called home and to leave it a better place for our children and future generations. “I am running to continue the mission Luke started — to stand up for our Christian values, to fight for our rural agricultural communities and to deliver real results to move our state forward.’’  A special election will take place on March 20 to determine who will fill the seat of Luke Letlow, who died just days before he was set to be sworn in. Julia Letlow has already attracted the support of  Steve Scalise,  the House minority whip and a prominent Republican figure in Louisiana politics. I am proud to endorse Julia Letlow for Louisiana’s 5th Congressional District. The loss of my friend Luke Letlow just days before he was to be sworn in has been nothing short of devastating. Like many have said, Luke represented what is best about public service — Andrew Yang,  the former Democratic presidential candidate, formally launched his campaign for mayor of New York this morning. Speaking at an event in Morningside Park, Yang told a socially distanced crowd, “I am so thrilled to announce to you all that I am running for mayor of New York City.”  “I am so thrilled to announce to you all that I am running for mayor of New York City.”⁰⁰Tech entrepreneur Andrew Yang’s agenda includes a guaranteed minimum income, starting a “people’s bank” and reopening the city “intelligently” from the pandemic  https://t.co/QXJiJBjdZA   pic.twitter.com/a38U5zAzUY Yang, who based his presidential campaign on a promise to establish a universal basic income program, made a similar pledge to New Yorkers. “We will launch the largest basic income program in the history of the country, right here in New York,” Yang said. Yang dropped out of the presidential primary last year after a disappointing performance in New Hampshire, but the tech entrepreneur’s ability to attract donations and support in a crowded field impressed many of his more established political opponents. The entire National Mall will be closed for  Joe Biden ’s inauguration due to security concerns after the Capitol riot, according to a new report. The Washington Post  reports :  The extraordinary closure is the latest in a series of security measures to harden the city against the type of violence that rocked the Capitol on Jan. 6. Local and federal officials had already established a downtown security zone and called up more than 20,000 National Guard troops to protect the presidential swearing in on Jan. 20. The move is significant because the Mall has been the traditional site where much of the general public has gathered to view the inauguration at the Capitol in person and on large jumbotrons.  ‘That means no one will be able to get into the Mall,” one of the officials [familiar with the matter] said. ‘I would think about it as if you are going to watch, you are not going to be able to see anything. You would maybe be able to see the top of the Capitol.’ Biden told reporters last week that he was not afraid to take the oath of office outside, but the violence at the Capitol last week has intensified concerns about another incident occurring during the inauguration. A fourth House member has tested positive for coronavirus after sheltering in place with colleagues during the Capitol Riot. Adriano Espaillat,  a Democrat of New York, said he is following his doctor’s guidance and quarantining at home after receiving a positive test result. Espaillat spoke in favor of  Donald Trump ’s impeachment on the House floor yesterday. I am following guidance from my physician and quarantining at home after having tested positive for COVID-19. In a tweet thread, Espaillat noted that he received his second dose of the coronavirus vaccine last week, but the benefits of the vaccine take time to go into effect. “I have continued to be tested regularly, wear my mask and follow the recommended guidelines,” Espaillat said. “I will continue my duties representing New York’s 13th congressional district remotely until I have received clearance from my doctor.” Three of Espaillat’s Democratic colleagues --  Bonnie Watson Coleman, Pramila Jayapal  and  Brad Schneider  -- have also tested positive for coronavirus since the riot. Democrats have blamed their Republican colleagues, some of whom refused to wear masks during the lockdown, for contributing to the spread of the virus. On Tuesday, House Democratic leadership introduced a proposal to fine members who do not wear masks on Capitol grounds. Dr Harold Bornstein, the president’s former personal physician,  died on Friday at 73. During the 2016 campaign, Bornstein famously said that  Donald Trump , one of his longtime patients, would be “the healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency,”  The New York Times  has the story :  His death was announced on Thursday in a paid notice in The New York Times. It did not give a cause or say where he died. Loquacious, hirsute and eccentric, Dr. Bornstein, a gastroenterologist, was Mr. Trump’s personal physician from 1980 to 2017. He had inherited Mr. Trump as a patient from his father, Dr. Jacob Bornstein, with whom he shared a medical practice on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, at Park Avenue and 78th Street. When Mr. Trump was elected president in 2016, Dr. Bornstein had hoped to be named White House physician and suggested as much to a longtime Trump assistant. But he was expelled from the Trump orbit after he disclosed to The New York Times that the president was taking medication to make his hair grow. This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Martin Belam. Here’s what the blog is keeping an eye on today:  Joe Biden   will deliver remarks this evening on his “vaccination and economic rescue legislative package to fund vaccinations and provide immediate, direct relief to working families and communities”. The president-elect has promised that passing a comprehensive coronavirus relief package will be his first order of business after taking the oath of office. That task will be significantly easier with  Democrats  in control of the Senate, but there are still some disagreements within the party over the details of a relief package.  For example, Biden has pledged another round of direct cash payments to all Americans, but  Joe Manchin , the centrist senator of West Virginia,  has said  he would like more targeted relief rather than checks for everyone. Biden will likely address those differences in opinion in his speech today, so stay tuned. If you fancy something to get your ears around, in this podcast today, Jonathan Freedland talks to Noah Feldman, who testified for the Democrats in the president’s first impeachment hearing. They discuss the various consequences for Trump after the House of Representatives voted to impeach him for the second time.  Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2021/01/14-46985-gdn.pw.210114.ds.Trump_impeached_again.mp3  The latest weekly initial jobless claims soared to 965,000 last week, according to the weekly data from the Department of Labor. Last week’s figure was 795,000. The most recent Bureau of Labor Statistics showed there had been a monthly decline of 140,000 jobs in December.  The US still needs to recover 10 million jobs to return to pre-pandemic levels. The overall unemployment rate is at 6.7 percent and some 19 million Americans are still relying on claiming some sort of unemployment benefit. President-elect  Joe Biden  will be announcing his plans for a Covid economic recovery program in Wilmington, Delaware at 7:15pm. It is happening again… pic.twitter.com/B09GWkWATJ No Administration has done more to partner with the Middle East’s most vibrant and tolerant democracy, Israel, than we have.  pic.twitter.com/HV8Ellzwzj As my colleague Julian Borger put it earlier : “The last days of Pompeo have been played out in a blizzard of self-congratulatory tweets, at the rate of two dozen a day, as he seeks to write his own first draft of history. The former Kansas congressman, with evident ambitions for a presidential run in 2024, has accented his claims of success by frequent derogatory references to the previous administration, portrayed as hapless appeasers. Some of the tweets have been factually incorrect.” Theodore R Johnson, senior fellow at the Brennan Center for Justice, writes for us today: Last week, Raphael Warnock  made history by winning a special senatorial election  in Georgia, becoming the first Black Democrat from the south ever elected to the United States Senate. Warnock, the senior pastor of the same church Martin Luther King Jr once led, pulled off the upset thanks to high turnout among Black voters across the state, in metro and rural areas alike. While his victory may have the feel of an overnight success story to much of the nation, it is the product of voter engagement that’s occurred over the last decade. The signs that Warnock could pull off an unexpected victory were all there. In 2018, Stacey Abrams came within 1.4 percentage points of becoming Georgia’s first Black governor and the first Black woman to be governor in the nation’s history. Then, last November, Joe Biden carried the state, becoming only the second Democrat to win it in more than three decades. And it happened by the slimmest of margins: Biden bested Donald Trump by just 11,000 votes when more than 5m were cast. After these two statewide contests, Democratic strategists were optimistic that strong turnout among Black Georgians would allow them to win both Senate seats up for grabs. Warnock’s victory is a culmination of that trend and  sustained voter engagement work  by figures such as Stacey Abrams and years of Democratic organizers. As has been well-established, Black Americans are the most reliable Democratic voters in the country – for the last five decades, Democratic presidential and congressional candidates win about 90% of Black voters on average. This basically held true in Georgia in 2020, where Biden beat Trump among Black voters 88–11. Strategists understand that increasing Black voter turnout creates lopsided advantages for Democratic candidates for elected office. So in  Georgia , where the number of Black Americans has steadily increased in recent years and presently makes up about a third of the state’s residents, Democrats recognized that a window of opportunity to win statewide contests would open. Stacey Abrams’ gubernatorial campaign leveraged the work of grassroots voter mobilization and civic engagement efforts and directed resources to expand outreach, especially in communities of color. And though she lost that election in an outcome clouded by voter suppression, the playbook for how to increase turnout by educating Georgians about the voting process and getting disengaged citizens to show up on election day was well-established. And it worked. Read more here:  Theodore R Johnson – The Democrats owe their new control of the Senate to Black voters in Georgia ProPublica have  a disturbing read  this morning about deep-seated racism in the Capitol police force, whose role in last weeks unrest in Washington DC has increased scrutiny. Joshua Kaplan and Joaquin Sapien report: When Kim Dine took over as the new chief of the US Capitol Police in 2012, he knew he had a serious problem. Since 2001, hundreds of Black officers had sued the department for racial discrimination. They alleged that white officers called Black colleagues slurs like the N-word and that one officer found a hangman’s noose on his locker. White officers were called “huk lovers” or “FOGs” — short for “friends of gangsters” — if they were friendly with their Black colleagues. Black officers faced “unprovoked traffic stops” from fellow Capitol Police officers. One Black officer claimed he heard a colleague say, “Obama monkey, go back to Africa.” In case after case, agency lawyers denied wrongdoing. But in an interview, Dine said it was clear he had to address the department’s charged racial climate. He said he promoted a Black officer to assistant chief, a first for the agency, and tried to increase diversity by changing the force’s hiring practices. He also said he hired a Black woman to lead a diversity office and created a new disciplinary body within the department, promoting a Black woman to lead it. “There is a problem with racism in this country, in pretty much every establishment that exists,” said Dine, who left the agency in 2016. “You can always do more in retrospect.” Read more here:  ProPublica – “No One Took Us Seriously”: Black Cops Warned About Racist Capitol Police Officers for Years Here’s what is in the diary for today. The president has got no official public engagements listed, although, as they have done virtually every single day in January, the White House has asserted that, and I quote,  Donald Trump  “will work from early in the morning until late in the evening. He will make many calls and have many meetings.” Vice president  Mike Pence  takes part in a briefing on inauguration security at Fema headquarters at 4pm. President-elect  Joe Biden  will speak about his “vaccination and economic rescue legislative package to fund vaccinations and provide immediate, direct relief to working families and communities” in Wilmington, Delaware, at 19:15 ET, which is just gone midnight if, like me, you are in the UK. Future first lady  Jill Biden  hosts a virtual special announcement and listening session with military family organisations at 1pm. And perhaps attracting more attention than usual, given the events of the last couple of months and the pressure put on Georgia’s election machinary by the president,  Gov. B rian Kemp  delivers his state of the state address in Atlanta, Georgia, at 11am. Also at 11am, New York State attorney general  Letitia James  is trailing that she willl make “a major civil rights announcement”. Donald Trump has fallen out with his personal lawyer,  Rudy Giuliani , and is refusing to pay the former New York mayor’s legal bills, it was reported, with the president feeling abandoned and frustrated during his last days in office. Giuliani played a key role in Trump’s failed attempts to overturn the results of November’s presidential election through the courts. The lawyer mounted numerous spurious legal challenges, travelling to swing states won by  Joe Biden , and spread false claims the vote was rigged. According to the  Washington Post , relations between Trump and Giuliani have dramatically cooled. Trump has instructed his aides not to pay Giuliani’s outstanding fees. The president is reportedly offended by Giuliani’s demand for $20,000 a day – a figure the lawyer denies, but which is apparently in writing. White House officials have even been told not to put through any of Giuliani’s calls. The apparent breach with Giuliani – one of Trump’s most loyal and sycophantic supporters – has contributed to the president’s sense of isolation and betrayal, aides have suggested. Trump is reportedly unhappy that members of his inner circle have failed to defend him following last week’s deadly attack on the US Capitol by a mob of his supporters. Many have been silent following Wednesday’s vote in the House of Representatives to impeach Trump for a second time. Those who have reportedly failed to step up include Trump’s press secretary, Kayleigh McEnany, his son-in-law and adviser, Jared Kushner, and his chief of staff, Mark Meadows, responsible for indulging Trump’s belief that the election was rigged. “The president is pretty wound up,” one senior administration official  told the Post . “No one is out there.” Trump’s refusal to pay Giuliani’s bills is another blow to the former federal prosecutor. Giuliani is already under fire for his own alleged role in inciting Trump supporters to storm the Capitol building. Read more of Luke Hardin’s report here:  Trump ‘refusing to pay’ Rudy Giuliani’s legal fees after falling out
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Journeys of hope: what will migration routes into Europe look like in 2021?:	I n 2020, tens of thousands of migrants crossed desert and sea, climbed mountains and walked through forests to reach what has become an increasingly inhospitable Europe. Many of them died, overwhelmed by the waves, or tortured in the  detention centres of Libya . More were displaced after the  flames of Moria refugee camp  in Greece burned everything they had. As a new year begins, so do the journeys of tens of thousands more people seeking a new life overseas. The Guardian has spoken to experts, charity workers and NGOs about the challenges and risks they face on the main migration routes into  Europe . Migrants walk in protest to the Serbian-Hungarian border near Kelebija, Serbia, in February 2020. They seek a passage to the EU. Photograph: Bernadett Szabo/Reuters In July last year, seven north African men climbed into a shipping container in a railway yard in Serbia, hoping to emerge a few days later in Milan. Three months later, on 23 October,  authorities in Paraguay found their badly decomposed bodies  inside a shipment of fertiliser.  Violence from security forces in the Balkan states  has pushed people to take even greater risks to reach Europe. After the Serbian border with EU countries became virtually impassable in 2018, refugees began trying to reach Croatia via Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) instead. The path usually begins in Turkey, from which migrants attempt to reach Bulgaria or Greece, then North Macedonia or Serbia, then Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia, from where they can finally reach Italy or Austria. The final leg of the Balkan route, which crosses mountains and snow-covered forests and lacks facilities for migrants, is one of the most perilous and gruelling, made worse by the  brutal pushbacks  carried out by squadrons of Croatian police who patrol the EU’s longest external border. Between January and November 2020, the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) recorded 15,672 pushbacks from Croatia to BiH.  More than 60% of cases reportedly involved violence . The humanitarian situation for those entering Bosnia and Herzegovina remains unacceptable and undignified “The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 has decreased migration flows along the western Balkan route,” says Nicola Bay, DRC country director for Bosnia. Last year, 15,053 people arrived in BiH, compared with 29,196 in 2019. “But in the absence of real solutions the humanitarian situation for those entering BiH remains unacceptable and undignified.” In December, a fire destroyed a migrant camp in Bosnia, which had been built to contain the spread of Covid-19 among the migrant population. The same day the International Organization for  Migration  declared the effective closure of the facility. The destruction of the camp, which was strongly criticised by rights groups as inadequate due to its lack of basic resources, has left thousands of asylum seekers stranded in snow-covered forests and subzero temperatures. When countries in the region begin to ease Covid-19 restrictions this year, Bay says it is highly likely there will be a surge of arrivals to BiH, which remains the main transit point for those wanting to reach Europe – a scenario for which the EU and the region remain unprepared. Carrying children and their few possessions, migrants flee in Moria camp on the island of Lesbos, Greece. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images On the night of 8 September, the Moria refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos, the biggest of its kind in Europe,  burst into flames . The government announced a four-month state of emergency on the island, as thousands of vulnerable asylum seekers were displaced. “This was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece,” says Stephan Oberreit, head of mission for Médecins Sans Frontières in Greece. “The combination of violence, Covid pandemic and the continued harmful policies of containment on the islands have led to several breaking points and eventually to the fires that have destroyed Moria.” 2020 was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece After the blaze,  the EU said there would be no more Morias . But more than 15,000 men, women and children are still trapped in miserable conditions on the Greek islands and the policy of containment continues. People using this route generally come by dinghy from the Turkish town of Ayvalik, aiming to reach Lesbos. Oberreit says that while arrivals have decreased this year, reports of illegal pushbacks have increased “in a concerning way”. “But let’s be realistic, people will continue to try to cross and risk their lives in the absence of other safer and legal options.” Oberreit says the pandemic “has been used by Greek authorities to accelerate their agenda to create closed centres on the Greek islands and to increase the border controls”. It’s hard to predict what will happen this year, “but the signs we have today give us little hope that the situation for the people who manage to arrive on the Greek islands will improve. Or that the EU will abandon its approach based on deterrence and containment,” he says. Migrants are rescued by members of the Spanish NGO Proactiva Open Arms after leaving Libya on an overcrowded dinghy in November. Photograph: Sergi Camara/AP In mid-November, four shipwrecks in the space of three days  claimed the lives of more than 110 people  in the Mediterranean, including at least 70 people whose bodies washed up on the beach of al-Khums, in western  Libya . Taking advantage of good autumn weather, people smugglers sent hundreds of migrants to sea. Many of the journeys ended in tragedy. Last year, at least 575 people died taking the central Mediterranean route. The  International Organization for Migration  (IOM) says the real number is considerably higher. People using this route usually depart from Tripoli or Zuwara in Libya, or from Sfax in Tunisia, and make for the Sicilian island of Lampedusa or Malta in small boats. At the start of the pandemic, Italy and Malta declared their ports closed. Rome established “quarantine boats” – ferries on which migrants are placed under quarantine for 14 days, which have been  criticised by human rights groups . There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries ... human rights are practically revoked “There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries that these people badly need and not even legal assistance,” says Oscar Camps, founder of Proactiva Open Arms. “In such a situation, human rights are practically revoked.” Open Arms is now the only NGO rescue boat operating along the central Mediterranean route. Many other rescue boats are blocked in Italian ports because officials refuse to  authorise their departure . Camps says he would like to see a planned civil or military rescue operation along the route this year, similar to  Operation Mare Nostrum , which Italy ran in 2013–2014. “It should be an operation aimed at dismantling Libyan armed groups, falsely called coastguards, financed by the EU, whose only mission is to intercept boats and bring them back to a country at war,” says Camps. “However, considering the way things are going, we would settle for them stopping the criminalisation of rescue operations carried out by humanitarian ships.” A migrant climbs into the back of a lorry bound for Britain at the entrance to the Channel tunnel in Calais, November 2020. Photograph: Denis Charlet/AFP/Getty Images Several thousand people attempted to cross the Channel to reach Britain last year. London has repeatedly pressed Paris to do more to prevent people leaving  France . In November, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, said they wanted to make the route unviable and signed a new agreement aimed at curbing the number of  migrants crossing the Channel  in small boats. More than  8,000 people  made the crossing in small boats last year, up from almost 1,900 in 2019. “The difficulties faced by women, men and children will in many ways remain the same as before,” says Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty’s refugee and migrant rights programme director. “Clearly, there is no will among the two governments – particularly not the UK – to directly address the needs and circumstances of these people to ensure they have access to asylum.” Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France on family reunification is uncertain According to experts, the future of the Channel migration route is linked to the continuing pandemic lockdowns and whether the UK participates in EU migration policies, specifically the EU family reunification programme. “Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France in relation to this particular matter is uncertain,” says Valdez-Symonds. “All that can be said, as things stand, is that almost the sole formally sanctioned option for at least unaccompanied children with family in the UK to seek asylum here is  about to close .” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
