Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
The violence at the Capitol was an attempted coup. Call it that:	O n Wednesday, a coup attempt was led by the president of the United States. A rightwing mob attempted the coup in the form of  a violent riot that stormed the Capitol building . They disrupted the proceedings that would have completed the recognition of the election of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Those proceedings had been disrupted earlier by elected officials bringing forth bad-faith claims that the election was not legitimate and should instead produce a continuation of Trump’s presidency. This too was a coup attempt, an effort to violate the constitution and override the will of the voters in this election. Inside and outside were two faces of the same thing, and both were fomented by the leaders of the Republican party and by the US president. The mob outside would not exist without the politicians inside. Those insiders will make noises of horror and repudiation, but they own this. Had Mitch McConnell and other Republican leaders recognized the legitimate winner of the election in early November, had there been no challenge to a legitimate election from inside the government, there would have been no mob. Having failed to suppress enough votes to guarantee a Republican presidential victory, the Republican party and the Trump administration decided to try to suppress them retroactively. Trump invited the mob and whipped it up for months and set it off today, as surely as if he’d lit a bomb’s fuse. I call it a coup attempt because, though I assume it will not prevent the Biden presidency, it certainly intended to, and is part of a campaign to delegitimize and thereby weaken the incoming administration. It was a long time coming, building up for years with white rage, especially white male rage fuelled by everyone from Trump himself to the National Rifle Association, Fox News and the various rightwing pundits, the Republican party, the various faces of white supremacy, and far-right groups such as the Proud Boys. It is a rage against the fact that other people might be equal under the law, that women and people of color might also govern as power begins to be distributed more equally, the same rage that attempted to delegitimize a black president with birtherism and obstruction. It is a rage against equality. Democracy is a set of agreements to make decisions together and respect the outcome whether you like them or not. The kind of violence we saw on Capitol Hill is authoritarian, a way to try to force other people to submit to the will of the perpetrators. This violence comes from the white men who were long the only people with power in this country imagining themselves as marginalized and oppressed outsiders because others might also have power and a voice. We saw these kind of men last summer, when they invaded the Michigan capital while carrying semiautomatic rifles and saw them again when a handful of them were arrested for a plot to kidnap Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer. We saw them in racist shootings from the Texas border to a Pennsylvania synagogue. This coup attempt was built by the more and more uninhibited ideology of violence we have seen again and again, in the mass shootings that became a norm in 21st-century America, the fetishization of guns and gun rights that made the killing machines and the death they inflict far more common, so that death by gun recently overtook death by car as a leading American way to die. As I write, I hear a Republican leader on TV say “Remember we are the party of law and order,” and, of course, the riot going on in the Capitol is technically lawless, but “law and order” as a rightwing slogan means that they are the law and they impose their version of order. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I change them at will and punish those who don’t obey, or, if I feel like it, those who do because I can. Political scientist Frank Wilhoit once said: “Conservatism consists of exactly one proposition … There must be in-groups whom the law protects but does not bind, alongside out-groups whom the law binds but does not protect.” They are demonstrating that nothing binds them and that they expect to have whatever they want. Entitlement is too demure a word for this. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I punish those who don’t obey What is at stake in America today is the outcome of an election. But it’s also the rule of law and the rights of voters. And in the end it’s also about the authority of facts and evidence and history and science, that no one has the right to override those things for personal gain. Trump’s position all along has been that he in particular has that right. Today it came to a head and became a crisis as a mob sabotaged a constitutionally mandated procedure for the peaceful transition of power. This was always going to happen because Trump’s power was always going to be finite in reach and duration under the law, and because he wants that power to be infinite, he was always at war with the law, and he always had a volunteer army willing to help him take it. Today they acted like an army, a hostile occupying force in the nation’s capital. This is what he wanted and this is what he orchestrated and this is what we got. Trump was the most prolific public liar America has ever seen, and his lies were an essential part of his authoritarianism, a refusal to be bound by facts, even the facts of what he said or did the day before. He demanded a parallel narrative in which he won the election and laid the groundwork long before to claim, if he lost, that it was illegitimate, as he did in 2016. In a recorded video on Wednesday, Trump said to the crowd “We love you” as he told them to go home but also reasserted that the election was stolen, which is why they’re there in the first place. Ivanka Trump apparently deleted a tweet in which she called them “American patriots”. The Trumps and their loyalists in office will disavow the worst of what happened and pretend to be surprised by it and continue feeding it. Conversation about what’s been happening over the past several months has often bought into the false binary that either we have a successful coup, in which they steal the election, or we have a failed coup, but there is something insidious in-between: the delegitimization of the democratic process and the incoming administration. In this in-between state, Trump supporters continue to regard their leader and themselves as above the law and entitled to enforce it however they see fit, on the basis of whatever facts they most enjoy having. They are building a separate reality and appear to wish for a shadow government to beleaguer and undermine the legitimate one. Today, we’ve seen it in action. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
What's the furthest from goal a player has seen red for a professional foul?:	“What is the furthest away from goal someone has been sent off for a professional foul?”  muses Robert Davies. Our thoughts immediately settled on Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s gloriously cynical  scything down of Newcastle’s Rob Lee  at Old Trafford in 1998 but by the time the Norwegian actually made contact with Lee’s shins, he was only around 30 yards from goal. How about  this shocking decision  from the 1991 League Cup quarter-finals then, when Southampton’s Jimmy Case was sent for an early bath after hauling down Bryan Robson – hardly known for his blistering pace – a good 40 yards from goal with two covering defenders for company? At the beginning of the season referees had been instructed to tighten up punishment for fouls that denied a clear goalscoring opportunity and, on this evidence, they had a loose understanding of what that meant. Another example from September 2018, in which Aberdeen’s Michael Devlin was given his marching orders  for a foul around 45 yards from goal , suggested officials were still struggling many years later. Aberdeen fail to overturn Michael Devlin's red card against Kilmarnock. Your thoughts? ➡️  https://t.co/Bsp8HyvWfS   pic.twitter.com/EeyiaKm9Gs Simon Kaplan has a potential winner. “I’d suggest Gary Cahill playing for Bolton against Tottenham in December 2011,” he writes. “He got a red card (rescinded on appeal) for denying Scott Parker a ‘clear goalscoring opportunity’ by taking him out about five yards inside the Bolton half.” Owen Coyle measured it for us in his post-match rant: If you understand the terminology it has to be a clear goalscoring opportunity. Now, Scott Parker is a fantastic player but he took a touch with his left foot, went out to the wing, 50 yards from goal. We had Zat Knight in the middle and other defenders coming back. However, if  this video evidence  is anything to go by, we reckon Mikel Arteta can match those 50 yards after bundling over Marouane Chamakh at Crystal Palace in 2013. “He was far from goal, it was an accidental foul, he was not the last man,” protested Arsène Wenger. Arsenal didn’t appeal, so the red card stood. “Has any club scored as many goals in the Champions League group stages as Manchester United this year (15) and not qualified for the knockouts? ” wonders Tim Leehan. While we’ve been polishing off the last few Quality Street, Yorben Geerinckx has done the hard yards for us. “If I’m correct, this only happened twice,” he suggests. “The first time was in 2012-13 when Chelsea scored 16 and amassed 10 points, as many as Shakhtar Donetsk. The Ukrainian side went through because they scored more away goals in the games between the two, with later-to-be-Chelsea player Willian scoring twice at Stamford Bridge in a 3-2 loss, which would prove sufficient to progress after a 2-1 home win. Juventus topped that group and Chelsea would go on to win the Europa League. “The second time was last season. RB Salzburg introduced Erling Braut Haaland to the world and also scored 16. Liverpool won that group and Salzburg finished five points behind runners-up Napoli, progressing to the Europa League, where they were eliminated by Eintracht Frankfurt in last 32.” Paul Moran unearthed the same examples and came up with some new ones. “In poring over 27 years of Champions League group stages, I found that Group D of the 2005-06 competition surprisingly only featured 12 goals across the 12 games. Two 2-1 results were the highest-scoring fixtures and, incredibly, Lille managed to secure six points and third place (transferring to the Uefa Cup) despite only scoring once – they were helped by an impressive defence which conceded just two goals.” Perhaps Jorge Valdano was right about  that particular era of European football . Anyway, back to Paul. “Has any other group stage in a competition (or even a whole competition) featured a goals-per-game figure of less than one? Or has any team in a group stage/competition had a lower figure of goals-per-game (scored + conceded) than Lille’s 0.5?” Send your answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU . “Portsmouth won 2-0 at Hull with only one shot on target and it didn’t come from Pompey (there were two own goals),”  writes Eddy Reynolds. “ Is this a record?” Nope. Burnley have gone one (none? – Knowledge Ed) better. “I watched Fulham lose 2-1 at Burnley in January 2019,” writes Jon Gundry. “That Fulham lost was not a surprise. We haven’t won at Turf Moor since 1951. Even in a desperately poor season ending in relegation from the Premier League, it was a surprise to lose when Burnley  did not have a shot on target . Fulham conceded two own goals by Joe Bryan and Denis Odoi. André Schürrle scored a cracker at the right end.” Worthy of note is this from Mike Dunford, who recalls Southampton’s  6-0 smash-and-grab win at Wolves  in 2007. “Memory serves that we had five shots on target. Mick McCarthy’s team were so unfortunate – and I speak as a Saints fan who saw it – that the home supporters  applauded  their team off. Has that ever happened in a bigger home defeat? And has anyone ever won by more goals in which every shot on target went in?” Patrick Brennan has one, at least. “ Luton beat Blackburn 3-2  on the last day of the 2019-20 season with one shot on target (a penalty) and two own goals,” he tweets. “If they hadn’t won they’d have gone down.” “Arsenal have been beaten home and away by Manchester United and Chelsea,”  noted Paul Brazier in March 2010.  “Has any side become champions of England despite losing all four games against the teams in second and third place?” In short, no. There have been a few examples of the champions losing three and drawing one, the most recent being Aston Villa in the 1980-81 season. They drew 1-1 at home to third-placed Arsenal, losing 2-0 at Highbury (the day they clinched the title), and lost both fixtures to second-placed Ipswich: 2-1 at Villa Park in mid-April and 1-0 at Portman Road. “Wikipedia reliably informs me there are five clubs that Sam Allardyce has played for and managed: Limerick, Preston, Bolton, Sunderland and West Brom. Can any manager beat that?” asks David Skinner. Has any other manager recovered from a huge loss (yes the 9-0!) and some as well as Hasenhuttl has? Or simply not been sacked. It’s an astonishing turnaround. @blzzrd   @OptaJoe   @guardian_sport  might know #SaintsFC   #Hasenhuttl “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,” reports Alex Crane. “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” @TheKnowledge_GU  Do you know the long and short of this question?  https://t.co/wLRqy70wXf “After an FA Cup tie on 1 February 1913, Burnley, then riding high in the Second Division, beat Midland League Gainsborough Trinity 4-1,” begins John Spooner. Trinity led until the last half hour, largely due to the efforts of goalkeeper Ronnie Sewell and his full-backs Cliff Jones and Sam Gunton. At full-time, Burnley made a bid to buy the trio  en bloc . The deal was sealed by 6.20pm that evening. Has a similar instance of players being signed by the opposition at the final whistle happened since?” Or similar bulk buys? @TheKnowledge_GU  Excluding one off huge wins, what's the highest goals-per-game ratio in a cup run?  For example, Newport County's 1988-89 Conference Cup involved 27 goals over three matches, ending in a 6-5 AET defeat. Barking.  pic.twitter.com/dSRdHmwzFP •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Football transfer rumours: Phil Jones and Jesse Lingard to join Newcastle?:	T he Mill was amazed to find out that Steve Bruce still has contacts at Manchester United, and that he intends to lean on them heavily to bolster his paper-thin  Newcastle  squad with a trio of loan deals. With his Magpies scoring, on average, a goal every leap year he’s decided to target his, erm, defence. The young left-back  Brandon Williams ’ rampaging runs up and down the flank for United in the Carabao Cup have got Bruce hot and bothered, so he’d like to slot him into his defence with a steady presence at centre-back beside him to coach him through games. The kind of cool-headed, controlled leader of men who could ensure Newcastle get the clean sheets they need to pick up the points required to spend another season treading water in the Premier League. So, why he thinks  Phil Jones  is the man to do that we don’t know. But there you go. He’ll also try to bring in  Jesse Lingard,  presumably to choreograph the celebrations on those rare occasions when they do score. In news not involving Manchester United fringe players, it says here that  Lionel Messi  has Whatsapped Neymar and told him to save him a seat in the  PSG  dressing room because he will be arriving in Paris this summer. Mauricio Pochettino may want to take a refresher course in ego-management if this is true.  Manchester City  haven’t given up on signing Messi but news that Kyle Walker has received a text from Messi is yet to arrive with us. And in any case, Pep Guardiola is more interested in signing “mini Messi”  Dario Sarmiento  from Estudiantes. Apparently, Juan Sebastián Verón has helped broker a deal for the 17-year-old, who will not be able to join until the summer, when he turns 18. Tottenham  have sprinted ahead of  Arsenal  in the race to sign crafty Leipzig midfielder  Marcel Sabitzer . José Mourinho has made the Austria international a key target, but the summer window is a more likely time to sign the £30m playmaker whose ability to pick a pass is almost as impressive as his man bun. Fabio Quagliarella  has turned his nose up at the chance to re-sign for Juventus as a back-up striker with a rousing, if rather confusing, declaration of his love for current club Sampdoria. “If you have given so much and received even more, if every time you feel the emotion beating in your chest, it means that the bonds are stronger than anything else, which go beyond flattering courtships, that put aside current reports and respect history,” he roared. “I think, live and play like this. Forza Samp.” And  Leeds  transfer guru Victor Orta has decided it might be good idea to sign a defensive midfielder to stop Marcelo Bielsa’s side getting torn apart on the counter-attack. The man they want is Fiorentina’s  Erick Pulgar  and they have had “concrete contact” about signing him. Diego Costa has been linked with a move to Elland Road, too, though can anyone in their right mind see the big man signing up for double January training sessions at Thorp Arch?
How one umpire's war on throwing hounded a bowler out via 16 no-balls:	I t was in this week in 1898 that Ernest Jones became the first bowler in Test history to be no-balled for throwing, an early skirmish in a one-man war waged by James, Jim or Jem Phillips, Anglo-Australian cricketer, umpire and fighter against the crooked elbow, who once went two full decades without experiencing a winter only to break that run in the most emphatic way possible by giving up cricket and moving to Canada. After his retirement Athletic News called Phillips a “zealot for purity” who “suffered from distorted vision, the result of prejudice and passion”. The Observer, however, described the no-ball call against Jones as “a courageous action [that] reverberated over two hemispheres”, and when news broke of his death in 1930 the Guardian wrote that he was “a man of fine physique, tall, broad, and powerful, most intelligent and fearless, as his career would suggest”. He was “the umpire who assisted so largely in stamping out throwing in first-class cricket” and “accomplished a really great work for the game”. The call had been coming, and not just because the same umpire had no-balled the same bowler during a tour match a couple of months earlier. “Did I go much over the line, Jim?” Jones had asked, upon hearing the call. “You delivered the ball more than a foot behind the crease,” answered the umpire, pointedly. “The law prohibiting no-balling was becoming obsolete,” WG Grace wrote of the late 1890s, “and the time had come when the interests of cricket demanded drastic measures to suppress throwing and discountenance anything like dubious delivery.” Those drastic measures took human form in the shape of Phillips, once a decent bowler for Victoria and for Middlesex, who was once described as “a big, thick-set Colonial, with red hair and red moustache, the incarnation of imperturbable obstinacy”, and later as a “self-constituted authority upon the art of fair bowling and maker of controversies”. A year before England’s second Test in Melbourne and Phillips’s infamous call,  Fred Spofforth  – the Australian fast bowler who had settled in England – wrote an article for Sporting Life in which he wondered if the MCC was “going to legalise throwing” altogether. “There is scarcely a first-class county which does not include a thrower amongst its cricketers,” he wrote, naming the Australian spinner Tom McKibbin and England’s Bobby Peel as notable chuckers (Grace was among those who had already cast doubt on Peel’s action). The article proved incendiary, nudging the debate forward a notch or two and preparing the ground for Phillips (perhaps ironically, given that when Jones’s action had been questioned during Australia’s tour of England in 1896 Spofforth had pointedly spoken out in his defence, going so far as to bet £50 that he could “strap Jones’s arm from the wrist to below the shoulder and he’ll bowl as fast as ever”, an offer which nobody took him up on). Overdue as it probably was, cricketers and journalists in Australia were outraged by the call, given that Jones had toured England without issue – even though Phillips had umpired some of his games there – and that several high-profile Englishmen had gone unpunished despite actions widely considered to be suspect – in addition to Peel, CB Fry, Dick Attewell and Arthur Mold were mentioned. They needn’t have worried: Phillips would come on to them. That summer Phillips no-balled Fry twice, two other umpires called the same player, and the English magazine  Cricket  reported on “the obvious determination of umpires to make themselves heard on the question of throwing”. This determination was not exactly unanimous – there was one match in which Somerset’s Ted Tyler was twice no-balled by Phillips from square leg only for the other official to disagree so vehemently he refused to allow extra balls to be bowled – but Phillips continued, and in 1901 his campaign reached an apotheosis when he got the chance to make an example of Mold. In December 1900 the county captains met to discuss the issue of throwing, and between them compiled a list of players who would not be allowed to bowl the following summer, with Mold and Fry among them. Lancashire’s captain, AN “Monkey” Hornby – who once scored an all-run 10 off a single ball – spoke out in his player’s defence. “If I can have my way,” he said, “we shall play Mold and let the umpires no-ball him if his delivery does not satisfy them of its fairness.” And after the blacklisted players were eventually reprieved, that is precisely what happened. There is no doubt that Arthur Mold was hounded out of first-class cricket For many months Lancashire kept Phillips and Mold apart, giving the bowler time off whenever the Australian officiated their matches, but for a match against Somerset at Old Trafford they included him in their team. In Lancashire’s first innings Phillips stood several yards behind his normal position when Mold was bowling, “to devote my whole attention to his delivery”, but did not see anything bad enough to force him to act. When the home side batted again he said: “It became apparent to me that there was a marked change in some deliveries, and as the innings proceeded this change became more pronounced and frequent.” Eventually he felt he had to intervene, and he called Mold for throwing. Then he did it again, and again, and again. By the time the innings ended Mold had been no-balled 16 times, and at the age of 38 it all but ended his career. The bowler protested his innocence, and that “it will be a bad day for English cricket if expert opinion is to come from the bush of Australia”, but the reputational damage had been done. “There is no doubt that he was hounded out of first-class cricket,” Athletic News wrote on his death in 1921, noting that Phillips’s intervention “was akin to kicking a man when he was about to depart this life”, coming “after 12 years during which no umpire had called him and no one had impugned his action to his face.” Perhaps, but they had impugned it pretty much everywhere else, and the age of the career chucker was at an end. That December the MCC wrote to the counties, informing them of their “hope that the county cricket executives will, in future, decline to play bowlers with doubtful deliveries”. The scourge of throwing had been calmed, and a battle that opened with Phillips’ call in January 1898 was over. This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe,  just visit this page and follow the instructions .
Share a story with the Guardian:	Get in touch with your news tips and stories by filling in our encrypted form below.  Click here for other ways to contact the Guardian securely . If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . We will contact you if one of our journalists is interested in following up on your story.
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
UK residents: how will you be impacted by Brexit?:	With the Brexit deal  signed into law  on Thursday morning, the UK’s relationship with the EU is set to change dramatically on 1 January. We’d like to hear how you will be impacted by Britain’s departure from the EU, particularly those working in industries which will be directly impacted, such as farming, pharmaceuticals and haulage. We’d also like to hear from people working in small businesses, and those who travel often. You can get in touch by filling in the form below or  via WhatsApp  by  clicking here  or adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click  here . Read terms of service  here .
Tell us about your return to the UK from countries on the quarantine list:	We would like to hear from people about their experiences arriving at UK airports, ports and train stations from countries on the quarantine list, such as  Croatia , France, Spain and Luxembourg. Were you required to fill out a test and trace form? Was your temperature taken? Were you given a QR code for scanning? Did anyone check your passport? Was there any information indicating you needed to isolate for 14 days?  We are also interested in hearing from people who have been contacted to ensure they have been quarantining. You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click  here . Read terms of service  here .
What is bitcoin and why are so many people looking to buy it?:	Bitcoin is a type of digital currency that emerged after the 2008 financial crisis. It allows people to bypass banks and traditional payment methods. It has become the most prominent among thousands of so-called  cryptocurrencies . It relies on  “blockchain” technology , which is a shared database of transactions, with entries that must be confirmed and encrypted. The network is secured by individuals called “miners” who use  high-powered computers to verify transactions , with bitcoins offered as a reward. There are more than 18m in existence, and the mathematical system controlling the generation of new bitcoins – which is decentralised and therefore has no overarching institution such as a central bank – has a hardwired maximum of 21m coins. There are several currency exchanges where consumers can swap traditional “fiat” money – backed by governments – for cryptocurrencies, which must be stored using a digital wallet. Some of the biggest exchanges include Bitstamp, Coinbase and Gemini. However, finance firms have also created new investment products based on bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, such as contracts for difference, which are used to track the value of an asset without needing to directly own it. There are problems when it comes to using bitcoin as a currency, with many people simply owning it as a speculative investment instead, given its tendency for extreme swings in value. Within the space of a single hour on Monday alone, its value fell by about $3,000 (£2,230), then rose again by about $2,000. This makes it almost impossible to put a reliable price on goods and services. Instead, there are ways to pay using applications such as BitPay, which converts bitcoin funds in a digital wallet to pay for goods in traditional currencies used by retailers. Transactions are growing, more so online than in physical shops, with firms including Microsoft, Lush and Expedia accepting payments. The first-ever bitcoin transaction was made in 2010, when a Florida man paid a British man 10,000 bitcoins to order him two Papa John’s pizzas. Today that would be worth more than $300m. The  City regulator is concerned  crypto investment firms could be overstating potential payouts, or understating the risks, from investing in bitcoin and products related to the digital currency. As a newer and relatively lightly regulated market, consumers are unlikely to have access to state-backed compensation if something goes wrong. There has also been a boom in  bitcoin scams . There are three main factors influencing the bitcoin price. First, the media frenzy over its boom in value, drawing in new buyers looking to make money. Second, more traditional finance firms are investing in the market. And finally, comparisons between bitcoin and gold, which fit with trends in the global economy. The development of Covid-19 vaccines could enable a swift economic recovery from the pandemic, at a time when governments and central banks are still providing vast amounts of emergency support – which could trigger a burst of inflation. Some investors view bitcoin as a store of value, similar to gold, which can hold its worth during times of economic stress or rising inflation. Bitcoin’s value is almost entirely defined by perceptions. Some economists believe it is entirely worthless. However, analysts at JP Morgan have said it could hit $146,000 if it became as established as gold for investors. However, to match this reputation built up over millennia – as a thing worth owning, with otherwise little intrinsic value – it would need to become much less volatile.
Hear Here podcast recommendations: sign up for unexpected audio pleasures:	Hear Here hunts out the best podcasts every week. Sign up and we’ll send you an email filled with shows you’re unlikely to see featured on the major podcatchers but that are instead hidden gems whose listeners are desperate for the rest of the world to tune in.  See the latest edition of Hear Here ... here. No sign-up button?  Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault.  Please  click here  to reload the page on theguardian.com  which should correct the problem. *** More emails from our culture team: Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Film Today : get the day’s insider news and our latest reviews Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Art Weekly:  the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitions *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Sign up to our Film Today email:	Every weekday we bring you the latest movie news, blogs, big name interviews, reviews and more. We’ll also point you towards  Peter Bradshaw ’s film of the week, and a host of quizzes, features and festival coverage. You can also also follow us on Twitter  @guardianfilm  or like us on  Facebook . You need never miss a film story again. *** Want more film? Try this: Guardian Documentaries : be the first to find out about our new documentary films, created by top international filmmakers and following unseen global stories More emails from our culture team: Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Art Weekly:  the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitions Hear Here : podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Art Weekly: sign up to start the weekend with a splash of colour:	Art Weekly is your one-stop shop for all your arty needs. Jonathan Jones handpicks the best ideas and things to see and delivers the week’s must-read news, so you won’t miss a thing.  See the latest edition here. *** More emails from our culture team: Film Today : get the day’s insider news and our latest reviews Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Hear Here : podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Beach maximalism: a frenzy for cabanas and carts is taking over Australian shores:	A  friend and I took my blue and white-striped umbrella to Noosa beach the other day. I was a bit dismayed. From the path above the beach we surveyed the scene. Perhaps, I thought, we had fallen through the earth on to an Italian  spiaggia  – one of those private beaches where you can rent a sunbed or  cabina  and lie alongside rows of the idle rich, inert in large sunglasses. For half a kilometre or so, from Noosa headland to the breakwater, candy-striped cabanas were jammed, a higgledy-piggledy tent city for refugees fleeing the horrors of 2020. We picked our way through the chaos and found a small campsite near the rising tideline. But we didn’t fit in. For a start, I am lardishly pale and get freckles in the shade and my one-piece swimsuit is from a discount chain store. My umbrella was also out of place. Aside from its jaunty stripes, there’s not much to recommend it. In terms of technology, it’s backwards, of an era when my bare legs stuck to the vinyl back seat of Dad’s Valiant when we went to the beach and the Big Pineapple was the hottest ticket in town. As I knelt in the sand – sweating and breaking fingernails digging a hole deep enough in which to secure my unfashionable umbrella’s pole, then struggled against the wind to open its canopy – I felt the eyes of Costa del Noosa upon me. To our left, a thin, tanned woman shook out a towel emblazoned with the words “Pls Instagram this” and then retreated to the shade of her pineapple-patterned blue cabana. She stretched out on a lilo and picked up her book,  The President is Missing . Certainly, he was. Not so far from her, a man lay on a beanbag lounge and rested a beer on his belly. Beside him was a beach cart, that new essential for taking your whole house to the seashore – babies, toddlers, coolers, booze, food, towels, toys. (Seasonal style note: Wahu Surfer Dudes such as Sunny Coast Sammy or Bells Beach Bethany – figurines attached to miniature surfboards that kids toss into the whitewash – are 2021’s bucket and spade.) Behind us, blokes sitting in the sun outside their cabana were discussing the relative merits of local restaurants’ cocktails. “Would you say seven or eight out of 10?” asked one. “Mate, definitely an eight,” was the reply. Under her breath, my friend, a fan of chivalry, muttered that they could at least have offered to help us raise our recalcitrant umbrella. The cabana frenzy is pushing aside little old umbrella users like me and taking over prime beach real estate from Portsea to Bondi. “Don’t start me on them,” my friend Karen says of the structures, which have as much potential as an overbearing Sydney harbourside mansion to foment neighbourhood disputes over lost views. “You can’t see the waves.” The biggest cabana made by CoolCabana, which was sketched into being by an architect sunbathing at nearby Little Cove beach and is one of the more popular brands, is 5.76 metres by 5.76 metres. Another friend Kim, an unflinching umbrella aficionado, has observed a range of inconsiderate, entitled behaviours accompanying this new beach imperialism. “People are more prepared to put their own desire for comfort ahead of consideration of other beachgoers,” she says.  Kim has seen someone erect their cabana on top of a temporarily absent swimmer’s beach towel and boogie board. She’s seen three deserted cabanas erected next to each other with mats running between them and empty sun lounges. Their residents were sunbathing out the front of their dwellings. Conversely, when the sun sinks in the afternoon, the shade often falls beyond the cabana and so people move outside into it, doubling their footprint. But for every ill-mannered beach builder, there is another who is courteous and simply appreciates a cabana’s practical benefits. “We were sick and tired of having to hold on to the umbrellas and being speared by other people who didn’t know how to put an umbrella in,” Tewantin resident Katrina tells me when I stumble into the cabana she is sharing with her family. I’m hoping she didn’t see me trying to secure my umbrella in the sand. Katrina notes how easy a cabana is to set up and points out the pockets in its corner struts for things like keys and sunglasses. She has a CoolCabana and matching CoolCabana loungers. Her fold-up Buddy Wagon is parked beside the cabana. “My little one gets in there when we’re coming to the beach,” she says. When she visits the farmers’ market, it’s a blessing for her bad back. My friend Kim sounds dubious when I ask her about the wagons, which variously come with accessories such as umbrellas, lids, awnings and portable coolers that hang off the sides. Hmm, she says, yes, she can see that if you have a distance to walk with small children they might be a good idea. But she wonders about the people she sees pulling them through Noosa national park. “Should you be visiting the national park with half a house, with everything but the kitchen sink?” she muses. “Trolleys seem to enable excess.”
Werner and Havertz end goal droughts as Chelsea breeze past Morecambe:	As a manager craving the comfort of a straightforward victory, Frank Lampard could not afford to take any unnecessary risks. The merest hint of an upset was not a risk worth taking after a series of stumbles in the Premier League. Lampard knew Chelsea’s  reputation for impatience  too well to gamble, even against lower-league opponents who had not played since Boxing Day because of a Covid-19 outbreak in their squad. On shaky ground after losing four of his last six league games, Lampard needed Chelsea to secure safe passage into the fourth round. The visit from  Morecambe , lying seventh in League Two, was not the moment to throw in the kids. Chelsea needed belief to return, for Hakim Ziyech to build fitness after his injury problems, and for struggling stars such as Timo Werner and Kai Havertz to play themselves into form. Inevitably the tie became little more than a training ground exercise, with Morecambe’s defence gamely trying to live with Chelsea’s attackers. It finished 4-0, it might have been more, and the significance for Lampard came from Werner and Havertz ending their goal droughts: the former after 12 games, the latter after 15. “It’s a little bit of confidence,” Lampard said. “I don’t want to overstate that given the nature of the game. I’m pleased for Timo. He’s had plenty of near-misses in that time. It’s important for Timo and Kai. It’s a nice big step for both of them.” Under scrutiny after the  shambolic defeat by Manchester City , Lampard needed to avoid any complacency. Disappointingly for the youngsters who had spent the week training with the first team, this was not an occasion for experimentation. Even the bench was packed with senior players: only Faustino Anjorin, who has played in the Champions League, made the match-day squad. But the decision to pick such a strong side brought another form of pressure. The onus was on  Chelsea  to put on a show and they lacked rhythm during the first half, struggling to create as the visitors placed bodies behind the ball. Chelsea were unimpressive despite leading 2-0 at the break. Morecambe, whose players ended a period of self-isolation last Tuesday, fought to restrict the space behind their defence. Havertz, who has struggled since recovering from Covid, was quiet during the early stages. Yet there was little chance of Morecambe holding out. They were close to taking a shock lead when Adam Phillips almost caught out Kepa Arrizabalaga with a miscued cross – Chelsea’s reserve goalkeeper saved himself from embarrassment by scrambling to stop the ball crossing the line – but the opening goal arrived shortly after that scare, Mason Mount accepting an invitation to shoot from 20 yards and firing a low effort past Mark Halstead in the 18th minute. Mount’s presence in the side was a reminder that Lampard trusts youth in the right circumstances. The England international is one of Chelsea’s most reliable players and he was accompanied in midfield by another academy product, Billy Gilmour, who was accomplished in possession. Gilmour took it upon himself to move the ball quickly and ensured that Callum Hudson-Odoi, another off the production line, had opportunities to run at Morecambe on the left. When Hudson-Odoi took a lofted pass from Ziyech and made it 3-0 at the start of the second half, it was evidence that Chelsea’s future remains bright. The move for the second goal had also hinted at better to come: Ziyech cutting inside to cross with his left foot, Havertz ghosting into space to head across goal, Werner in position to score in Chelsea colours for the first time since 7 November. Lampard will hope that Werner’s confidence returns now his barren run has ended. He saw Ziyech gain fluency as the game wore on and rejoiced when Havertz, dangerous in the second half, rose to head César Azpilicueta’s cross home. For Chelsea, who visit Fulham on Friday, this needs to herald the start of the recovery.
Carlos Vinícius's hat-trick for Tottenham ends Marine's adventure:	There was no shock to end all shocks, no humiliation either, and the surrealism of Tottenham visiting  Marine  in the third round of the FA Cup was not diminished by a straightforward win for the team 161 places higher in the English football pyramid. As Gareth Bale sprayed passes around Rossett Park, José Mourinho sat on a chair with the garden of 19 Rossett Road behind him and a cardboard cut-out of Jürgen Klopp over his right shoulder. “Three Lions” blared out from number 11 during the closing minutes while Gary Lineker and Alan Shearer threw a few shapes on the makeshift TV gantry nearby. “I was happy when they brought Bale on so I could be on the same pitch as him,” said the Marine left-back, James Joyce. “I saw he was blowing a bit towards the end and asked him if he was done in. He said he was starving. I said don’t worry about that, the club has provided you with a Tesco meal deal for after the game.” A magnificent cup run is over for only the second team from the eighth tier of English football to reach round three, although its impact will be lasting. Marine launched a virtual ticket appeal to compensate for £100,000 in commercial revenue that stood to be lost when the game was moved behind closed doors. When the final whistle blew on Spurs’ professional victory over 30,000 tickets had been sold and over £300,000 raised. This could be the last game Marine play all season - the Northern Premier League division one north west is suspended until at least 6 March and a restart looks highly unlikely at present – and every penny counts at non-league level. Marine acquitted themselves well in the biggest game of their lives, holding their Premier League visitors at bay for 24 minutes before Carlos Vinícius commenced his hat-trick. Alfie Devine came off the bench at half-time for Spurs and straight into the record books as the club’s youngest goalscorer when he added the fifth. Both Neil Young and Bayleigh Passant, Marine’s manager and goalkeeper respectively, were unhappy with the manner of the goals conceded. They had nothing to be disappointed about. Non-league football had a much-needed day in the spotlight and, but for the scenes outside the ground before kick off, the club from Crosby delivered in every respect. Social distancing went out of the window as hundreds of people lined College Road to witness the arrival of the team coaches. Mourinho and his players alighted on the road outside the ground, opposite Smithie’s Hairdressers and a few yards down from ‘The Bug’ (as The Edinburgh public house is known locally) before making their way to the function room that served as their changing room. Even with nine changes to the team that beat Brentford in the Carabao Cup semi-final in midweek, this was still a Spurs’ side worth popping to the bottom of the garden to see. Heung-Min Son and Bale may have been on the bench, and Harry Kane rested completely, but Moussa Sissoko, Lucas Moura, Toby Alderweireld and Dele Alli all started and the visiting squad boasted over 400 international caps between them. For Marine the task was easier in theory than practice: keep things tight, stay in the game and capitalise on any opportunity. For 24 minutes they adhered to the plan and were inches away from taking a truly stunning lead from their first attack. Neil Kengni, collecting the ball deep in the Spurs’ half, ran at a back-tracking defence before unleashing a 30-yard drive that smacked against the top of Joe Hart’s crossbar. The former England goalkeeper tipped the rebound over for a corner having been caught out by the dip on Kengni’s initial shot. “Come on Marine, these are shite!” bellowed a home fan, clearly over-intoxicated by the near-miss, from behind Passant’s goal. Spurs soon put him right. The fairytale evaporated in the space of 14 first-half minutes as Alli stepped up a gear and four goals, all from Brazil, punctured Marine’s bubble. Alli made the first when he exchanged passes with Gedson Fernandes and crossed low to the far post where Vinícius bundled the ball around Passant before lashing home on the goal-line. His second was a little further out, and again created by Alli. The Spurs’ playmaker picked out Matt Doherty’s run with a perfectly weighted cross. Passant, released by Tranmere last year, produced a fine save to turn away the defender’s volley but could only tip the ball into the path of Vinícius for another tap-in. Moura scored the third, curling home a free-kick from 20 yards, and Vinícius claimed his hat-trick following more good work by Alli. The Brazilian forward reacted sharply after Josh Hmami failed to clear and beat Passant with a dipping shot from just inside the area. The romance of the occasion had faded for Marine, but did not disappear from the tie completely. Devine replaced Sissoko to become the youngest debutant in Spurs’ history at 16 years and 163 days. The midfielder, signed from the clear-out forced on Wigan when they went into administration, soon claimed the title of Spurs’ youngest goalscorer when he cut inside from the left and beat Passant with a powerful low drive to the near post. Spurs did not declare at five. They were held there by a determined Marine team despite fatigue kicking in and Bale entering the fray for the final 25 minutes. A glorious defeat.
Crawley's second-half treble stuns Marcelo Bielsa's Leeds in FA Cup:	It has come to feel as if Leeds only deal in  FA Cup  pain and humiliation. Just five times in 20 years have they made it past the third round and sometimes they have not even got that far. Their supporters still shudder at the crashes from the League One days – against Hereford and non-league Histon in rounds one and two respectively. This was another disaster and the name of League Two Crawley can be added to the roll-call of shame that also includes Newport County, non-league Sutton United and Rochdale. It was an afternoon when Leeds were not so much beaten but torn apart during a second half in which Crawley scored three times and ought to have had more. Were it not for the colours, nobody would have been able to tell the team that sits 12th in the Premier League from the one that occupies sixth place in the bottom division of the professional game in England. Crawley had the hunger, they had the work rate and the plan, and they had the cutting edge, too. Nick Tsaroulla, a former Tottenham trainee, got the rout started when he sprinted from halfway to finish brilliantly in the 50th minute and it was quickly 2-0 when Ashley Nadesan embarrassed Kiko Casilla at his near post. It was a horror moment for the Leeds goalkeeper but it got even worse for him and his teammates. Crawley’s third came when Casilla pushed out a shot from Nadesan following a corner and the centre-half Jordan Tunnicliffe was on hand to fire into the roof of the net. The minnows had further chances during a period that will live for ever in the memories of their fans who, sadly, had to enjoy it from their living rooms via the BBC. Crawley brought the stardust – not their more illustrious rivals – all the way down to their introduction of the reality TV star Mark Wright as a 90th-minute substitute. Wright, a one-time Spurs youth team player who went on to feature in non-league before seeking his fortune outside the game, is currently the subject of a BBC documentary. The latest episode was exquisitely scripted. pic.twitter.com/lTgWZ2AdWy Wright, 33, has been training with Crawley for the past couple of months and this was the first game for which he was eligible. The Only Way is Essex? The only way, here, was West Sussex. Never before have Crawley upset Premier League opposition. It was surely the biggest result of their history. “That’s what they’re telling me,” the manager, John Yems, said. “We went to church this morning, and lit a few candles. Nah, not really. We knew we had to make it as difficult as we could – don’t get caught chasing the ball, don’t get mixed up in their game. We did that. We let them have it in front of us and the rest is history.” Marcelo Bielsa had been poetic in his pre-match press conference. “For me, the FA Cup represents English football in its purest form,” the Leeds manager said. He showed his respect to the competition – and Crawley – by naming a strong starting XI, which he set up in a 3-4-3 formation with the England midfielder Kalvin Phillips on the right of the defensive three. Leeds had all the ball in the first half but they failed to do very much with it – an Ian Poveda shot from a tight angle that worked Glenn Morris and an optimistic Rodrigo penalty shout being the sum total of their efforts. And they melted into the background after the interval as Crawley shone the harshest of lights on their defensive looseness. Bielsa has now lost all three of his ties in the competition. Crawley could have been in front at half-time. Nadesan was crowded out after a mistake by Phillips but the big chance came on 41 minutes from a Jack Powell corner only for Tom Nichols to head too close to Casilla, who saved smartly. It did not matter. Bielsa made three changes at half-time, with two of them being the introduction of the youngsters, Oliver Casey and Jack Jenkins. Casey, in particular, struggled in central defence and Leeds were 2-0 down before they had seemingly caught their breath. “They changed up at half-time which I think favoured us,” Nadesan said. The power of Tsaroulla’s 40-yard run was matched by the precision of his low shot into the far corner – where was the Leeds resistance? – and Crawley were in dreamland when Nadesan outpaced Casey and blasted for the near post. The bounce deceived Casilla and the ball squirmed through him. Tom Dallison and Sam Matthews had gone close before Tunnicliffe’s goal while after it, Jake Hessenthaler had two good chances – the first after he dribbled around Casilla; Casey would make a saving block. The Rocky theme tune filled the stadium at full-time and the only consolation for Leeds was that Gatwick airport was a mere 10 minutes away.
Bernardo Silva's double sees Man City coast to Cup win over Birmingham City:	As  Manchester City  paid tribute to a goalscoring midfielder, another belatedly remembered how to find the net. City had emerged in shirts featuring the No 8 worn by Colin Bell for much of his distinguished career at Maine Road, along with a banner proclaiming “the king”, their late, great player of the 1960s and 70s. Bell remains the only midfielder to score 150 goals for City. If Bernardo Silva had not quite proved as prolific, a return of 30 in his first three seasons in Manchester was very respectable. He began this season by going 17 games without a goal and extricated himself from a drought with two inside 15 minutes. The player who Pep Guardiola believes was the best in the Premier League in 2018-19 has regressed since then, but this was a reminder of the quality he possesses. If the stage was set for a return to the scoresheet when Guardiola promised Sergio Agüero a first start since October, City’s record scorer ended up quarantined. “Unfortunately he was in contact more than usual with one person who is positive [for coronavirus],” said Guardiola. “He tested negative but he is isolating.” Instead, Silva’s double included the sort of predatory strike Agüero would be proud to call his own. It was rather too much for  Birmingham City . Aitor Karanka’s Middlesbrough eliminated Sunday’s hosts from the FA Cup six years ago but his current charges could not stage a sequel. “If you allow them to play, if you are jogging behind the ball instead of being aggressive, the only thing that can happen is what happened,” he said. A rival of Guardiola in many a  clásico  and a former assistant of José Mourinho at Real Madrid, Karanka has forged a reputation for defensive excellence as a manager but his timid side were elegantly eviscerated in the first half. “I was pleased when I saw the first XI because it means Pep respected us,” Karanka said. Fresh from reaching a fourth consecutive Carabao Cup final, Guardiola rationalised his strong selection. “If you follow the trajectory for our teams, we don’t drop one competition,” he said. “Every game we play to win.” And, with victory secured by the break, Guardiola took pity on Birmingham and removed Kevin De Bruyne. A midfielder who has inspired comparisons with Bell – not least from the latter’s former teammate Mike Summerbee – had delivered a masterclass. It included two defence-splitting balls for Gabriel Jesus. Andrés Prieto saved the Brazilian’s first shot; the second, dinked over him, was cleared off the line by Maikel Kieftenbeld. Like Kyle Walker, Jesus made his comeback after suffering from Covid but, not for the first time, he endured the sort of day when the finish eluded him, the kind that raises doubts if he is the long-term answer; perhaps the more potent Agüero’s absence spared Birmingham a thrashing. As it was, Silva condemned the Championship team to a sixth defeat in seven games, stripping the afternoon of tension before any of the substitutes could warm up. “We made nice goals,” added Guardiola. “I am happy for Bernardo. He scored two goals and could have scored more.” Silva’s wait was ended in style with a strike of technical brilliance, the Portuguese latching on to George Friend’s headed clearance to hook in a half-volley. The watching Ederson shouted out his name in celebration. “It was class,” said Zack Steffen, the goalkeeper City had on the pitch. His second was an altogether simpler finish. This time the excellence came from the move, involving Phil Foden and Riyad Mahrez and culminating in De Bruyne’s cutback for Silva. He twice came close to completing a hat-trick, much to the disappointment of Ederson, who emerged from quarantine to exclaim his colleague’s name at regular intervals. Thereafter, Foden drilled in a shot after Mahrez laid the ball off to him and the fractionally offside Mahrez had a goal disallowed. City eased up, permitting Felix Nmecha an outing in the No 10 role, Liam Delap a cameo in attack and Taylor Harwood-Bellis a second half in the defence. Birmingham belatedly sparked to life. Their substitute Jérémie Bela unleashed a couple of ferocious shots, glancing a post and clipping the bar, and Karanka lamented: “We finished the game in the way we should have started it.”
Jason Steele's acrobatics take Brighton past Newport after penalty shootout:	It would be hard to script a better redemption story on a football pitch. After flapping at a stoppage-time cross to gift Newport of League Two an extraordinary equaliser, Brighton’s backup goalkeeper Jason Steele made four penalty shootout saves to help the Premier League strugglers to advance to the  FA Cup  fourth round and spare any embarrassment after a nail-biting tie. Adam Webster, whose own goal paved the way for extra time, scored the decisive spot-kick as Brighton won 4-3 on penalties following Scot Bennett’s miss. It was to be another agonising climax for Newport, who came unstuck on penalties against Newcastle in the Carabao Cup in September, and a particularly cruel crescendo for their goalkeeper, Tom King, who made three wondrous saves including a superb stop to deny Lewis Dunk in extra time. In the end King’s opposite number proved the hero but Steele could not bear to look as Webster stepped up to drill in the 14th penalty. “Jason was disappointed with the goal but he responded well,” said the Brighton manager, Graham Potter, who described a hairy escape as a traumatic experience. “Credit to Newport and we wish them well in terms of their promotion push. We knew they would be tough opponents.” Newport’s form for an upset has been one of the most captivating stories in recent years and they almost topped the lot when Kevin Ellison powered at goal with only seconds of extra time to play. A day which began with Ellison, who turns 42 next month, winding up the club physio by calling to say he was overcome with “FA Cup fever” ended with the former Morecambe winger wondering how Dunk managed to block a thunderous half-volley. The game spiralled into extra time after Webster’s own goal, which stemmed from Steele making a mess of a teasing cross, cancelled out Solly March’s 90th-minute strike. Michael Flynn – the mastermind behind Newport sending Leicester, Leeds and Middlesbrough packing in this competition from Rodney Parade – promised Brighton a bobbly pitch and, within three minutes, Dunk was guilty of failing to read the conditions. The Brighton captain undercooked a back pass but Pádraig Amond, who finished as the joint-top scorer alongside Gabriel Jesus in the FA Cup in 2018-19, unusually fluffed his lines. Despite vying for promotion from League Two, the finances of the competition meant Newport were never going to take this lightly. King saved superbly to deny Andi Zeqiri his first Brighton goal but ultimately it was Steele who made the difference. “I’m really thankful for that because I nearly cost us in the last minute,” Steele said. “A lot of credit has to go to my goalkeeping coach who had done a lot of research. In the end I dug myself out of it.” For different reasons Brighton, whose dressing room constituted a marquee behind the away terrace, were always going to take this seriously despite it being the first of three away matches in six days. Next up? Manchester City on Wednesday. Newport are back here on Saturday to play Salford. “There’s players there [for Brighton] on more [money per week] than some of my players earn in two years,” Flynn said. “It is not by fluke or by coincidence, we work hard and they have put the club on the map again.”
Football transfer rumours: Tierney out and Buendía in at Arsenal?:	M onday’s Rumours kick off with quite the doozie, with The Telegraph reporting Napoli have set their hearts on an audacious summer swoop for  Kieran Tierney . A standout performer for  Arsenal  even during their most abysmal spell of form this season, the left-back looks certain Future Captain Material and one suspects that if the Italian side get their way, Gunners fans might storm the Emirates in protest and raze it to the ground. This is not the first time Napoli have shown interest in the left-back, having been beaten to his scrawl when he moved “down the road” to London from his boyhood club Celtic. In news more likely to meet with the approval ofArsenal fans, Mikel Arteta and technical director Edu are reported to be interested in acquiring  Emi Buendía  from Norwich City, but will have to fend off interest from Valencia in the £40m-rated Argentinian midfielder. Guardian transfer guru Fabrizio Romano claims the Premier League side have already been in contact with the player’s representative and an official bid is in the pipeline. Brendan Rodgers has no plans to bring in any new recruits during the January window unless his hand is forced by injuries, but the Leicester City manager is prepared to let  Hamza Choudhury ,  Demarai Gray  and  Islam Slimani  leave the club. West Brom are in the box-seat to sign midfield enforcer Choudhury, while Southampton are interested in adding Gray to their coterie of wingers. According to the Leicester Mercury, Lyon have agreed personal terms with Slimani and will either pay a fee for the striker in the current window or bide their time and take him on a free in June. In news that will come as music to the ears of Liverpool and Manchester United, Bild report that RB’s Leipzig chief executive, Oliver Mintzlaff, has said the club could be receptive to offers for their 23-year-old central defender  Dayot Upamecano . Liverpool are also reported to be interested in Bayern Munich’s Austrian utility man  David Alaba , but may be put off by the £10m salary demands of a player who is believed to have his heart set on a move to Real Madrid. Following his side’s  win over Morecambe in the FA Cup  on Sunday, Frank Lampard announced that central defender  Fikayo Tomori  will probably be allowed to leave the club on loan in the current transfer window. The 23-year-old is the subject of firm interest at Newcastle, where Steve Bruce is also hopeful of bringing in Manchester United full-back  Brandon Williams  for the rest of the season. With his client out of contract this summer despite his importance to the Manchester City cause,  Fernandinho’ s agent has been discussing his client’s future with Brazilian TV station Globo Esporte. Giovanni Branchini claims the central midfielder could return to his former club Athletico Paranaense when his current deal expires but also flagged up interest from various other unspecified Brazilian and European clubs. Out of favour at Manchester United and in need of a career reboot,  Jesse Lingard  could be offered a fresh start by Inter, but only if the Italian side can rehome  Christian Eriksen  first. Having singularly failed to impress since moving from White Hart Lane to the San Siro, the Danish playmaker has been linked with a surprise return to Tottenham Hotspur if  Dele Alli  moves to Paris Saint-Germain. However, with Eriksen’s representatives alleged to be in dispute with Spurs over a commission they believe they are owed in the wake of his move to Italy, the prospect of him moving to Wolves, West Ham or his former club Ajax seems more likely.
'It was a midweek night in Stockport. What we achieved was bizarre':	L udek Miklosko, Marc Rieper, Mark Bowen, Slaven Bilic, Julian Dicks, Michael Hughes, John Moncur, Ilie Dumitrescu, Ian Bishop, Hugo Porfírio, and Iain Dowie: the West Ham team packed with internationals that was knocked out of the League Cup by third-tier  Stockport  County a quarter of a century ago. Following that memorable night at Edgeley Park, County’s fortunes were to plummet. In 2009 they entered administration and two years later, a stay of more than a century in the Football League came to an end. Between 2013-19, County competed in the National League North, finishing a record low of 14th in their opening season. Now there is renewed hope. Jim Gannon, after returning for a third spell in charge in 2016, guided County to promotion two seasons ago; last summer they were bought by Mark Stott, a local businessman who is revamping the club; and on Monday West Ham are again the visitors, for an  FA Cup  third-round tie. Gannon, who first joined County as a centre-half in 1990, was in Dave Jones’s Hatters side that beat the Hammers in a fourth-round replay on the cold, wet evening of 18 December 1996. “To get that result [a 1-1 draw] at Upton Park and take them back to Edgeley and beat them was incredible,” he says. Tom Bennett, who lined up in midfield, says: “We’d had a couple of wins in the competition before – Sheffield United, Blackburn at Ewood Park – but nobody expected us to go through. “I remember after Blackburn thinking: ‘We’ve already beaten a Premier League side so there’s nobody other than the top boys that we’re really going to fear, because we were a good team.’ “In the first game at Upton Park, Luís [Cavaco] scored so we ended up drawing and for the return at Edgeley we genuinely thought we had a chance of winning it. A proper chance, not just a puncher’s chance.” Mike Flynn, who was County’s captain, describes the 1996-97 campaign as “the most enjoyable season in the club’s history” for fans, with the cup run extending to the semi-finals along with promotion from what is now League One. He says: “We were in the players’ lounge at Upton Park and the draw came out for the next round. It was Southampton, away. I was with Tony Dinning [a midfielder] and said: ‘What a draw that is.’ Ian Bishop was stood close to us. He said: ‘Hey boys, don’t get carried away. You only get one crack at the big boys. You’ve had your chance.’ And I thought: ‘Right, yeah, whatever.’” For the replay 9,834 fans packed into Edgeley Park. What they witnessed was Harry Redknapp’s side having to battle the elements as well as a confident County. Bennett says: “It was cold. And if you look at any images, it doesn’t look as if it’s a great pitch because it was pouring down with rain all day and night but the pitch was brilliant [for us]. “It wasn’t a bowling green but we were a passing side so it wasn’t a leveller for us to have a bad pitch. They came out looking at it, going: ‘It’s a quagmire here.’ You know – rain and nobody really wants to be here. I genuinely think it was one of those occasions where you’ve got your Premier League players who want to play on a bigger stage and it’s actually a midweek night in Stockport. And it’s: ‘Do you want that?’” The initial answer was yes: Dicks opened the scoring via a corner after 22 minutes. County were level just 60 seconds later courtesy of a bizarre Dowie own goal. Flynn takes up the story. “I took a long throw-in from the right into the box, it was headed straight back towards me. With me being probably better with my head than my feet, I decided to head it straight back into the box. For some unknown reason Dowie is in the middle of the area and jumps up and puts a storming header in the top corner to equalise. “We were on cloud nine – we just couldn’t believe it. We were rubbing shoulders with the elite yet we were matching them.” Stockport had West Ham reeling and four minutes after Dowie’s aberration they landed what would prove the decisive blow, Brett Angell the hero. “I put the cross in for Brett’s goal,” Bennett says. “The big man got a great flick-on to it and from then on you’re winning 2-1, you’ve got something to hang on to. And the fans, the noise that they made was fantastic.” County did, indeed, dig in. “We had more than an hour to hold on against a top team,” Flynn says. “We rode our luck, we had chances, they had chances, but probably over the two games we edged it, which was quite remarkable really.” At the final whistle joy broke out. “It was unreal, fantastic,” Flynn says. “It was Southampton and Matthew Le Tissier in the next round, then Middlesbrough and [Fabrizio] Ravanelli in the semi-finals. Then, the last week of the season we had to win three out of four games for promotion,” he says. “We played Saturday, Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday. We won our first three – the third was Chesterfield away and we won 1-0. It was quite bizarre really, what little old Stockport actually achieved.” Gannon and his 2021 vintage hope to do something similar on Monday. “We are building memories for younger fans,” the manager says. “Beating West Ham would outshine anything done before.”
José Mourinho takes a supporting role in Marine's drama of homespun charm:	With 19 minutes gone at Rossett Park, and the score still 0-0 between  Marine AFC and Tottenham Hotspur , something almost-brilliant almost happened. Neil Kengni, Marine’s right winger, took the ball on the halfway line, galloped forward into a pocket of space, took another step, then spanked a wonderful dipping shot on to the crossbar. The moment was granted another layer of double-take by Joe Hart’s weird reverie as the ball floated over his head. Cool, collected and entirely at sea with his angles, England’s joint second-most capped goalkeeper of all time was finally startled into actual footballer-style action by the smack of ball on metal. Kengni is a trainee plumber from the eighth tier. Six inches lower and he would have dished up surely the most hierarchically extreme 1-0 lead in English football history and a moment of genuine cup football schmaltz. It was just a flicker in the end. Carlos Vinícius, it turns out, doesn’t care much for your magic. Vinícius is from Maranhão, a small-town coastal region in the north-east of Brazil – perhaps, at a stretch, a kind of tropical Crosby. He certainly looked at home here, and agreeably vengeful in his finishing. Before long Vinícius had made it 1-0, smashing the ball into the net from an inch out before performing a dramatic Kylian Mbappé-style celebration. Soon he was tapping in a second. Lucas Moura curled a beautiful shot into the top corner to make it three. And the Vinícius hat-trick came before half-time with a nice floated finish over the goalkeeper. A 5-0 final score was probably fair enough. Not that it really seemed to matter much either way on the day. Even at the best of times it is possible to overdo it on the  FA Cup  chintz, those clunky old tales of mud and romance – sporting aristocrats matched against the shelf‑stackers, teachers, roofers, nurses, pickpockets, dilettantes, flâneurs and all the rest. Packed into a bloated TV fixture list, at a time when hospitals have become frightening places and when the nation is swarming with an urgent new virus strain, this might have felt like a bleak, forced, even rather grim occasion. In the event it was something else – and for that, many thanks must go to  Marine . This was an uplifting piece of theatre, televised live by the BBC on a grim, shuttered, atomised Sunday night, and bringing with it oddly comforting glimpses of a fond and familiar world. After months of staring at the dystopian hellscape of empty plastic mega-stadiums there was something wonderfully moreish about the sight of massed back-garden spectators. The Victorian terrace beyond the Rosset Park touchline revealed a varied lineup of sheds, barbecues, side-returns and full-width extensions, a Betjeman-like snapshot of suburban Lancashire life. There were glimpses of locals cradling a glass, breath steaming the air, and beamed into the quarantined front room like a quietly reassuring Sunday-night drama. The show had its schlocky side, too. Marine came through seven Covid-menaced FA Cup rounds. They beat Runcorn Linnets and Frickley Athletic to get here. Their winner in the last round was an extra-time deflection off the back of a schoolteacher. Non-league football might even be facing another cancellation in the next few days. This was a standalone, a lighted window in the dark, and a gift in the middle of a horrible winter. There was an impressive turn too from José Mourinho, who came to Crosby on his most gracious, aggressively respectful form, enjoying immensely the reflected spectacle of his own crinkly humility. The word from Spurs’ inner sanctum was that Mourinho would be “preparing normally with massive respect” – which, to be fair, doesn’t sound that normal. Snipe, snark, underhand tactics – now that really would be the ultimate respect. So we looked forward to Mourinho’s provocative shushing gestures over the back garden fences. Would he poke a schoolteacher in the eye? Jostle an NHS nurse? Gesture about his trophy haul to a dozing pensioner? In the event Mourinho also curated the occasion perfectly, picking a strong team, speaking with genuine affection for the day and the opposition, and sitting centre stage on a plastic veneered dining chair through what turned out to be an energetic third round cup tie. Dele Alli started and played well, the quality of his movement and touch standing out. Alli looked happy, too, which is perhaps worth just as much. At one point in the first half he fell over trying a quick turn and drew a barrage of giggles and calls for a yellow card for simulation from the Spurs bench behind him. Footballers having a good time: we don’t need much. Finally there was another nice moment as 16-year-old Alfie Devine scored his first professional goal and Spurs’ fifth of the game, a nice little jink inside and a near-post finish. He looked absolutely overjoyed, unable to pretend this was anything other than the best moment of his life so far (sorry parents, friends, but let’s face it). Marine AFC v Spurs will drift on into the season’s blurred remains from here. Should football actually be going on at all right now? Here was a reminder of the best of this game – as a consolation, a muster point and something in the day that isn’t sickness and anxiety, as for a couple of hours in a dark week the FA Cup delivered its own small square of light.
FA Cup third round: 10 talking points from the weekend's action:	Willian was a stalwart for Chelsea, even if he was often perceived as a notch below their brightest stars. Last summer he was given the chance to become a leading light for Arsenal but he has flopped, giving them another expensive problem. Against Newcastle he had an opportunity to show that their recent upturn, which coincided with his absence through illness, could be sustained in his presence but instead he produced more of the same. This season was a chance for Willian to put his mark on games but he has cast scant influence while the likes of Bukayo Saka and Emile Smith Rowe point the way forwards. Ordinarily there would be little problem in keeping a 32-year-old international around as experienced filler but Willian arrived on a hefty wage that Arsenal are committed to paying until mid-2023. They cannot afford him to be a luxury item and, if he does not rediscover some form, he will follow Mesut Özil on the list of costly conundrums that need solving.  Nick Ames Match report:  Arsenal 2-0 Newcastle (aet) Crawley haven’t finished higher than 14th since being relegated to League Two in 2015 and have often been tipped to fall back into the non-league game from which they won promotion in 2011, but John Yems has assembled a slick and potent side this season who are unbeaten since late November and, in sixth, look a decent bet to go up. Some might fear that an extended Cup run will derail a stretched squad’s league ambitions but the manner of their victory over Leeds should only fuel them. This was no smash and grab giantkilling – Crawley dominated midfield against a team known for getting on the front foot wherever possible, enabling their attackers to expose the flaws in Marcelo Bielsa’s notoriously flaky defence, with Ashley Nadesan a perennial threat. That they managed to take control of the tie with their highly rated top scorer, Max Watters, sitting on the bench until the 72nd minute suggests they have what it takes to mix a Cup run with a promotion push.  Tom Davies Match report:  Crawley 3-0 Leeds With no fans in attendance and Derby reduced to sending their youth team to Chorley for Saturday’s tie in Lancashire, it was easy to forget that there are still overwhelming positives from an FA Cup run, even in these uncertain times. The National League North side, who are in the fourth round for the first time in their history following the  2-0 victory against the Covid-depleted Rams , estimate they could now make as much as £500,000 from a run which has now seen them knock four EFL sides out of the Cup. Their manager, Jamie Vermiglio, revealed before the Derby tie that getting to round three had, in no uncertain terms, saved the club. With more revenue set to follow in the weeks ahead, Chorley can plan for happier times. They are the first sixth-tier team to get this far since Havant and Waterlooville in 2008, only  to be beaten 5-2 at Anfield by Liverpool . Boyhood Reds fan Vermiglio admits that is his dream tie next.  Aaron Bower Match report:  Chorley 2-0 Derby Donny van de Beek started in this edgy win and was again accomplished, yet in the Premier League the Dutchman is more akin to the eternal substitute, being named in the XI by Ole Gunnar Solskjær only twice in his 10 appearances in the competition. If this makes judging the midfielder’s true worth particularly tricky it is evident that when he does feature, Van de Beek adds a quick, one-touch dimension to Manchester United that enhances their play and which the manager wants for his team. Van de Beek does not possess Paul Pogba’s X-factor creativity, Scott McTominay’s muscularity, Fred’s all-round game, nor is he a firefighter like Nemanja Matic but this is the point. Pairing the 23-year-old withany of these others offers United a different way of going at opponents and illustrates the depth of options the manager has in this department. Whether Van de Beek starts either of the next two trips, to Burnley or Liverpool, remains to be seen though.  Jamie Jackson Match report:  Manchester United 1-0 Watford Whether Sheffield United’s first victory for six months does anything when it comes to reigniting their seemingly doomed fight for Premier League survival remains to be seen but Chris Wilder recognised they had to stop the rot. Otherwise, he said, there would be consequences. From the moment his players trudged down the terrace of the Thatchers End, where the Bristol Rovers supporters’ bar doubled up as the visitors’ dressing room, they knew they had everything to lose and the League One side everything to gain. Wilder, who named only eight substitutes owing to injuries and illness, named arguably his strongest available team and finally they have something to build on before facing Newcastle at Bramall Lane on Tuesday, when league duty resumes. “This division is ruthless, cut-throat and it really doesn’t give a monkey’s about anybody and punishes when you when you’re not at your best,” Wilder said.  Ben Fisher Match report:  Bristol Rovers 2-3 Sheffield United Wolves had failed to keep a clean sheet in the 10 matches since beating Crystal Palace on 30 October, but looked much more defensively sound in Friday’s  FA Cup  third-round win. Winning only twice in that spell while alternating between Nuno Espírito Santo’s stock 3-4-3 formation and a less risk-averse 4-2-3-1, Wolves have appeared less solid. Despite fielding a back four, including the more attacking left-back option Rayan Ait-Nouri, Wolves managed to retain a more compact shape and were undone down the channels less than during the past two months against an admittedly compact Palace. Expected goals suggested they were three times more penetrative than Palace, with matchwinner Adama Traoré leading the way, but it was the tighter defensive performance that boded just as well. Romain Saïss is playing with increasing conviction alongside Conor Coady and, just in front, the returning Leander Dendoncker and, especially, Rúben Neves provided a better screen.  Pete Lansley Match report:  Wolves 1-0 Crystal Palace This was due to be the day for Sergio Agüero. After six successive games on the bench Pep Guardiola had promised him a first start since October. Then the teamsheets were submitted and there was no sign of Manchester City’s greatest goalscorer. He was absent but not injured. He is self-isolating and is almost certain to miss Wednesday’s game with Brighton, perhaps even Sunday’s against Crystal Palace. And, given how Guardiola seems concerned the Argentinian’s battle-worn body will break down again, perhaps more training sessions and substitute appearances will be required before he is deemed ready to start. A frustrating 2020 – Agüero could bring up a year without a Premier League goal next week – may turn into a wasted final season in Manchester, a stop-start campaign where stops outnumber starts. With each setback it feels less likely City will see Agüero at his sharpest and most spectacular again.  Richard Jolly Match report:  Manchester City 3-0 Birmingham City Antonio Rüdiger seemed certain to leave Chelsea at the end of the previous transfer window. The German had completely fallen out of favour under Frank Lampard. However Rüdiger ended up staying at Stamford Bridge and has worked to put himself back in contention. Although he is not part of the regular back four, he is first in line behind Thiago Silva and Kurt Zouma in central defence, which has left another of Lampard’s defenders with a tough decision to make. Fikayo Tomori is one of five centre-backs in Chelsea’s squad and the England international, who turned down the chance to join West Ham on loan in October, will feel that he needs to move this month. The 23-year-old is fifth choice at the moment and, although Lampard made changes against Morecambe, Tomori was on the bench for the win over the League Two side. After coming on in the 80th minute, he needs a loan.  Jacob Steinberg Match report:  Chelsea 4-0 Morecambe Spurs and José Mourinho left with their reputation intact thanks to a quintessentially professional performance at Marine with Dele Alli at its heart. The midfielder has been out of favour for the majority of the Portuguese’s reign in north London and a cold night out at a non-league ground could be seen as a punishment for the England international. It was, however, a test for Alli, to show his quality against an eighth-tier side and prove he has the desire to succeed at Spurs. From the evidence of the opening 20 minutes, Mourinho has been justified in casting Alli aside for parts of the season. Things clicked soon after as he picked up the ball and drifted into the box before laying the opener on a plate for Carlos Vinícius. A clipped pass to Matt Doherty created the second goal and with two moments of class the game was over. Alli looked driven for the 65 minutes he was on the pitch and will be hoping his performance will justify more time on the pitch in the Premier League.  Will Unwin Match report:  Marine 0-5 Tottenham Two and a half years after signing for the club, Percy Tau finally made his Brighton debut – via three loan spells at different Belgian clubs – against Newport. The South Africa international was brought back from Anderlecht this month as Graham Potter looks to add to his firepower as he aims to take the Seagulls away from the relegation zone. The striker came on with 20 minutes of normal time to go. He looked lively and showed promising signs in his linkup play with Neal Maupay as Brighton attempted to break down their League Two opponents. Tau forced a save from Tom King and later smashed a fine chance to win the match over the bar. His scoring record in Belgium was underwhelming and the early signs of whether he has the composure to regularly convert the limited opportunities he will get in a Premier League relegation battle is yet to be seen.  Will Unwin Match report:  Newport 1-1 Brighton (Brighton won 4-3 on pens)
Dan Lawrence is ready for an England Test debut, says Chris Silverwood:	Dan Lawrence looks set to make his Test debut for England against Sri Lanka on Thursday, with the head coach, Chris Silverwood, confident the 23-year-old “fighter” is ready after closely tracking his rise through the ranks at Essex. Lawrence, a wristy right-hander with 10 first-class centuries, is viewed as a long-term investment for Test cricket and in the absence of Ben Stokes and Ollie Pope has been pencilled in to bat at No 5 ever since the squad for this tour was named. A five-bowler strategy that sees wicketkeeper Jos Buttler slated to bat at No 6 appears the likeliest course and Silverwood, who spent eight years at Essex before his switch to England in early 2018, believes Lawrence is equipped to deal with that responsibility on debut. “I think he’s ready,” said Silverwood. “I’ve known Dan for a long time now, having coached Essex’s second team when he was coming through there as well. He’s a great character and a fighter with lots of skill there as well. Should he get the nod we’ve got every confidence he can be successful.” Lawrence, a product of Chingford  Cricket  Club, has been viewed as a potential England cricketer since 2015 when, aged just 17 years and 290 days, he became the County Championship’s third youngest centurion, with 161 against Surrey at the Oval. Two centuries during a hugely successful Lions trip to Australia last year elevated his profile further and though much has been made of his lack of trigger movement and a penchant for the leg side – teammate Alastair Cook called him “Legside Larry” in his newspaper column – Silverwood fancies it will work. Silverwood said: “I think the one thing with Dan he has always played his way. He does not get flustered. He doesn’t care who the opposition are. I saw those characteristics in him as a young man and he has showed the same characteristics now. It is great to see the consistency. “But equally his knowledge of the game – how he goes about his skills and adapts to situations, has got stronger and stronger. He is strong on his leg side but there is no reason why he can’t adapt that to Test cricket.” Bowling-wise, England’s plan appears to be an all-rounder at No 7, one of Ollie Stone or Mark Wood for outright pace through the air, two spinners in Dom Bess and Jack Leach, with Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad rotating for one final spot. This represents a departure from the three-spinner strategy that returned a 3-0 victory back in 2018 but that may yet change. Moeen Ali is out of the first Test, his isolation after contracting Covid-19 only ending on Wednesday, and Silverwood may yet add one of Mason Crane, Amar Virdi or Matt Parkinson to the main squad – all three are reserves on tour – once he and Joe Root have inspected the pitch in Galle. Silverwood added: “We can play plenty of spin if required to. They are all here, so they’re available. We travel with such a large group so should any eventuality come up we have it covered. It is difficult to win here. I read [Sri Lanka head coach]  Mickey Arthur’s comments  [to the Guardian] about our win in 2018 being in the back of their minds and wanting to get revenge for that. Do I believe we can win? Of course, I always believe our team can beat anyone. To me it’s about the processes, the continual progression of the team.”
Talking Horses: letter shows fears of £60m hit to racing from bet reforms:	T he prospect of a £60m hit to horse racing’s already struggling finances is conjured up by a template letter to MPs now being distributed within the sport, complaining about the potential impact of affordability checks on gamblers and calling on lawmakers to pressure the Gambling Commission into a rethink. The letter’s author is not known, but it was evidently drafted after agreement among the sport’s most senior power-brokers that some pushback was necessary. The GC is consulting on possible changes to its regulations in the area and has extended the deadline for feedback until 9 February, having experienced “high engagement” since the  consultation began in November . It has already indicated likely parameters for triggering an affordability check on a customer, saying that a monthly loss of £2,000 would be unrealistically high while £100 would probably be the “lowest possible threshold”. The template letter, seen by the Guardian, states: “I am reliably informed that the proposals put forward by the Gambling Commission could result in more than £60m in direct losses to the British racing industry from reduced Horserace Betting Levy and media rights income. This would be amplified many times over through the wider rural economy and potentially lead to racecourses closing. “The Gambling Commission’s proposed action would be disproportionate to the small number of people who suffer harm from betting on racing, as well as being a very significant invasion on personal liberty in the free society in which we live. At a time when racing and the British economy are trying to recover from Covid-19, a rushed intervention like this would also significantly set back recovery. “Naturally, I have grave concerns about this and would welcome your support in calling for the Gambling Commission to rethink introducing this measure, ensure it is evidence-based and, at the very least, ensure that the decision-making process aligns with the government’s recently launched review of the Gambling Act.” The letter suggests betting on racing, being “skill-based”, should be treated differently from the casino-style gambling readily available online, on the grounds it is less likely to trigger problem gambling. It claims British racing’s fixture list and calendar has been “designed to provide a fair, safe and compelling betting product that has both stood the test of time and evolved with society”. There is no explanation on how the figure of £60m was arrived at, though it appears to be based on the assumption of a £100 threshold for affordability checks. The British Horseracing Authority declined to comment. It is believed officials are still trying to assess the potential impact, depending on the threshold that may be adopted. Britain’s 59 racecourses are expected to be among those forwarding the letter to their MPs. David Armstrong, the chief executive of the Racecourse Association, said: “We’ve done this on a few other issues, including at some points during the Covid crisis, where we do ask our MPs to help us, MPs with racecourses or training yards in their constituencies, we often ask them for help in this way.” A Gambling Commission spokesperson said action was necessary because of the failings of some online betting firms. “Whilst some operators have continued to improve their customer interaction processes, our evidence shows that many online operators are not setting thresholds for action at appropriate levels. They are not taking the appropriate action or acting quickly enough when they do identify risks of potential harm. “We are clear on the need for gambling companies to take further action and our consultation proposes that the Commission sets firm requirements to ensure consistent standards. But we want to have an open discussion with the gambling industry, consumers, people with lived experience and other stakeholders, to ensure we strike the right balance between allowing consumer freedom and ensuring that there are protections in place to prevent gambling harm.” Devon trainer Gail Haywood has a low profile but she’s got her hands on a good one in  Song Of The Hunter (2.50) . A point winner who showed promise in landing a Taunton maiden hurdle last spring, he looked on his way to victory on his handicap debut last month, only to fall at Hereford’s second-last. It was an odd fall, as he seemed to clear the obstacle well, and the grey seemed as surprised as anyone. Hopefully he can shrug that off because he was raised just 2lb and has an obvious chance to make amends back at Hereford today. Kevin Brogan, the 7lb claimer everyone wants, gets the ride and the 5-2 is appealing. Flagrant Delitiep (2.20)  is an improving chaser from an in-form yard and should be able to follow up last month’s success at 11-8 or so. I’m surprised to see 8-1 about  Flann (12.50) , who improved for a soft surface to win a bumper in November and should be better over hurdles. Doncaster  12.30  Connie Wilde  1.05  Broken Halo  1.35  Strategem  2.05  Truckers Pass  2.40  Donnie Brasco  3.10  Getaweapon  3.40  Ned's Escape  Hereford  12.50  Flann  1.20  Le Tueur  1.50  The Mulcair  2.20  Flagrant Delitiep (nb)  2.50  Song Of The Hunter (nap)  3.20  Grimm Star  3.50  Quietlyflowsthedon  Wolverhampton  4.15  Daafy  4.45  Perfect Rose  5.15  Tashbeeh  5.45  Shaqeeqa  6.15  Jack The Truth  6.45  Sinjaari  7.15  Blow Your Horn   In Doncaster’s opener, the well-related  Connie Wilde (12.30)  could take a step forward on this handicap debut and it’s interesting to see some support for her, down to 14s from the opening 28-1. At Wolverhampton,  Shaqeeqa (5.45)  is of interest at 12-1. She showed little in two starts last year for a stable that was not having a good time but was sold in October and her new yard is going well. There’s enough quality in her pedigree to sustain hope.
Nuno fears stopping football again would spark Super League:	Nuno Espírito Santo fears the  Premier League  would never recover from a second shutdown because the biggest clubs would seize the opportunity to establish a European super league. The Wolves manager issued the stark warning after an alarming rise in positive Covid tests in the Premier League, and disruption to the fixture schedule, prompted some managers to call for another lockdown or short-term circuit breaker. Aston Villa’s game against Tottenham on Wednesday has been postponed because of an outbreak at the Midlands club, with  Fulham now playing Spurs at short notice , although the Premier League has informed clubs it has no plans to suspend the season.  Nuno and Everton’s Carlo Ancelotti, whose teams meet at Molineux on Tuesday, are among the top-flight managers who believe football should continue. The former suspects the Premier League would be fatally undermined by another shutdown because the wealthiest clubs would seek to capitalise on the uncertainty by pushing their expansion plans. Liverpool and Manchester United were  approached regarding a European Premier League  in October, and  Project Big Picture , a revamp of the English top flight which suggested reducing teams to 18 and scrapping the EFL Cup, has been discussed. “If we stop everything will change,” the Wolves manager warned. “A new football will come, probably with a Super League, probably with other competitions. It’ll be a matter of which clubs will survive. It’s a tough decision to make. I don’t know what is better. What I’m afraid of is, if the decision is to stop, football we know now will not be the same. This is my biggest fear. The schedule will go crazy and it’ll be impossible to finish the league and think about the Euros. “We cannot move forward and go back to a normal situation. The virus and pandemic is affecting things a lot, the increase of cases is growing in a scary way. This is what my main concern is. Things have changed – almost a year ago we were stopping because we didn’t know what was happening. It was something we hadn’t experienced. There were a lot of doubts. After the restart everyone made a big effort. There were protocols, meetings, things exchanged, we were sure no matter what we were playing because we only needed 14 players.  “Now things have changed and we are starting to think about stopping again. If you have a crisis the strong will survive – what about the rest? My personal view, when I have an awareness of what’s going around, you will not find the same model we have now.” Steve Bruce, the Newcastle manager, has argued it is  morally wrong for football to continue  amid the rise in infections and deaths. Ancelotti disagrees. “I understand what Steve said but football can be a good distraction in this period if people stay at home and watch it on TV,” said the Everton manager, who would have no issue with the Premier League, or government, banning mass goal celebrations. Ancelotti said: “There is no rule that says you are not allowed to celebrate. We are really strict in following the rules that the Premier League have put in place, really strict to follow the protocols, and if the Premier League say you don’t celebrate, you don’t hug, then we’re not going to celebrate. “We wear masks in the dressing room, we try to keep social distancing, and so on. We’re really strict at following the protocols. It will not be a big problem if they say you are not allowed to celebrate if you score goals. We adapt to everything. Now, managers don’t celebrate after a goal. If you look now there are no managers who celebrate because you have to wait for the VAR check. And so the celebration for the manager has gone and it can also be done for the players.” Everton’s leading goalscorer, Dominic Calvert-Lewin, will miss the trip to Wolves with a hamstring injury.
England's Kyle Sinckler faces Six Nations wait after tirade at referee:	The England prop Kyle Sinckler faces an anxious wait to discover if he will be available for the start of the Six Nations after being cited for “failing to respect the authority” of the referee Karl Dickson during  Bristol’s Premiership win against Exeter  on Saturday. Sinckler has already  apologised via social media  for screaming “Are you fucking serious?” after Dickson ruled that a diving tackle by Luke Cowan-Dickie did not merit a yellow card for non-use of the arms. The tighthead, who was once a teammate of Dickson’s at Harlequins, did not receive a sanction at the time but has now been ordered to appear before an online disciplinary hearing on Tuesday evening. While there is still some doubt over when exactly the  Six Nations  will kick off given the rising Covid-19 infection rates in Europe, a mid-range sanction of four weeks would potentially affect Eddie Jones’s selection plans for England’s opening fixture against Scotland at Twickenham on 6 February. The Rugby Football Union, though, also remains keen to uphold the values of respect in the game and Sinckler’s outburst on live television has attracted a good deal of attention both inside and outside the sport. There is a distinction between criticising a referee’s decision and directly abusing the same official’s character, however, which may yet result in a low-end entry point ban of two weeks. The incident occurred early in the second half of Bristol’s 20-7 victory against the defending league and European champions. After being floored by Cowan-Dickie’s low tackle and hearing Dickson suggest it was a legitimate challenge, an angry Sinckler made his displeasure known to the official even before he had risen to his feet. Dickson, in return, warned the 27-year-old to control himself or risk a red card. “If you scream at me like that again you will leave the field,” the former Quins scrum-half said. “The language you used is unacceptable.” Sinckler was subsequently cited by the independent citing commissioner Duncan Bell, himself a former international prop, and has already acknowledged he was in the wrong. “Want to apologise for my reaction today,” he tweeted. “Not the example I want to be setting. Heat of the moment stuff. Will make a conscious effort to improve. My bad.” The prop was previously  banned in 2017 for seven weeks  for making contact with the eye of Northampton’s Michael Paterson. The independent disciplinary panel will be chaired by Richard Whittam QC, with Becky Essex and one other panel member to be confirmed. The citing follows another much-discussed incident in a French league game at the weekend where the Nevers winger Josaia Raisuqe was shown a red card for jokingly hoisting the referee aloft after the final whistle of his side’s 30-25 win against Beziers.
Fulham to play Tottenham at two days' notice after Spurs v Aston Villa called off:	Tottenham will play Fulham, rather than Aston Villa, in the  Premier League  on Wednesday night with the Cottagers’ subsequent fixture against Chelsea pushed back a day in a complex piece of rescheduling that shows the challenge of continuing elite sport during the third wave of the Covid-19 pandemic. The Premier League confirmed Aston Villa had requested their match against Spurs be postponed following a  substantial coronavirus outbreak  at the club. The league accepted that request, then asked Fulham to fulfil the fixture instead. That match up will go ahead, despite Fulham’s misgivings, as will the west London derby with Chelsea, albeit on Saturday rather than Friday. A chain of dominos was set in motion after Aston Villa were forced to close their Bodymoor Heath training ground last week, when nine first-team players tested positive for Covid-19 before their FA Cup tie against Liverpool. Villa  fielded a team of youth and under-23 players  for the Cup tie, but felt unable to complete the league fixture this midweek. Villa’s request to postpone meant Fulham were approached to fill the vacancy.  Fulham  are believed to feel they received the short straw, having been asked to step up only after they had played their own Cup tie – a 2-0 win over QPR – with a team in which a number of first-team regulars were selected because they were not expecting another match so swiftly. Clubs are able to make representations to the league in the face of such a request, but the ultimate decision is taken by the Premier League board and the game was approved to go ahead. Chelsea  then agreed to delay their match with Fulham to give their west London rivals more time to recover. Rather than being played on Friday night theat game will now take place at 5.30pm on Saturday. Villa’s weekend fixture against Everton has also been put back, from Saturday teatime to Sunday noon. Fulham have had to close their training ground in recent days and received notification of positive tests within their ranks. Some at the club feel they would not have been asked to play had they been fighting for the title, rather than against relegation, but it would appear that the interests of individual clubs are to be put to be one side as the league concentrates on the more considerable challenge of keeping the competition as a whole on the road. José Mourinho had said it was “impossible” for Spurs to be without a midweek game given potential fixture congestion ahead. Chelsea are set to face Fulham despite having to shut their academy training centre because of a coronavirus outbreak believed to involve as many as 20 cases. Youngsters have been told to stay away while the site undergoes a deep clean after a number of positive tests were returned over the weekend, but first-team facilities remain open. The academy is housed at Chelsea’s training ground in Cobham but is separate from the first team’s site. It will remain shut for the rest of the week, with those who tested positive isolating for 10 days. The development game against West Ham on Friday and the Under-18 match against Brighton on Saturday will not take place. Chelsea have ensured the situation has not impacted their first team. There are separate bubbles for the senior, academy and women’s squads. The under-23s have been training inside the first-team bubble and have not been affected. Chelsea are believed to be one of the few Premier League clubs to test their under-23 players, also going above and beyond the protocols by testing players in lower age-groups. There will be another round of testing before the academy site reopens.
The Guide: Staying In – sign up for our home entertainment tips:	Who needs to go out when there’s so much to do indoors? If you’re looking for inspiration, let The Guide – The Guardian’s Saturday arts and entertainment supplement – help you out. Every week, we’ll send you some hot picks, guaranteed to keep you entertained. Expect the best of everything available to watch, play, hear or read. You won’t have time to be bored. No sign-up button?  Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault.  Please click here to reload the page  which should correct the problem. *** More emails from our culture team: Hear Here : podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Film Today : get the day’s insider news and our latest reviews Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Art Weekly:  the art world low-down, along with in-depth articles *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Harry Potter and Michael Bublé fuel UK online reselling boom:	Harry Potter,  Michael Bublé  and PlayStation 4 have helped fuel a boom in online sales of secondhand books, CDs and consumer technology during the pandemic. Sales at MusicMagpie, an online “reseller”, jumped more than 22% to nearly £120min the UK last year as sales of secondhand books soared by 75% and consumer technology – including previously used smartphones and games consoles – rose by a fifth. In the final months of the year – in the second lockdown and with Christmas approaching – secondhand book sales were dominated by JK Rowling’s  Harry Potter  books. Michael Bublé Christmas album led the way in festive CD sales. Bargain hunters also sought out PlayStation 4s and the iPhone 7, while disc media – which includes CDs, DVDs and games – rose nearly 9% led by sales of Adele’s 10-year-old CD 21. The company, which was founded in a Stockport garage in 2007 and initially traded only in CDs, now specialises mainly in secondhand technology. It buys goods for a price set by an algorithm based partly on their popularity then refurbishes and resells them via its own sites as well as Amazon and eBay. It has more than 7m registered customers worldwide. Last year it began setting up kiosks in Asda and Co-op stores where it’s possible to recycle an old phone for cash. It is considering a stock market listing after profits soared nearly 50% to £44.8m last year. With charity shops closed during high street lockdowns to control the Covid-19 pandemic, and many people short of cash after months on furlough or having lost their job, online trading of secondhand goods has boomed. A spate of decluttering while stuck at home over the summer has also driven the market. Sales of used goods  jumped 30% on trading site eBay  between March and June with sales of secondhand or vintage fashion the fastest growing and biggest category. Fashion resale site Depop also experienced record sales in the UK, US and Australia in the summer, while Oxfam increased sales at its online store by 86% over the festive period when it was forced to close many stores as a result of virus restrictions. Books were the charity’s top-selling secondhand item. “Consumer attitudes towards buying refurbished products are changing, and there’s also an ongoing move towards ethical spending and tackling the growing problem of e-waste,” said Steve Oliver, the co-founder and chief executive of MusicMagpie. There are some concerns that the boom in online trading of secondhand goods could dent profits for charities at a  time when they are already suffering  from months of enforced closure of high street shops. Robin Osterley, the chief executive of the Charity Retail Association, said his members were not worried about losing sales to online traders: “It’s a big market and lots to go around. Our members have got the ability to take advantage of these platforms themselves through partnerships with Depop, eBay, or World of Books.” Adele – 21 ABBA – ABBA Gold Guns N’ Roses – Greatest Hits Arctic Monkeys – Whatever People Say I Am, That’s What I’m Not Adele – 25 This is Going to Hurt – by Adam Kay Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone – by JK Rowling Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – by JK Rowling (Hardback) Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban – by JK Rowling Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets – by JK Rowling Michael Bublé – Christmas ABBA – ABBA Gold Nirvana – Nevermind Dire Straits – Brothers in Arms Arctic Monkeys – Whatever People Say I Am, That’s What I’m Not PS4 Xbox One PS4 Pro Xbox One S PS4 Slim FIFA 19 (PS4) Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 (Xbox 360) Grand Theft Auto V (Xbox 360) Call of Duty: Black Ops (PS3) Fallout 4 (PS4)
Schwarzenegger rebukes Trump and compares Capitol riot to Kristallnacht:	Arnold Schwarzenegger issued  a stinging rebuke  of Donald Trump on Sunday, comparing the riot at the US Capitol which the president incited to Kristallnacht, the night  in November 1938  when Nazi thugs attacked Jewish Germans and their property, a harbinger of horrors to come. He also compared American democracy to a weapon he wielded onscreen in the loincloth of Conan the Barbarian nearly 40 years ago, saying: “Our democracy is like the steel of this sword. The more it is tempered, the stronger it becomes.” Trump supporters  broke into the Capitol on Wednesday  after the president told them to “fight like hell” in support of his attempt to overturn election defeat by Joe Biden. Five people died, including a Capitol police officer who was hit with a fire extinguisher and a rioter shot by law enforcement. Authorities have made  numerous arrests , among them one man charged with bringing firearms and explosives to Washington and another who allegedly threatened to kill the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. Chants of “ Hang Mike Pence ” were heard and one rioter was seen carrying plastic “zip tie” handcuffs, suggesting plans to kidnap lawmakers. Trump, who will leave office on 20 January, now faces a second impeachment. As a  two-term governor of California  as well as the star of the Terminator franchise and other action classics, Schwarzenegger maintains a presence and a  voice  in Republican politics.  He has clashed with Trump before . On Sunday, in  a video posted to social media  and scored to rousing classical music, the 73-year-old said he “would like to say a few words to my fellow Americans and to our friends around the world about the events of recent days”. “I grew up in Austria and was very aware of Kristallnacht, or the Night of Broken Glass,” he said. “It was a night of rampage against the Jews carried out [by] the Nazi equivalent of the Proud Boys [a quasi-fascist group of Trump supporters].” “Wednesday was the Day of Broken Glass right here in the United States. The broken glass was in the windows of the United States Capitol. But the mob did not just shatter the windows of the Capitol. It has shattered the ideals we took for granted. They did not just break down the doors of the building that housed American democracy. They trampled the very principles on which our country was founded.” On Sunday it was reported that another officer had died, though it was not immediately clear if the death was related to the Capitol riot. Schwarzenegger described a traumatic childhood in post-war Austria, the son of a police officer who joined the Nazi party. “I have seen firsthand how things can spin out of control,” Schwarzenegger said. “I know there is a fear in this country and all over the world that something like this could happen right here. I do not believe it is. “But I do believe that we must be aware of the dire consequences of selfishness and cynicism. President Trump sought to overturn the results of an election. And a fair election. He sought a coup by misleading people with lies. My father and our neighbours were misled also with lies. I know where such lies lead. “President Trump is a failed leader. He will go down in history as the worst president ever. The good thing is he soon will be as irrelevant as an old tweet.” Schwarzenegger appealed to Americans’ patriotism and commended lawmakers who regathered after the assault on the Capitol to confirm Biden’s victory, despite objections from 147 Republican representatives and senators. He then picked up a sword which he said he wielded as Conan the Barbarian in  a pair of early 80s fantasy epics . “Here’s the thing about swords,” Schwarzenegger said. “The more you temper a sword, the stronger it becomes. The more you pound it with a hammer and then heat it in the fire, and then thrust it into the cold water and then pound it again … the more often you do that, the stronger it becomes. “I’m not telling you this because you become an expert swordmaker. But our democracy is like the steel of this sword. The more it is tempered, the stronger it becomes.” Wishing Biden well, Schwarzenegger said: “Those who think they can overturn the United States constitution, know this. You will never win.” Banned by Twitter, with no official duties for the day and with the White House pool reporter sent home before noon, Trump did not immediately respond.
Tell us about your lockdown hobby for the chance to win a £200 holiday prize:	Taking up a niche hobby has become a lifeline for many during lockdown. Whether it’s bookbinding or tree-spotting, paddleboarding or quilt-making, new interests have helped people deal with Covid anxiety and the groundhog days of confinement. If you have taken up a new hobby, especially one that has helped you get outside, even if it’s only to the local park or woods, then we’d love to hear about it. Tell us how you got started and why, and how the hobby has connected you to the outside world. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in –  but it’s your words that will be judged   for the competition . Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by travel expert Tom Hall, will  win a £200 voucher for a stay at a  Sawday’s  property  – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click  here . Read terms of service  here . We’re sorry, but for legal reasons  you must be a UK resident  to enter this competition. The competition closes on Tuesday 19 January at 9am GMT Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click  here . Read terms of service  here .
Sign up for Word of Mouth: the best of Guardian Food every week:	Each week we’ll keep you up-to-date with all the food coverage from the Guardian and the Observer. We’ll send you the latest recipes from Yotam Ottolenghi, Nigel Slater, Meera Sodha and all our star cooks, stand-out food features and seasonal eating inspiration, plus restaurant reviews from Grace Dent and Jay Rayner. Sign up below to start receiving the best of our culinary journalism in one mouth-watering weekly email. Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football or travel, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Design Review: get the newsletter for the way we live now:	‘Design’ is a word used to describe architecture and products, ideas and visual arts. Design makes your sofa comfortable, but it can also save the planet if you’re developing innovative building materials. In this age, every aspect of design is considered by the switched-on reader, so the  Design  Review newsletter focuses on thinking and process as much as products to buy. The way we think about lifestyle is changing. As our focus turns to sustainability and away from the short fix of fashion and trends, we have updated our lifestyle journalism to reflect this. Following on from the Observer’s quarterly  Design magazine , our monthly newsletter to bring you more of these features and stories. *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters  may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Ofsted gets thousands of emails praising schools after minister's remarks:	England’s schools inspectorate,  Ofsted , has been overwhelmed by more than 10,000 emails from parents, mostly singing the praises of their children’s schools, after Gavin Williamson urged them to complain if they were not satisfied with the remote education on offer. The education secretary’s comments last week sparked outrage among teachers and parents, but there are now fears the growing deluge of complimentary emails could result in genuine safeguarding concerns being delayed or missed by overstretched staff. Ofsted’s call centre team are sorting through emails to identify genuine complaints or concerns, but the vast majority are believed to be from parents praising their child’s school during lockdown in defiance of Williamson’s advice. Addressing MPs in the Commons last week  following the start of the third national lockdown and the closure of schools to all but vulnerable pupils and children of key workers, Williamson said Ofsted would enforce legal requirements for state schools to provide high-quality remote education. “We expect schools to provide between three and five hours teaching a day, depending on the child’s age. If parents feel their child’s school is not providing suitable remote education they should first raise their concerns with the teacher or headteacher and, failing that, report the matter to Ofsted.” There have been concerns about patchy remote provision since the pandemic began last year, but Richard Brown, headteacher of the  Urswick  school in Hackney, north-east London spoke for many in the sector when he said of Williamson’s comments: “What an absolute kick in the teeth.” By Friday, according to  Schools Week  around 5,000 emails had been sent to Ofsted’s general enquiries inbox, which normally deals with safeguarding concerns, questions about how to register as a child minder and complaints about schools. By Monday that had more than doubled and additional staff may have to be brought in to deal with the backlog. Ofsted declined to comment. It coincided with new  Ofsted guidance  on remote learning, which advised that live online lessons - frequently held up as the gold standard during lockdown - were not always the best way to deliver remote education and that sometimes text books and worksheets might be more effective. The guidance also found that pupils using a laptop tended to spend longer accessing a remote lesson than those using a phone or tablet.  “This means that we need to think carefully about whether pupils have access to the right kind of device when we’re using digital remote education. If they don’t, and we can’t provide enough devices, it might be better to consider non-digital approaches as well,” said Daniel Muijs, Ofsted’s deputy director, research and evaluation. Ofsted will resume on-site monitoring inspections of schools currently judged inadequate or requiring improvement from next week, though grades will not be issued, and inspectors will be expected to assess the remote education on offer.
Coronavirus UK: Covid cases and deaths today:	Coronavirus  has hit the UK hard, with the country recording more than 3m cases and 80,000 deaths linked to the disease. The government figures below include confirmed cases only – some people who have the disease are not tested. At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. After that, the centre of the virus shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland before rising again in London and the south-east. Everyday life in the UK has been subject to varying degrees of restriction since March, and various national lockdowns currently apply in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland. These regulations are set by the legislative body in each nation so there are local differences.  Details of the  English lockdown are listed here ,  Scottish lockdown here ,  Welsh here  and  Northern Irish here . You can also search for your local area below. Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before falling in late spring and summer. But they then increased again and passed the earlier peak in September, reaching record levels in December after a dip in November. The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising since September and has reached a new record. Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases. There have been more recorded cases in the second wave of the pandemic, and this can be partly attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring. In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave. More tests were available during the second wave and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms are now being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total. However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above. In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic. This data comes comes from  Public Health England , working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. Differences in data collection and publishing schedules may lead to temporary inconsistencies. 3 and 4 October cases totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault. The government figures for deaths that are used in this tracker incorporate any deaths that have occurred within 28 days of a positive test. This means that they they are able to quickly capture those deaths occurring in hospitals and care homes, both settings where testing is widespread. The ONS, along with its counterparts in Scotland and Northern Ireland, captures deaths data differently. They count all deaths where Covid is on the death certificate. About 90% of these deaths are directly due to Covid while it is a contributory factor in the remaining deaths. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as  well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Covid lockdown: what can be done to tighten the rules in England?:	With hospitalisations and deaths rising sharply and the NHS struggling to cope, scientists have called for a  tightening of lockdown measures  in England. “We’re in a crisis – that crisis is not only killing people, it’s compromising the ability and the effectiveness of the  NHS , including its ability to roll out the vaccinations,” said Stephen Reicher, a professor of social psychology at the University of St Andrews and a member of a committee advising the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies (Sage). “We need to act early, and act hard – half measures really don’t work, they give you all the pain, but they don’t give you the gain.” Reducing contact with others, principally in indoor and poorly ventilated spaces, is key. Scientists say we need to close what we can, with the least damage, beyond the current measures. As the new Covid variant makes its presence felt, here are some ways the government could limit the damage. Apart from food shopping the main reason people tend to leave their homes is for work – at the moment that activity is declining, but it is still higher than the original March lockdown, said Reicher. “And the reason for that … is that we are much broader in defining what we call essential work.”  For example, after the  government closed schools , except for children of key workers, “one in six schools had over a third of its pupils returning, and one in eight schools had a half or more … it made a complete mockery of the policy,” Reicher said. People using public transport for work amplifies the problem, added Susan Michie, a member of the scientific pandemic influenza group on behavioural science, a Sage subcommittee. “Reicher said: “If we so broadly draw the definition of critical workers that their children represent a large proportion of the population and undermine the closing of schools … the same is true in terms of those workers themselves. That’s the area where we can really make a big difference.”  The idea is to re-evaluate the places indoor where people can spend significant periods of time with each other and may not be able to socially distance, said Michie. For example, nurseries are one of the areas where we probably need to take action, said Reicher, highlighting recent  Sage data  that indicated that even though it is harder for children to experience serious illness they tend to pick up infections and spread it through their families and communities. Places of worship are another obvious example – people are doing that quite satisfactorily on Zoom. Pet grooming parlours are also open – they say for therapeutic, not aesthetic purposes – but there is a lot of wriggle room there, said Michie. “These [venues] are not essential – we’re talking life and death here.” People do not understand the details of the general principles of transmission – we need to explain that nothing is absolutely safe or dangerous, but that there are degrees of risk, the experts said. Wearing masks definitely decreases the risk of infection – but nearly all “super- spreader” events are indoors, noted Reicher. In places such as supermarkets, people should be made to adhere to the 2-metre rule and be given access to sanitiser and free masks, and be encouraged to wear masks. Enforcement should be used only as a last resort, he said, adding that draconian enforcement was counterproductive. “It would undermine the relationship between authority and the public, it would undermine the motivation to adhere, and it will probably do more harm than good.” Outdoor mask-wearing is a good signal to remind people we are in a pandemic – but practically achieves little in terms of lowering infection risk unless people are close together, he said. And if it rains, and the masks get wet and damp, then they’re not effective any more, said Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia. Research suggests fewer than 20% of those who should  isolate do so fully . More than  half of people applying  for the £500 one-off payments to self-isolate are being rejected in some coronavirus hotspots in England. “The only one area where there’s evidence of non-adherence at scale is people not isolating when they have symptoms,” said Michie. “People are walking around the community spreading it, and the reasons are because of not having enough income or not enough practical support or caring responsibilities outside the home. All of that can be dealt with and indeed is dealt with in other countries.” It is not just about what you cannot or should not be allowed do, she said. “It’s what the government should be doing to support all of it.”
Australia’s state by state Covid restrictions and coronavirus lockdown rules explained:	Australian states and territories have different levels of restrictions to contain Covid-19. Here we answer some common questions about restrictions in each state, based on the information available as of 11 January. This article should not be treated as legal advice. It will be updated as restrictions are announced, implemented or repealed. Here are the official state and territory restriction guides for  New South Wales ,  Queensland ,  Victoria ,  Tasmania ,  Western Australia ,  South Australia , the  Northern Territory  and the  ACT . The  Queensland  government has announced it will lift a lockdown for greater Brisbane at 6pm on 11 January. Once the lockdown ends, anyone who has visited greater Brisbane since 2 January will be required to wear masks in indoor places like shopping centres and supermarkets, gyms and places of worship and libraries. Indoor venues are restricted to one person per four square metres and outdoor venues are restricted to one person per two square metres. From 6pm on 11 January, up to 20 people will be allowed in homes and public spaces and up to 100 guests at weddings and funerals. These restrictions will be in place until 22 January. Full details are on the  Queensland Health website . Queensland:  the lockdown also applies to anyone who has been in the greater Brisbane area since 2 January and is now in another area of Queensland. New South Wales:  people in NSW who have been in the greater Brisbane area since 2 January must follow the same rules and stay home from 6pm on 8 January to 6pm on 11 January. Tasmania:  anyone arriving in  Tasmania  from Friday who has been in Brisbane since 2 January must quarantine for up to 14 days. Northern Territory:  the greater Brisbane region has been declared a hotspot, meaning anyone arriving in the NT from the area will be given the option of returning or mandatory two-week quarantine. South Australia:  if you have been in the greater Brisbane area since 2 January you must get tested for Covid. Anyone arriving into SA from midnight 8 January is required to quarantine for two weeks. Western Australia:  a hard border with Queensland has been reinstated from midnight 8 January. The northern zone of Sydney’s northern beaches was under its own set of restrictions until 10 January 2021. But since then, the same rules apply as for the rest of greater Sydney. New South Wales:  residences in greater Sydney, Central Coast and Wollongong are allowed a maximum of five visitors.   In the rest of the state, people are allowed a maximum of 50 visitors in their homes at a time. However NSW Health strongly recommends having no more than 30 visitors at a time if the residence has no outdoor area. If there are more than 50 visitors at a home, every person can be held individually responsible for  a breach of the public health order . Victoria:  people can have up to 15 visitors in their homes each day. Queensland:  no more than two visitors to a household are allowed per day in greater Brisbane between 6pm on 8 January and 6pm 11 January. Everyone else in Queensland can have up to 50 people inside their home. Tasmania:  a maximum of 100 people are allowed to gather at residential premises (including shacks) whether inside or outside. Western Australia:  there is no limit to the number of guests you are allowed as long as there is no more than one person per 2 sq metres. South Australia:  gatherings in private homes are limited to 50 people.   All gatherings must observe the density requirements of one person per 2 sq metres. Northern Territory:  there is no limit on how many people can gather indoors or outdoors, but physical distancing is required. Gatherings of more than 100 require the completion of a  Covid-19 checklist . ACT:  there is no limit on visitors. States and territories have agreed that anyone catching domestic or international flights must wear a mask on the plane and in the airport. Some states have additional mask-wearing requirements to control outbreaks. New South Wales:  in the greater Sydney area, it is mandatory to wear masks indoors except at your private home. You must also wear a mask at the SCG for the third Test and A-league games. Victoria:  you must carry a mask with you whenever you leave your house and put it on indoors, aside from your private house. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, masks must be worn at all times when you leave your house during the lockdown period from 6pm on 8 January to 6pm on 11 January.  New South Wales:  public gatherings in greater Sydney, Central Coast and Wollongong of up to 30 people are allowed. In regional NSW, public gatherings of 100 people are allowed. This limit does not apply if the group of people are all from the same household or if it is a controlled outdoor event. Victoria:  up to 100 people from any number of households can gather. 1.5 metres should be maintained between yourself and others not from your household. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, you’re allowed to exercise with no more than one other person, unless all from the same household. Everywhere else in the state public gatherings are restricted to a maximum of 100; this does not apply to businesses operating with a Covid-safe plan. Tasmania:  up to 250 people are allowed in an undivided indoor space and up to 1,000 in an outdoor space, as long as there is at least 2 sq metres of space per person. Western Australia:  there is no limit on the number allowed at public gatherings as long as there is at least 2 sq metres of space per person. South Australia:  gatherings at public places are capped at 50, with density requirements of one person every 4 sq metres. Northern Territory:  there are no limits but you should maintain physical distancing. Gatherings of more than 100 will require completion of a  Covid-19 checklist . ACT:  up to 500 people   can gather together outdoors as long as 2 sq metres of space per person is maintained. If people wish to hold gatherings of greater than 500 people, they must seek an exemption in accordance with the  COVID Safe Event Protocol . Visitors cannot enter an aged care facility in any state if they have recently been overseas, been in recent contact with a confirmed case of Covid-19, or feel unwell. New South Wales:  NSW Health  provides guidelines  for residential aged care facilities. No visitors are allowed at greater Sydney aged care facilities, except for visitors performing essential care functions, until 11.59pm on Wednesday 6 January. People from greater Sydney also cannot visit regional aged care facilities. There are no restrictions on people from regional areas visiting regional aged care facilities, unless they have been in a Covid hotspot, have Covid symptoms or are a close contact of someone who has Covid. Victoria:  there are no longer any restrictions on visits to care facilities in  Victoria . People of any age can visit residents for as long as desired, as long as the rules set by the facility are followed. Face masks must still be worn. Queensland:  no visitors are allowed to aged care facilities and hospitals in the greater Brisbane area. In the rest of the state, residents can have as many visitors as the facility allows, but people who have been in Victoria on or after 21 December 2020 are not allowed to enter residential aged care facilities unless 14 days have passed since they were in Victoria. Employees, contractors, students, volunteers and support persons who have been in Victoria on or after 21 December 2020 may enter a residential aged care facility if the individual obtains a negative Covid-19 test in Queensland after returning from Victoria. Tasmania:  residents can have up to two visitors at one time. There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. Residents are allowed to go outside on trips, and hairdressers can be allowed in. Additional visitors are allowed for end of life support, or if needed to reduce distress and confusion given a resident’s medical condition. Western Australia:  each resident can have one care and support visit a day, with  up to two visitors  at a time. Only immediate social supports, such as family and close friends, professional help or advocacy services can attend. South Australia:  people from NSW and people who have been in Covid hotspots are not permitted to visit SA aged care facilities. Aside from that, up to two people can visit at the same time for care and support. There is no limit to the length of each visit. Workers must wear a mask where physical distancing isn’t possible, and they can work at only one site. Northern Territory:  residents can have up to  two visitors at a time . There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. ACT:  residents can be visited  by up to two people at a time.  There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. New South Wales:  yes, as long as venues observe the 4 sq metre per person rule up to a   cap of 300 for each separate area   at any time. All diners must provide name and contact details, including a phone number or email address, for contact tracing. Food courts have reopened. Victoria:  there are specific directions for differently sized indoor venues. Venues are capped subject to a density rule of one person per 2 sq metres, with no other cap. There are no longer any group booking limitations. Queensland:  restaurants and cafes in greater Brisbane will be offering takeaway only during the lockdown from 6pm on 8 January to 6pm on 11 January. Elsewhere in the state, restaurants, cafes, pubs, registered clubs, RSL clubs and hotels with a Covid-safe checklist can seat   any number of patrons as long as the 2 sq metre per person limit is observed. Tasmania:  up to 250 are allowed in an undivided space as long as there is no more than one person every 2 sq metres. Up to 1,000 people are allowed in an undivided outdoor space, density requirements permitting. Western Australia:  cafes and restaurants (including in pubs, bars, hotels, casinos, clubs) can open to up to seated diners, with one person every 2 sq metres. There is no requirement for businesses to maintain a patron register, but they must display a COVID Safety Plan Certificate in a prominent location visible to patrons. South Australia:  restaurants, cafes, pubs, food courts, nightclubs and casinos have density requirements of one person per 2 sq metres. Northern Territory:  all businesses can reopen as long as they have a Covid plan. ACT:  restaurants, cafes and other hospitality venues offering seated dining can host up to one person per 4 sq metres. Venues can register to host one person per 2 sq metres. Residents in the greater Brisbane area cannot leave during the three-day lockdown until 6pm on 11 January. You are allowed to enter the region to return home or stay with family and friends, but once there you must stay for the lockdown period and follow the rules. Aside from that, the only restrictions on travel within states are in  Western Australia  and  South Australia  where there are restrictions on visiting some remote Aboriginal communities. New South Wales:  anyone can enter NSW. However, if you have been in the greater Brisbane area since 2 January, you are required to follow the lockdown rules in place from 6pm on 8 January to 6pm on 11 January. People from NSW who have been in Covid hotspots are restricted from entering all other states and territories. Victoria:  a  permit system is in place for travel to Victoria  from NSW. People are only eligible for permits if they are: transiting through NSW to Victoria from another state or territory; briefly passing through Victoria from another state or territory and are not staying in Victoria; or are a permitted worker. Victorians returning from NSW must apply for an exemption to return by calling the coronavirus hotline on 1800 675 398. Victorians who have not been in Covid hotspots are free to travel to other states and territories, except for WA. Queensland:  the Queensland border is open to all states and territories, unless you have been in a Covid hotspot in the last 14 days or since the hotspot was declared (whichever is shorter). Currently specific parts of New South Wales are  hotspots . Anyone travelling to Queensland who has been in NSW at any time since 1am Friday 11 December must complete a  Queensland Border Declaration Pass  before they enter Queensland. Anyone (including all interstate visitors and Queensland residents returning home) who was in  hotspot locations  on or since Friday 11 December 2020 must follow testing and quarantine requirements. Tasmania:  There are no restrictions on Tasmanians travelling to other states and territories. Travellers who have been in  high risk locations , which currently includes greater Brisbane and greater Sydney, must apply for an exemption to enter Tasmania as an  Essential Traveller  for critical work, health, compassionate or other reasons. Tasmanians wanting to return home can provide evidence of residency and seek to complete the 14 days required quarantine at a residential address or other suitable premises. Travellers who have spent time in a  medium-risk area  in the 14 days prior to arrival in Tasmania are required to quarantine, either in a suitable premises or in government-designated quarantine (fees can apply). Western Australia:  travellers from  medium risk states  are not permitted to enter without an exemption through  G2G PASS . If permitted entry, you must self-quarantine at a suitable premises for 14 days. If a suitable premises is not available, you will be directed to a government-approved quarantine facility at your own expense. Travellers from low risk states are allowed to enter with a G2G PASS, but must quarantine for 14 days as above. Travellers from very low risk states are allowed to enter with a G2G PASS without the need to quarantine. South Australia:  anyone travelling to SA must complete a  cross-border travel registration . People from NSW are not allowed to enter unless they have an exemption. Residents returning to SA from NSW are required to self-quarantine for 14 days.There are no restrictions on travel from other states and territories. Northern Territory:  you can enter provided you fill out a border entry form up to 72 hours before arrival and present it upon entry. You will be required to legally declare you have not been in an area the state considers  a Covid-19 hotspot in the past 28 days . Penalties of up to $5,000 and up to three years in prison apply for providing misleading information. Arrivals from a hotspot area must go into 14 days supervised quarantine at the traveller’s expense. ACT:  travellers who have been in Covid-affected areas of greater Sydney , Central Coast or Wollongong areas are not permitted to enter ACT without an  exemption . If you a returning ACT resident who has been in a Covid-affected area you must self-quarantine for 14 days. There are no restrictions on travel to other states and territories. New South Wales:  up to  100 can attend a wedding , subject to the 4 sq metre rule indoors and 2 sq metre rule outdoors. For weddings, up to 20 people in the wedding party are permitted on the dance floor. This applies only to members of the official wedding party and dancers cannot be rotated or substituted throughout the celebration. Funerals can be attended by up to 100 providing there is at least 4 sq metre per person. This applies to indoor and outdoor ceremonies.   Those attending will have to provide name and contact details. In greater Sydney – which includes the Central Coast and the Blue Mountains – singing and chanting is not allowed at any indoor venue. Victoria:  Weddings and funerals are subject to a one person per two square metres density rule, with no other caps.   A wedding or funeral held at a private residence is limited to up to 15 people. The four-square metre rule must be applied to limit the number of people on the dance floor and there can only be up to 50 people on the dance floor at one time, if space allows. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, weddings and funerals are limited to 20 guests. Outside of the affected area, up to 200 can attend weddings and funerals at a professional venue or private residence as long as a Covidsafe plan is in place. Private wedding services in public areas or private homes can have up to 100 people in outdoor public spaces and 50 people in private properties. A record of names and contact details of each guest must be kept for 56 days. Tasmania:  in commercial spaces, up to 250 can gather in an undivided indoor space, and up to 1,000 in an undivided outdoor space. In both cases, the number present must also not exceed one person per 2 sq metres. Up to 100 people can gather at private residences. Rules apply to the number of people allowed to consume alcohol while standing. Western Australia:  there is no limit as long as there is no more than one person every 2 sq m. South Australia:  weddings are capped at 200 for commercial premises, 50 for private residences, and all attendees must register with SA Health. Funerals are capped at 50. Density limits of one person every 2 sq metres apply to both. Northern Territory:  there is no limit but gatherings of more than 100 will be required to complete a Covid-19 checklist. ACT:  there is no cap on the number of people who can attend weddings or funerals, as long as there is no more than one person every 4 sq metres. However organisers for events for between 201 and 500 people are required to notify ACT Health and submit their COVID Safe plan (via the  online form ), and events over 500 will need an exemption in accordance with the  COVID Safe Event Protocol . Dancing at weddings is permitted. New South Wales:  the number of people in a public place of worship must not exceed 100, and the 4 sq metre physical distancing rule must be observed. An outdoor religious service is subject to the one person per 2 sq metre rule. Victoria:  religious gatherings are subject to a one person per 2 sq metres density rule, with no other caps. Queensland:  places of worship will be closed in greater Brisbane during the lockdown period from 8 January to 11 January. In other parts of the state, places of worship can have one person per 2 sq metres. Tasmania:  up to 250 can gather in an undivided indoor space, as long as there are 2 sq metres per person. Western Australia:  attendance is limited only by the 2 sq metre rule. South Australia:  capped at 200. Attendance is limited only by the 4 sq metre rule. Northern Territory:  there is no limit on how many can attend at the same time but social distancing should be observed. ACT:  capped at 25 people across the entire venue. If a venue wants to have more than 25 people, it can have one person per two square metres of usable space in each indoor and outdoor space (excluding staff) provided they are using the  Check In CBR app . Students in all states and territories are currently on holidays so restrictions are not current. Yes, hairdressers, barbers, nail waxing, tanning and beauty salons, tattoo and massage parlours have reopened across the country, except in the greater Brisbane region during the lockdown period. Businesses must meet density limits, and, in  South Australia , service providers must wear a mask. In Victoria, masks are strongly recommended for both the client and the person providing the service. New South Wales:  museums, galleries and libraries, National Trust and Historic Houses Trust properties are   open to guests, as long as 4 sq m is allowed per person and they have a Covid-19 safety plan. For large venues attendance to a ticketed event with allocated seating must not exceed 50% of capacity.   The total number of people in a major recreational facility hosting a non-ticketed or non-seated event must not exceed one person per 4 square m (excluding staff) with no maximum capacity. Victoria:  entertainment and cultural venues such as music venues, museums, indoor and outdoor cinemas, and the casino are open, subject to capacity restrictions. Night clubs are also able to reopen.   Brothels and strip clubs have reopened, but must have Covid-safe plans in place and follow strict patron limits. Queensland:  libraries, museums, art galleries, historic sites, indoor cinemas, concert venues, theatres, arenas, auditoriums, stadiums, nightclubs, outdoor amusement parks, zoos and arcades can reopen with a Covidsafe plan. However, in greater Brisbane they will be closed during the three-day lockdown from 6pm on 8 January to 6pm on 11 January. Tasmania:  up to 250 can attend each undivided space in indoor recreational facilities, such as libraries, arcades, play centres, cinemas, museums, national institutions, historic sites and galleries, the 2 sq metre rule permitting. Up to 1,000 are allowed in each undivided outdoor space. Western Australia:  community facilities, libraries, galleries, museums, theatres, auditoriums, cinemas and concert venues can reopen, as can Perth zoo, wildlife and amusement parks, arcades, skate rinks and indoor play centres. All venues can have as many people as the one person per 2 sq metre rule allows. There is a 50% capacity cap on major sport and entertainment venues, such as the Optus Stadium, HBF Park and RAC Arena. All events are allowed, except for large scale, multi-stage music festivals. Unseated performances can go ahead at concert halls, live music venues, bars, pubs and nightclubs, and the casino gaming floor can reopen under temporary restrictions. South Australia:  venues are open, but   density requirements must be observed, with a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres allowed at cinemas, theatres, concert venues, zoos, galleries, museums and historic sites. Northern Territory:  public libraries, art galleries, museums, zoos, cinemas and theatres, music halls, nightclubs, amusement parks, community centres, stadiums, sporting facility and similar entertainment venues are open. ACT:  movie theatres, indoor amusement centres, arcades, outdoor and indoor play centres, betting agencies, outdoor amusements and attractions, community and youth centres, galleries, museums, national institutions, libraries historic sites and zoos can sell seated (when applicable) tickets at no more than 50% of capacity of each venue. There can only be one person per 2 sq metres throughout the venue as long as the venue has the  Check In CBR app . New South Wales:  gyms, fitness centres and studios (such as dance studios) may open for up to 30 a class. The total in a facility must not exceed one person in 4 sq metres, excluding staff. Indoor pools and saunas have also reopened subject to the one person per 4 sq metre rule in greater Sydney and one person per 2 sq metre rule in regional NSW. Community sporting competitions and training can go ahead as long as the number in a facility does not exceed one person every 4 sq metres, excluding staff, to a maximum of 500. You can use outdoor gym equipment in public, with caution, and enjoy activities such as fishing, hunting and boating. Victoria:  from 5pm on 31 December 2020 you must wear a fitted face mask when you are in a public indoor setting. This includes when exercising indoors in facilities such as gyms and recreation centres unless you have a lawful reason not to. When exercising where you are out of breath or puffing, a face mask is not required. You do not need to wear a face mask when exercising outdoors.  Personal training is allowed  and exercise in a group of up to 100 in a public place is permitted. For indoor exercise classes, the cap is 50 people. In general, gyms are subject to the one per 4 sq metre density rule when staffed and the one per 8 sq metres when unstaffed. Outdoor sport recreational facilities, such as tennis courts, golf courses or bowling greens, are open with some restrictions. Outdoor and indoor pools have opened, with restrictions on capacity. Queensland:  if you live in greater Brisbane, you can leave the house for exercise during the lockdown from 8 January to 11 January, but must stay in your local neighbourhood. You can exercise with one other person or more if they’re all from the same household. For all other parts of the state, gyms, health clubs, yoga studios and community sports clubs can open for up to one person per 2 sq metres. People can gather outside, play non-contact sport and participate in outdoor group training and boot camps with physical distancing. Parks, playgrounds, skateparks and pools are open with physical distancing rules. Tasmania:  gatherings are limited to 1,000 people in the outdoors of a premises for community sport and 250 for an undivided space in an indoor premises, or a maximum of one person per  2 sq metres . Indoor pools are limited to 250 people in each single undivided space, or a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres. Outdoor pools are limited to a maximum of 1,000 people in the whole outdoor area of premises, or a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres. Western Australia:  gyms, health clubs, and indoor sports centres can reopen for up to one person per 2 sq metres. Gyms can operate unstaffed but must undergo regular cleaning. Contact sport and training has recommenced, and playgrounds, outdoor gym equipment and skate parks can be used. South Australia:  sport (including sports training), fitness and recreation activities are all subject to the  one person per 2 sq metres rule . Northern Territory:  gyms, fitness studios and indoor training activities such as Cross Fit are allowed. You can also officiate, participate and support team sports, such as football, basketball, soccer and netball. ACT:  gyms and fitness centres are open to up to 500 people, subject to the one person per 2 sq m if they have the  Check In CBR app  and 4 sq metres per person if they don’t. Full contact training for sport, dance and martial arts, as well as circuit training, is allowed. Generally, enforcement is left up to the discretion of police officers. States have taken different approaches. For example, the ACT   says it will issue a warning while Victoria has adopted a more hardline attitude to those breaking social distancing rules. The NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller said he would review all physical-distancing fines. “If I think it’s unreasonable, it will be withdrawn immediately and we’ll make personal contact with the individual,” he said. Not all states have specified this but it appears fines can be appealed using the same process as other fines issued by police. Information on how to lodge an appeal should be available on your state or territory’s government website. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Covid: England told to prepare for worst weeks of pandemic:	England’s chief medical officer has said the next few weeks will be the worst of the pandemic as he urged everyone to minimise meeting people. Prof  Chris Whitty  said the public should not wait for any government “tinkering” with rules but should “double down” now on avoiding any unnecessary contacts. Pleading with the public he said: “Even within them [the rules], we should be doing our level best to minimise the amount of unnecessary contact with people who are not in our household. I can’t emphasise that enough.” Speaking to BBC Breakfast, he said the  NHS  was facing its “most dangerous” point. He said: “In London for example one in 30 people currently have this coronavirus, across the country as a whole,  it’s one in 50 . So this is a serious problem, and it’s rising in every part of England.” He added: “This new variant is really pushing things in a way that the old variant, which was already very bad, was not able to. So we have a very significant problem … The next few weeks are going to be the worst weeks of this pandemic in terms of numbers into the NHS.” Whitty’s comments came as seven new  mass vaccination centres  opened across England: in London, Birmingham, Manchester, Newcastle, Bristol, Epsom and Stevenage. He said it would be “several weeks” before vaccinations against the virus started to take effect.  “We are now very close to the point with vaccination that we’re going to be able to get on top of this, but it’s not yet. If we want the numbers not to go up still further, everybody has to minimise the number of unnecessary contacts they have in their day.” Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, he added: “There’s a very high chance that if you meet someone unnecessarily, they will have Covid.” Asked about the idea of extending mask rules  to outdoors , Whitty said that while there “might be some logic” for mask use in certain outdoor settings such as packed queues, by far the bigger issue was indoor proximity. However, on BBC Breakfast he refused to answer viewers questions about whether more restrictions were necessary. “The decisions about exactly what restrictions are in place are very much a matter for ministers,” he said. But he urged the public to do their bit now. He said: “This is everybody’s problem, any single unnecessary contact you have with someone is a potential link in a chain of transmission that will lead to a vulnerable person … This is the most important thing. Tinkering with the rules may be useful, but the far more important thing is that everybody abides by the spirit of the rules that are there at the moment. Everybody knows what they need to do.” He added: “What we need to do before the vaccines have had their effect, because it’s going to take several weeks before that happens, is we need to really double down.” Meanwhile, the minister for vaccine deployment, Nadhim Zahawi, said people should not sit down when going  out to exercise . Speaking to Times Radio, he said: “So of course, exercise … But don’t go out and sit or have that opportunity of social interaction because you’re helping the virus and that’s what we want to avoid.” And pressed on whether the current restrictions were enough, Zahawi told Today: “I am worried about supermarkets and people actually wearing masks and following the one-way system, and making sure when it’s at capacity they wait outside the supermarket. I’m worried about some of the pictures I’ve seen of social interactions in parks, if you have to exercise you can go out for exercise only.” Whitty was also asked by a viewer whether he was given a new slide clicker for Christmas to avoid having to request slide changes at Downing Street coronavirus briefings. The chief medical officer revealed he shared their frustration. “I’m with them on this one,” he said, adding: “I’m rather hoping someone has sent one to Downing Street. I think they said they had, but Downing Street has not passed it on to me.”
Vaccine scepticism in France reflects 'dissatisfaction with political class’:	I n  France , every child is now obliged to have 11 vaccinations. If parents want their children to attend school, or take part in many extracurricular activities, they must accept. There is no opt-out or concessions made to vaccine doubters. On Monday France’s government and health authorities are speeding up the country’s Covid-19 vaccine drive – a process complicated by widespread scepticism about the inoculation that has encompassed the usual global conspiracy theories. For weeks, polls have suggested up to 60% of French citizens do not wish to be vaccinated. As the government’s vaccine operation enters its third week,  official figures  show that as of Saturday at least 93,000 people had been given the jab – a much lower number than elsewhere in Europe, including the UK, Germany and Italy.  Laurent-Henri Vignaud, a science historian whose 2019 book  Antivax,  co-written with immunology specialist Françoise Salvadori, examines vaccine scepticism in the west since the 18th century, says we should not heed polls suggesting the French will refuse the vaccine. “There’s a very big difference between what the French say and what they do,” he told the Guardian. “And polls whose methodology and questions can seem abstract do not reflect what happens when people know where they will have the vaccine, what it does, the how, when and why.” Vaccine doubters have existed as long as vaccines , but for years polls have suggested France has more than most of its European neighbours – an odd reputation given that immunology pioneer Louis Pasteur was French and is a figure of fierce national pride. Prof Jocelyn Raude, an expert on health behaviour at the École des Hautes Études en Santé Publique who has studied the anti-vaccine movement, says that as recently as 2005 polls showed 90% support for vaccines, “which seems incredible today”. However, by the turn of the 21st century the seeds of doubt had already been sown. In the 1990s, a mass campaign to vaccinate French children against hepatitis B coincided with a jump in multiple sclerosis cases, though studies never found a convincing link between the two.  In 1991, there was a medical scandal not linked to vaccines specifically when it was discovered that health authorities had knowingly distributed blood products contaminated with HIV to haemophiliacs in the 1980s. Several ministers were later charged with manslaughter. However, Raude said it was the 2009 H1N1 scandal, in which the government massively overordered 94m vaccine doses at a cost of €869m (£780m), that fuelled today’s vaccine scepticism. The health ministry later cancelled more than half the order but the damage was done. Opposition parties criticised the waste of public money and accused officials of being in league with big pharma. In the end, 323 people in France died of H1N1, only 6m people were vaccinated and 19m vaccine doses were destroyed. An official estimate put the cost of the debacle at €382m. Raude says the scepticism was amplified when some high-profile French celebrities began expressing vaccine doubts, relayed by newly emerging social media networks. Then came the  Mediator scandal . The diabetic drug, widely but wrongly prescribed to those seeking to lose weight, was linked to between 500 and 1,200 deaths over more than three decades. Mediator’s manufacturer, Servier, was accused of charges including manslaughter, and 12 people ended up in the dock in a criminal trial last year, including officials who were also paid as consultants of pharmaceutical companies. The company and the individuals charged deny wrongdoing. Judgment is expected in March. “It was a tipping point. The Mediator scandal validated in people’s minds the idea of corruption between officials and pharmaceutical companies in France; that it was about business not health safety,” Raude says. Another cause, he says, is the lack of confidence in doctors and scientists. “It’s not new for the French to lack confidence in political leaders, but there is a low level of confidence in the medical authorities in France. The effect of this is if you don’t trust the experts, you don’t follow their advice.” Vignaud says vaccine scepticism is less against the vaccine itself than those promoting it, reflecting  a distrust of “politicians , high-profile doctors and experts and journalists”. “France doesn’t have any more hard and fast anti-vaxxers than anywhere else, what it does have is … a certain dissatisfaction with the political class,” he says. “There is a strong expectation of the state, but we are permanently disappointed: we see this with the vaccine programme: some say it’s too slow, others it’s too fast. Everyone is disappointed.” The  film Hold-Up , a much lampooned and debunked epic claiming Covid-19 is a global conspiracy, has compounded the mistrust and been been shared by influential figures. Among those trying to combat the disinformation with facts and humour is the Facebook site  Les Vaxxeuses . “Vaccines are the biggest medical advance … don’t let lies make you doubt the benefits,” the website says. Over the weekend anti-vaccination proponents were dealt a blow when the far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed course and said she would agree to receive a Covid jab, having previously voiced her opposition. Ministers are confident France’s vaccine programme will catch up in the coming weeks, insisting it is “a marathon, not a sprint”. “Once access to the vaccine becomes a reality people will have the vaccine. They have had enough,” Vignaud says. Raude agrees the government’s “slow steps” strategy appears to be working. “The  government has been slow and careful  so as not to frighten people … when French people see the benefits, they will do it.”
The new UK Covid variant: your questions answered:	 Linda Geddes  Mon 11 Jan 2021  13.48 GMT   Last modified on Mon 11 Jan 2021  16.02 GMT   How do scientists know the new UK variant is 70% more transmissible, and how certain are they of this figure? Our gift to the world: the UK variant of S ars-CoV-2. There are sufficient data to quote 70% greater infectivity, but how was this figure ascertained?”  D  Moon, Brighton This has been investigated using a number of different methods, all of which lead to the same basic conclusion, that the new B117 variant is easier to pass from person to person – even if the precise increase in transmissibility is only an estimate, for now. One method involved comparing the growth in cases of the new variant and old variant within the same population, which enabled researchers to control other factors that can affect rates of transmission, such as social distancing. They also followed the pattern of signals in Covid tests across the UK, looking at the increase in cases of  “S gene dropout”  caused by specific mutations in the viral spike protein – a proxy for the new variant. “Both of these methods show that the new variant replaced the older variants in the UK population, strongly suggesting that the new variant is a fitter virus and most likely achieved this though increased transmissibility,” said Paul Kellam, a professor of virus genomics at Imperial College London. The researchers also tested various mathematical models to see which one best fitted the observed increase in the new variant, and discovered that it would be consistent with an  increase in the reproduction number of 0.4 to 0.7 . “What we would still like to see is proof in animal models of transmission that the new variant is better at establishing new infections than the old variant. But for now the evidence is sufficiently compelling that we must act on it, which is why we have entered another lockdown,” Kellam said. What does a 70% increase in transmissibility actually mean? Does it mean that if you breathe in a small viral load you are 70% more likely to catch it, or perhaps that you need to socially distance 70% further?”  Brian, retired IT consultant, Reading The 70% figure derives from this estimated increase in the R value of 0.4 to 0.7. Say the old variant was spreading at an R of 1.5, meaning 10 Covid-positive people transmitted infection to 15 new people: “The new variant would have a R of 1.9 to 2.3, so 10 people with Covid-19 would transmit infection to 19 to 23 new people,” said Kellam. “It is reasonable to say that strict adherence to the rules that are designed to break chains of transmission (hands, face and space) are still effective, but that the tolerance for bending or ignoring the rules may be much less, as we cannot discount that multiple factors have contributed to the increase in transmission, including poor adherence to tier rules.” Can I be reinfected with the new variant if I’ve already had Covid? Can people who have had  Covid catch this new variant as well?  James Crawford, Covid swabber, Bristol This is an area of active research. Although there have been reports of people being  reinfected  with older coronavirus variants, such reinfections appear to be rare. “What we know about the new UK variant at the moment strongly suggests that it remains sensitive to the immune response of the older variants and will be similarly sensitive to the immune response generated by the two vaccines currently being rolled out in the UK,” said Kellam. Are surfaces likely to play a greater role in transmission of the new variant? Do I need to up my game regarding cleaning?”  Natasha,  Cumbria This is also unclear. However, if the new variant finds it easier to bind to and infect cells, which is one theory being investigated, this could mean a smaller number of viral particles is needed to establish an infection. Complying with the guidance on hands, face and space is therefore more important than ever: 70% more handwashing will not compensate for not wearing a mask. How did the mutation happen, and why did it happen in the UK? If the mutation  occurs when the virus is transmitted from one person to another, surely the persistently high number of infections in this country will give the virus more opportunity to further mutate, the possible result being this devastating world pandemic is prolonged whilst new vaccines are developed.”  Steven Cooper, retired engineer, Herefordshire Viruses are constantly acquiring small changes in their genetic code. Usually, these “mutations” have no effect, but occasionally they will alter how the virus behaves – which is what may have happened with the B117 and South African variants. These are far from being the only coronavirus variants in circulation, but they’re generating concern because the mutations they carry may make them more infectious. As for how – and where – the B117 variant arose, it could simply be that Britain was the first country to detect it, as we routinely sequence more viral genomes than many other countries. Also being explored is whether mutations are more likely to arise in patients with long-running coronavirus infections who are treated with blood from recovered Covid-19 patients ( convalescent plasma ).  One study,  which followed a single immunocompromised patient, detected important changes in the virus each time the patient received plasma treatment, raising the possibility that the antibodies it contained placed additional pressure on the virus to mutate. However, this is less likely to happen in people with healthier immune systems. Will the Covid-19 vaccines still work, and, if not, how would scientists go about updating them? Yesterday, I got the first shot of the Moderna vaccine, am I covered from the new variant? ”  Conor, laboratory worker, New York Most scientists are confident that current Covid-19 vaccines will protect against the new B117 variant, but there’s a risk that they may become less effective if the virus continues to mutate. This is another reason why it’s important to reduce the number of people who become infected – because mutations are more likely to occur when the virus infects new hosts. If the vaccines did become less effective, they would be relatively easy to tweak – especially those based on RNA and vector vaccines, including the Pfizer/BioNTech and Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccines. Doing so would involve making small changes to the sequence of the genetic material these vaccines contain, and could be incorporated in the new design within a matter of days, said Brendan Wren, a professor of vaccinology at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, who added: “I’m sure that the Oxford group have already modified their vaccine design to include variants as they arise.” Can young (primary age) children be infected with the new variant/s and pass it on to their friends and parents? How much do schools contribute to the spread of Covid, and how has that changed since the emergence of the new variant?”  Olivia Bacon, clinical scientist, Hampshire People of all ages can be infected with both the new and old coronavirus variants and transmit them to other people, but primary-aged children appear less likely to do so – at least where the older variants are concerned. Whether this also holds true for the new B117 variant is still uncertain. “It is most likely that the B117 lineage influences transmissibility in all age groups, and there is not yet clear evidence that the degree to which transmission has increased in children is any different than the degree to which it has increased in adults,” said Erik Volz at Imperial College London, who is studying the new variant. Even if the variant is less transmissible between children than adults, the fact that transmission does occur is still a major concern when there are such high case numbers and hospitals are under such stress – which is why schools are closed. If you would like to submit a question about coronavirus, you can do so  here
Coronavirus live news: Republic of Ireland infection rate surges to be worst in world; strict new Beijing lockdown:	The health ministry of the  Palestinian Authority  (PA) has approved the main Russian vaccine against COVID-19, known as Sputnik V, for use in Palestinian self-ruled territory, Russia’s sovereign wealth fund said on Monday. In the Israeli-occupied West Bank, Palestinian Health Minister Mai Alkaila confirmed that her ministry had granted “emergency approval” for the Russian vaccine to be administered in areas under limited Palestinian self-rule. Deliveries are expected to be completed in the first quarter of this year. The PA said later it was allocating $10.5 million as a down-payment for the first stage of vaccination, to arrive within two months. The final cost will be $21 million, Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammed Shtayyeh’s office said in a statement. Asked if Israel would permit the Palestinians to import the vaccines, Deputy Israeli Health Minister Yoav Kisch told Army Radio: “Anything to do with Palestinian Authority public health is taken care of by them, (so) I think they have that freedom.” While Israel has become the world leader in vaccinations per capita, Palestinians in the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip - where Hamas Islamists rule - have yet to obtain their first supplies. Portugal  has suffered record numbers of coronavirus deaths and infections, making a new lockdown unavoidable, Prime Minister Antonio Costa said Monday. At a cabinet meeting Wednesday, the government will decide restrictions similar to those imposed during the first lockdown last March, AFP reported Costa saying. He was speaking after health officials reported a record 122 deaths over the past 24 hours, bringing Portugal’s overall toll to 7,965 ( see earlier post ). On Friday, officials logged a record 10,176 new cases over a 24-hour period. A total of 3,983 Covid-19 patients are currently in hospital - a new high - including 567 in intensive care. “We are certainly facing a third wave” of the virus, Costa told journalists Monday. Health Minister Marta Temido, blaming the recent surge in cases on the Christmas period and the cold snap, said the only solution is to bring down infection levels. The government will consult public health experts on Tuesday before discussing how best to strengthen the restrictions already in place since early November. President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa said on Saturday that “there’s no alternative but a general lockdown.” The remark came during a debate ahead of January 24 polls in which Rebelo de Sousa is seeking re-election. Bangladesh  will begin inoculating people against Covid-19 in the first week of February as it hopes to get the vaccine by end of this month, a senior health ministry official said on Monday in remarks reported by Reuters. The South Asian country of more than 160 million in November signed a deal with the Serum Institute of India to buy 30m doses of the vaccine developed by British drugmaker AstraZeneca. The vaccine will arrive in the country by 25 January, Abul Bashar Mohammed Khurshid Alam, head of the Directorate General of Health Services, told a news conference. “The vaccine will be first applied on the health workers and it will be monitored for the next seven days. After that, we’ll begin the vaccination across the country in the first week of February,” he said. Frontline workers such as health service providers and police will be given priority, health ministry officials said. Bangladesh has 523,302 confirmed cases, including 7,803 deaths. Italy  reported 448 coronavirus-related deaths on Monday, up from 361 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 12,532 from 18,627. However, Reuters reported that the number of swab tests also fell, as often happens over the weekend, amounting to just 91,656 against a previous 139,758. Italy has registered 79,203 COVID-19 deaths since its outbreak came to light on Feb. 21, the second-highest toll in Europe and the sixth-highest in the world. The country has also reported 2.289 million cases to date, the health ministry said. Patients in hospital with COVID-19 - not including those in intensive care - stood at 23,603 on Monday, up 176 from a day earlier. There were 168 new admissions to intensive care units, against 181 the day before. The total number of intensive care patients rose by 27 to 2,642. When Italy’s second wave of the epidemic accelerated quickly in the first half of November, hospital admissions were rising by about 1,000 per day, while intensive care occupancy was increasing by about 100 per day. Johns Hopkins University data shows  California  has recorded more than 30,000 deaths since the pandemic started nearly a year ago. Deaths have soared in America’s most populous state since a Covid-19 surge began in October, AP reported. It took California six months to record its first 10,000 deaths. But in barely a month, the total rose from 20,000 to 30,000. Over the weekend, state officials reported a two-day record of 1,163 deaths.  California ranks third in the US in coronavirus deaths, behind Texas and New York, where there have been nearly 40,000. Health officials have warned the worst is yet to come later this month when the full picture on infections from the holidays emerges. The city of Los Angeles announced late on Sunday that its Covid-19 testing site at Dodger Stadium would be transformed into a vaccination centre by the end of the week. The   Republic of Ireland  had the most confirmed cases of coronavirus per million people in the world last week, according to data from Johns Hopkins and the WHO set out in  a Bloomberg report . There were 10,100 cases per million over the seven days to Sunday, after a rapid acceleration in the number of cases detected in  Ireland . Until the end of December it had largely avoided the sharp rises seen in the UK and other parts of Europe. My colleague Rory Carroll, who will be covering this development more fully,  reported earlier  that hospitals were under severe strain, with one estimate suggesting the number of deaths could exceed 100 per day, far higher than during the first wave. The  German  company BioNTech, which developed the first coronavirus vaccine approved in the west, has said it expects to produce 2bn doses in 2021, up from the 1.3bn previously forecast. “We now believe that we can potentially deliver approximately 2bn doses in total by the end of 2021, which incorporates the updated six-dose label,” the company said, referring to an additional dose that could be extracted from each vial of the vaccine. European regulators last week approved doctors drawing six doses from each vial, boosting dosage capacity by 20%. The Mainz-based company, which developed the jab with the US firm Pfizer, is planning to open a new factory in Marburg, Germany, in February, which is expected to ramp up production capacity by 750m doses a year. The site will join five other sites in Germany, Belgium and the US shared with Pfizer. The company said it had shipped nearly 33m doses by 10 January, more than a month after Britain became the first western nation to approve any vaccine, on 2 December. The German company said last week that studies showed its vaccine works against the new mutation found in variants uncovered in Britain and South Africa. Lebanon ’s caretaker prime minister has said the country has entered a “very critical zone” in the battle against the coronavirus as his government mulls tightening a nationwide lockdown announced last week. Following a new post-holiday surge in infections, the Lebanese government imposed a nationwide lockdown and a nighttime curfew. But many were critical of the measures, calling them lax for exempting many sectors such as factories, plant nurseries and exchange bureaus. An AP report notes that Lebanon’s handling of the virus surge amid a deepening economic crisis has been under scrutiny, with many saying hesitant policies have failed to contain it. Doctors and experts say the extent of the spread has yet to be felt, predicting numbers will skyrocket in the coming days, overwhelming health facilities in the country of nearly 6 million. Daily infection rates have hovered above 3,000 and hit a record high of more than 5,000 last week. On Monday, panic buyers swarmed supermarkets after reports the government planned to order them shut in the tightened lockdown. Long queues formed outside chain supermarkets, sparking fear the crowds could further spread the virus.  Before a ministerial meeting to consider new measures, the caretaker prime minister, Hassan Diab, blamed careless behaviour for the spread, saying many Lebanese still considered the virus a hoax and were not taking it seriously. “We have entered a very critical zone in terms of the coronavirus spread or at a minimum, we are at the gates of that zone,” Diab said. The World Health Organization said 81.7% of Lebanon’s hospital beds were occupied on Sunday and bed occupancy in intensive care units had reached 91.4%, with the highest in Beirut. Some 2,295 healthcare workers had been infected by 10 January, up from 2,015 last week. France’s  prime minister, Jean Castex, has reportedly said a third Covid lockdown should not be ruled out, according to French television. He reportedly made the statement at a parliamentary committee on Monday. Others present at the meeting told BFMTV that Castex said: “We must not exclude a third lockdown as a last resort. For the moment, the latest figures lead us to believe a curfew is enough.” Two cases of what the French are calling the “British variant” or “English variant” have been discovered in Lille, in northern France. Eight cases of the highly contagious form of Covid were discovered in the southern city of Marseille at the weekend. President Emmanuel Macron will host a special meeting on France’s vaccine programme this evening at the Elysée. The health ministry says at least 100,000 people have been inoculated in France as the vaccine rollout enters its third week. The  International Energy Agency  (IEA) has said global carbon emissions, which have been reduced by the Covid-19 pandemic, are set to rebound in 2021 unless governments take swift policy action. Emissions declined by 7% in 2020 to levels last seen a decade ago, but the agency’s chief, Fatih Birol, said that as the economic damage from the crisis waned, “the early data … confirm our worry that global emissions in 2021 are set to rebound”. Birol announced that the IEA’s first comprehensive roadmap for the global energy sector to reach net zero emissions by 2050 would be published in May. Despite the gloomy outlook, the Paris-based watchdog believes that recent pledges by industrialised nations and a change in leadership in Washington mean that major powers could turn the tide in the climate crisis. “This year can be a pivotal year,” Birol said. “There is a significant new political alignment on climate, which opens up a new world of possibilities for all of us. Many of the largest economies … committed themselves to a net zero target mid-century in the last few months. I am certain that the new US administration will join this group of countries.” Joe Biden has pledged to rejoin the Paris agreement when he assumes office this month. Portugal  has hit a record of 122 coronavirus deaths logged over the last 24 hours, health authorities said. Portugal reported the record daily increase as the country geared up for a new lockdown this week to tackle the third wave of the coronavirus pandemic. Health authority DGS said the death toll registered over the last 24 hours reached 122, bringing the total to 7,925, while new infections rose by 5,604 from Sunday to a total of 489,293.  An international trial of the use of convalescent blood plasma on Covid patients with moderate and severe illness has halted enrolment of severely ill patients requiring intensive care after it found no benefit, trial investigators said on Monday. According to Reuters, the decision by the REMAP-CAP trial leaders came after an initial analysis of more than 900 severely ill trial participants in intensive care showed that treatment with the product – an antibody-rich plasma taken from people who have recovered from the pandemic disease – did not improve outcomes. “There was no evidence of harm associated with the administration of convalescent plasma” and the trial is continuing to recruit hospitalised Covid patients who are moderately ill but not in intensive care, scientists leading the trial said in a statement. “It is biologically plausible that patients who are not producing antibodies at the time of convalescent plasma therapy and those patients with excess virus may benefit more than others. Our additional analyses will explore this,” said Manu Shankar-Hari, a clinician and professor of critical care medicine at Guy’s and St Thomas’ hospital who is co-leading the trial. In the  UK , Boris Johnson has said tougher lockdown measures may be needed as he announced that around 2.4m vaccines for Covid-19 had now been put in people’s arms. The prime minister stressed that “now is the moment for maximum vigilance” amid increasing calls for tougher lockdown restrictions. He said stricter lockdown measures may be needed “if we feel that things are not being properly observed”. During a visit to a vaccine centre at Ashton Gate stadium in Bristol, Johnson said: “As I speak to you today we’ve done about 2 million people, maybe a bit more. We’re at about 2.4 million jabs all in across the whole of the UK.” You can follow all the UK coronavirus news, including a report that Johnson took a cycle ride seven miles from his home, with Andrew Sparrow here: South Africa  is struggling to cope with a surge in Covid cases that has already overwhelmed some hospitals, as people returning from widespread holiday travel along the coast spread the more infectious coronavirus variant. AP reports that of particular concern is Gauteng province, the country’s most populous, which includes the cities of Johannesburg and Pretoria. Authorities say it is already seeing a rise in new infections after people travelled to coastal areas, where the variant is dominant. “We expect that Gauteng is going to be hit very soon and very hard,” said Prof Willem Hanekom, the director of the Africa Health Research Institute. “It is anticipated Gauteng will have a steep curve of increased cases and hospitalisations.” The Steve Biko hospital in the Pretoria area has already reached capacity and is putting Covid patients into a field hospital outside the main building. South Africa has reimposed restrictions to curb the spread of the virus, including banning alcohol sales, closing bars, enforcing a night curfew and limiting attendance at public gatherings including church services and funerals. President Cyril Ramaphosa, who has met with his national coronavirus command council and cabinet over the renewed public health crisis, is expected to address the nation on Monday night. South Africa, with a population of 60 million, has reported 1.2 million confirmed cases of Covid-19, representing more than 30% of all the cases in Africa, which this week exceeded 3 million. It has reported more than 33,000 virus-related deaths. Experts say all numbers worldwide understate the true toll of the pandemic due to missed cases and limited testing. Zimbabwe  has banned families from transporting their dead relatives between cities, as part of new measures stop traditional funeral rites that are believed to be increasing the spread of coronavirus. The announcement, reported by AP, stops the custom where families take the dead to their areas of birth for ceremonies and burial. Police have also banned public viewing of bodies and the tradition of having a corpse stay overnight in the family’s home before burial. “Police will only clear body movements for burial straight from a funeral parlour/hospital mortuary to the burial site,” a police spokesman, Paul Nyathi, said in the state-run Herald newspaper. Zimbabwe, like many other African countries, initially recorded low numbers of Covid-19 but has recently experienced a rise in cases. There are fears that a new, more infectious variant of the virus arrived from South Africa when some of the thousands of Zimbabweans living in South Africa returned home for the festive season. Zimbabwe recorded 21,477 cases and 507 deaths on 10 January, up from the slightly more than 10,000 cases and 277 deaths at the beginning of December, according to government figures.
Iran bans importation of Covid vaccines from the US and UK:	Vaccines produced by the US and UK will be banned from entering  Iran , its supreme leader has said, even though his country has suffered the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East. “Imports of US and British vaccines into the country are forbidden ... They’re completely untrustworthy,” Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said in a live televised speech. “It’s not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations. “Given our experience with France’s HIV-tainted blood supplies, French vaccines aren’t trustworthy either,” he added, referring to France’s contaminated blood scandal of the 1980s and 1990s. Khamenei’s comments reflected the tense relations between Iran and the west, which have not abated in the waning days of Donald Trump’s presidency. In his speech, Khamenei mocked American democracy and human rights in the wake of  the riot at Capitol Hill in Washington , and said Iran was in no hurry to negotiate with the incoming Biden administration. But he said if the US lifted sanctions, Iran would respond. He said the issue of compensation for sanctions could be pursued at a later date. His remarks came as Iran prepared to discuss a plan to purchase medical supplies by unlocking as much as $1bn (£735m) of $7bn in frozen assets held in two South Korean banks. The plan will be discussed when the South Korean vice-foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, travels to Tehran in an effort to secure the release of a   South Korean vessel  seized by the Iranian navy earlier this week . Some of the South Korean delegation reached Tehran on Friday. Iran’s central bank governor said Iranian oil revenues had fallen to $20bn, a drop of more than half, as a result of US sanctions. The Iranian foreign ministry claimed the diplomat’s visit was totally focused on the unlocking of Iranian assets, insisting it had been arranged before the ship seizure, although the official Iranian press has been reporting the US block on Iranian assets in Korea ever since the ship was stopped for allegedly polluting the marine environment. Tehran has been in lengthy negotiations with  South Korea  on how to access the assets held in South Korean banks without falling foul of US extraterritorial sanctions, something that is likely to happen if dollar transactions are involved. In the past Iran has exported oil and natural gas to South Korea using settlement accounts based on Korean currency. Owing to the imposition of US sanctions, Tehran has been unable to access its money, even though it insists the money could be transferred in South Korea currency and used exclusively for the purchase of sanction-exempt food and medicines. Seoul claims it has not received the necessary US Treasury assurances that the payments would not lead to fines. More recently, Iran has suggested the money would be used to buy vaccines using the UN-approved  Covax facility . Any payment via a dollar transaction might give the US Treasury leverage to fine the banks involved, and Seoul has said there is no safe way to transfer the money. In relation to the coronavirus, Iranian officials have previously said that importing the Pfizer vaccine, which must be shipped and stored at -70C (-94F), poses major logistical challenges for Iran. The country has struggled to stem the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East, which has infected nearly 1.3 million people and killed nearly 56,000. Iran launched human trials of its first domestic Covid vaccine candidate late last month.
Indonesia plane crash: authorities locate black boxes among wreckage:	Indonesian authorities have located the black boxes of the Sriwijaya Air jet  that crashed into the sea  soon after taking off from the capital Jakarta, as human body parts and suspected pieces of the plane were retrieved. The  Boeing  737-500 with 62 passengers and crew was heading to Pontianak in West Kalimantan on Saturday when it disappeared from radar screens four minutes after takeoff. It is the first major air crash in Indonesia since  189 passengers and crew were killed in 2018  when a Lion Air Boeing 737 Max also plunged into the Java Sea soon after takeoff from Soekarno-Hatta international airport. Even before the latest crash, more people had died in air crashes in  Indonesia  than in any other country over the past decade, according to Aviation Safety Network’s database. Indonesia’s national transport safety committee chief, Soerjanto Tjahjono, said the locations of flight SJ182’s two black boxes had been identified. “Hopefully we can retrieve them soon,” said the military chief, Hadi Tjahjanto, without giving an estimated timeframe. Rescuers brought pieces of wreckage to Jakarta port. Authorities said they came from a depth of 23 metres (75ft) near a group of islands off the Jakarta coast. One twisted piece of metal was painted in Sriwijaya Air’s blue and red colours. Indonesian authorities said they had also retrieved body parts and clothing. Police asked families to provide information such as dental records and DNA samples to help identify bodies. The plane had 12 crew and 50 passengers onboard, including seven children and three babies, all of them Indonesian. President Joko Widodo expressed “deep condolences” over the disaster and urged the public to pray the missing people could be found. The tracking service Flightradar24 said the aircraft took off at 2.36pm local time (0736 GMT) and climbed to reach 10,900ft within four minutes. It then began a steep descent and stopped transmitting data 21 seconds later. There were no immediate clues on what caused the jet’s sudden descent. Most air accidents are caused by a range of factors that can take months to establish, safety experts say. A transport ministry spokeswoman said air traffic control had asked the pilot why the plane was heading north-west instead of on its expected flight path seconds before it disappeared. The pilots had decades of experience between them. The captain was reported to be a former air force pilot and his co-pilot had been at Sriwijaya Air since 2013, according to his LinkedIn profile. The plane was nearly 27 years old, much older than Boeing’s 737 Max model, which has been plagued with problems. Older 737 models are widely flown and do not have the stall-prevention system implicated in the Max safety crisis. “We are in contact with our airline customer and stand ready to support them during this difficult time,” Boeing said in a statement. “Our thoughts are with the crew, passengers, and their families.” Distraught relatives waited in Pontianak, which is about 460 miles (740km) from Jakarta, for news of their loved ones. A crisis centre was set up for families at Jakarta’s main airport. “We feel powerless, we can only wait and hope to get any information soon,” Irfansyah Riyanto, who had five relatives on the flight, told reporters. Founded in 2003, Jakarta-based Sriwijaya Air flies largely within Indonesia’s sprawling archipelago. The budget airline has had a solid safety record, with no onboard casualties in four incidents recorded on the Aviation Safety Network database. The EU banned all Indonesian airlines in 2007 after a series of crashes and reports of deteriorating oversight and maintenance since deregulation in the late 1990s. The restrictions were lifted in 2018.
Indonesia plane crash: divers to retrieve black boxes from Sriwijaya Air flight 182:	Indonesian divers will try to retrieve the data recorders of a Sriwijaya Air jet on Monday after it  plunged into the sea two days ago  with 62 people on board minutes after take off from Jakarta’s main airport. Flight SJ182 was headed to Pontianak on Borneo island, about 740 km (460 miles) from Jakarta, on Saturday before it disappeared from radar screens four minutes after take-off and crashed into the Java sea. Authorities pinpointed the area where the data recorders, known as black boxes, are located on Sunday as they lifted chunks of the  Boeing  737-500 fuselage off the sea bed. Rescuers have also found the remains of passengers and crew who died and their personal effects. One of the navy divers aboard a rescue ship said the search would resume on Monday with weather conditions improving. “We can narrow the search area today to 200 to 500 metres from the point location,” he told Kompas TV channel. “On the first day, we had been scouring 1-1.5km (from the main coordinates). We’ve looked through the outer areas now.” Nurcahyo Utomo, an investigator at Indonesia’s national transportation safety committee (KNKT), said authorities hoped to find the black boxes on Monday. He told Reuters the jet may have been intact before it hit the water, given that debris found so far had been scattered in a relatively tight area underwater. One of the jet’s turbines was found and shipped back to a port in Jakarta on Sunday. The incident is the first major air crash in Indonesia since 189 passengers and crew were killed in 2018 when a  Lion Air Boeing 737 MAX in 2018 also plunged into the Java Sea  soon after take-off from Soekarno-Hatta international airport. The Sriwijaya Air plane had 12 crew and 50 passengers on board, all Indonesians and including 10 children. Tracking service Flightradar24 said the aircraft took off at 2.36pm local time and climbed to reach 3,300 metres (10,900ft) within four minutes. It then began a steep descent and stopped transmitting data 21 seconds later. There were no immediate clues on what caused the sudden descent. Most air accidents are caused by a number of factors that can take months to establish, safety experts say. The pilots had decades of experience between them with the flight captain a former air force pilot and his co-pilot at Sriwijaya Air since 2013, according to his Linkedin profile. The plane’s takeoff had been delayed by heavy rain. The Sriwijaya Air plane was a nearly 27-year-old Boeing 737-500, much older than Boeing’s problem-plagued 737 MAX model. Older 737 models are widely flown and do not have the stall-prevention system implicated in the MAX safety crisis.
I aspire to give my family opportunities they thought they’d never get:	Name: Jake Turner Age: 19 Dreams of: Being a chef, musician and jujitsu fighter It has been a really good start to 2021. I’ve been working now for about a month and have been loving my new job. I’m running a food preparation kitchen and it’s really helped me keep on track with living a healthy lifestyle. I’m staying at my girlfriend’s family’s house. I’ve watched her mum cook breakfast, lunch and dinner, and a wide variety of foods, while working a full-time job. It’s made me reflect a lot on the bad habits I have had my whole life. It’s completely different and I’ve decided, I need to work so I can show my own family what life can be like. I know I won’t be able to do anything for them without an income. I live with my dad and my brother. They know I’m writing about my life, and their part in it, here. There is no room at my mum and stepdad’s for me to stay, as my two younger siblings live with them, and I respect that. I feel it’s time to grow up. Every time I stay at my own house, though, I feel there’s no hope for something better, like the energy is just too low. There could be so much more. When I come home to stay for work, in my head I just think, why do we live like this? I look around and there’s just clutter everywhere. I feel like, in this house, there isn’t much drive for bigger and better things. Maybe living with my mum from a young age has given me a belief that we all have the capability to get whatever we aspire to. I fear that if I don’t strive for the best, I’ll end up with the same habits as my father and brother. Habits I do not want. Sometimes, after I write my music and do my Tafe homework, I’ll join my brother in his room to play video games. But every time I play video games I get so depressed. Afterwards I realise it’s because I literally achieved nothing and now saying this, I worry that my brother might feel the same way, but just can’t break it.   I’ve tried so hard to bring my brother out of the cycle I feel he’s stuck in. I’m still conflicted with whether it’s a bad thing – to be at him in that way. But I feel as a family working together, we could get so much more than we have. We could start a garden. Help out in community centres. Go for runs to stay fit. It’s not bad, but in the back of my mind, I want things to change, not just for me and my family, but for the whole world, we can make this an even better place. Over the last couple of years I’ve realised I have to be the one to show them that they can do this. That you can have a job and have a healthy life. That you can escape this trap. Do I know if it will work? I’m not sure, but I’m going to try. Yes it’s going to be hard, but I’ve gotten so far in my life and I am determined to not let this defeat me I’m 19 years old and I’m forging a new path of my own. I’ve never been on Centrelink, I am a qualified chef in commercial cookery and am currently doing my certificate 4 studies at Tafe. I’ve been working since I was 16, five days a week. I am in the process of recording my first album in my room and train everyday in mixed martial arts to one day fight in the UFC. I care so much about my family, but I’m going to have to be by myself for a while. I feel I must move out, even with this pandemic happening. I’m not going to let it stop me. What they don’t know is I’m doing this all for them. I aspire to be the one to give my family opportunities they thought they’d never get in their lives. I don’t know why I aspire, maybe while writing this I’ll realise it, but I just feel deep down this is what I’ve got to do. I need to show them there’s more to life than video games and playing on your phone. Things like exercise, study, using your creativity. I have to admit during Covid it’s been very hard to do these things – the exercise and work and that – but it has given me a lot of free time with the creativity side of things. It’s hard to think I might not be training soon as we might have a second round of Covid here in New South Wales, but I’ll always be optimistic. Yes the economy is pretty screwed up, yes a second wave will have an affect on the speed of my progression, yes it’s going to be hard, but I’ve gotten so far in my life and I am determined to not let this defeat me. I want to show my family that anything is possible if you put your mind to it. I want to give them no more worries. I’ll do it all.
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales  health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the  NSW Health website . Anyone who attended the following venue for  more than an hour  during the following time period is considered a  close contact , and must immediately get tested and isolate for 14 days, regardless of whether a negative result is received: Arndell Park:  Blacktown Workers Sports Club (Grange Buffet), Sunday 3 January, 11.40am – 1.30pm Anyone who attended the Grange Buffet at the Blacktown Workers Sports Club for  less than one hour  between the above times must get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received. If symptoms appear, get tested again. Anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed below is a  casual contact  who must get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received. If any symptoms appear, get tested again. Campsie:  Campsie Super Fresh, 11 Anglo Rd, Campsie, Saturday 2 January, 12.30pm – 1pm Campsie:  Campsie Hills Seafood Shop, 190 Beamish St, Campsie, Friday 8 January, 12.35pm – 12.40pm Hurlstone Park:  Australia Post, 25 Crinan St, Hurlstone Park, Tuesday 5 January, 3.30pm – 4pm Warriewood:  Coles, Warriewood Square, Thursday 31 December 2pm – 2.10pm; Tuesday 5 January 12.45pm – 1pm Warriewood:  Woolworths, Warriewood Square, Monday 4 January 12.15pm – 12.45pm; Wednesday 6 January 12pm – 12.15pm Warriewood:  Aldi, Warriewood Square, Tuesday 5 January 12.10pm – 12.40pm; Friday 8 January 12pm – 12.25pm Warriewood:  Rebel, Wednesday 6 January 12.15pm – 12.30pm Anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed below should monitor for symptoms and, if they occur, get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received: Arndell Park:  Blacktown Workers Sports Club (Everywhere except Grange Buffet), Sunday 3 January 11.40am – 1.30pm Ashfield:  Michel’s Patisserie, Wednesday 6 January 4pm – 5pm Ashfield:  Coles, Wednesday 6 January, 4pm – 5pm Brookvale:  Pool and Spa Warehouse, Friday 8 January,   11.05am – 11.15am Hurlstone Park:  CK Convenience, 96 Duntroon St, Hurlstone Park, Monday 4 January, 11.45am – 12.30pm Lakemba:  Lakemba Pizza, 81 Haldon Street, Lakemba, Thursday 7 January, 4.20pm – 4.40pm Warriewood:  Pharmacy Less, Friday 8 January,   12.25pm – 12.35pm Anyone who used the following public transport routes at the times listed below should monitor for symptoms and, if they occur, get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received: Trains Hurlstone Park  to  Bankstown:  Wednesday 6 January,   10.58 am – 11.20am, Friday 8 January, 10.53am – 11.20am Bankstown  to  Hurlstone Park:  Wednesday 6 January,   1.50pm – 2.08pm, Friday 8 January, 2.37pm – 3.08pm All previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
SA fire prompts emergency warning; Victoria to reopen to regional NSW – as it happened:	With that, we’ll be closing the blog for today. Here is everything that happened: In  Victoria , the website to apply for a permit to enter the state is not yet working despite it becoming a requirement an hour ago. Earlier today, premier  Daniel Andrews  announced that everybody entering the state would need to apply for a permit, effective at 6pm today.  However, the online process is not yet live. . @VictorianCHO  has not yet signed the legal direction to enforce the permit system, hence the delay. Expected to be signed within the hour and website to go live then.  pic.twitter.com/bKEgyOF13p The blaze started just after 6pm, with flames and a thick cloud of black smoke blanketing the corner of Broadway and Glebe Point Road. Nearby  Victoria  Park pool was evacuated as a series of loud bangs came from the burning bus. Jeffrey Rae  was standing in Victoria Park when he saw the fire and ran over. He said: First I thought it was a shop on fire then I thought, ‘Oh shit, it’s a bus.’ I thought, ‘Oh my God there could be heaps of people in that’ ... There was black smoke everywhere, you couldn’t see anything. If it wasn’t for Covid, imagine, if it was normal times and that was full of people. Transport for NSW has confirmed there were no injuries sustained in the bus fire. A spokesman told Guardian Australia: “There will an investigation into the incident.” He also confirmed that it was a regular passenger bus, and the cause of the fire was not yet known. A spokesman for Fire and Rescue NSW has just confirmed to Guardian Australia that there were no people left on board a bus that caught fire this evening in  Sydney . He said: All the passengers and the driver were evacuated by the quick action of the driver. Firefighters were called to the bus at 6pm today when it caught alight on Parramatta Road at the corner of Glebe Point Road in Glebe. The spokesman said:  Firefighters quickly arrived on scene and identified there was a bus alight. They immediately got to work and by 6.20pm they have managed to control the vast majority of the fire. Firefighting operations will continue for a little while longer. Fire and Rescue NSW have asked people to avoid the area, which is the corner of Glebe Point Road and Parramatta Road in Glebe.  Please avoid the area.  https://t.co/hc4bk4So8H Black smoke over Victoria Park in Sydney after what looked like a bus on fire. Was swimming and saw the flames and a series of v loud pops or bangs before we were evacuated.  pic.twitter.com/1FfUnWoz59 just watched a bus on parramatta road catch fire and completely burn up over about 5 minutes—tyres exploded in the heat and everything A bus has caught fire in Sydney on the busy Parramatta Road in Glebe near  Victoria  Park. Video from the scene shows the commuter bus on fire at the corner of Glebe Point Road and Parramatta Road. Bus blazing on fire on Sydney’s Parramatta Rd  It’s insane.  Hope nobody injured or hurt.  pic.twitter.com/ceKG81jExB Guardian Australia’s  Josephine Tovey  was evacuated from a nearby pool. Was just evacuated from Vic Park pool, saw fire in the direction of Broadway, then a huge growing cloud of smoke. Everyone ran out.  pic.twitter.com/8xvoBccmQ0 A second person with the UK variant of Covid-19 has now tested positive in  Queensland , the state’s health department has confirmed. The partner of the quarantine hotel cleaner who initially tested positive last Thursday has also tested positive to the new variant. The state’s chief health officer,  Dr Jeannette Young , said the partner has been in quarantine since 7 January. Queensland had recorded no new cases of Covid-19 in the 24 hours until Monday, and earlier today the state lifted the three-day lockdown of Brisbane. This news was released just before 6pm today. Young said:  We know this particular variant of Covid-19 is more contagious, so this result is unsurprising. However, it highlights the importance of why the greater Brisbane lockdown was so important to ensure any potential spread of the virus is contained. Young added that additional testing of other close contacts of both the man and woman will continue this week. Queensland  Health  said there would be no change to the lifting of the Brisbane lockdown, or any change to the other restrictions that apply for the next 10 days. Here’s a little more on the NSW government response to that inquiry into the state’s koala populations. The inquiry had recommended several changes to try to halt the decline of koalas in NSW, including improved monitoring, prioritising koala corridors for conservation in urban development areas and increasing funding to the state’s Environmental Protection Authority for enforcement of habitat protection on land used for private native forestry. The government supported the recommendation to prioritise conservation of koala habitat corridors, but recommendations to finalise a new koala state environmental planning policy (Sepp) as soon as possible and establish a great koala national park were among those that were “noted”. Jacqui Mumford , the acting chief executive of the Nature Conservation of NSW, said the government’s response was “alarmingly relaxed about the looming extinction of an iconic native species” and delivered nothing new. She said: Basically the government response says, ‘Relax, we’ve got it covered – no need to do more.’ But koalas are more at risk now than they were late last year because the National party has torn down the koala Sepp and the obliteration of koala habitat continues. In its response to the committee, the government said it agreed “targeted action is needed to ensure that NSW koala populations increase over the next 30 years and beyond”. The government told the committee a new 2021-to-2026 koala strategy due this year would focus conservation and investment in areas “where they will deliver the most effective outcomes”.  The strategy is separate to the koala Sepp and will set out actions intended to stabilise and ultimately increase koala populations in the state. The NSW environment minister,  Matt Kean , has set a goal of doubling the number of koalas in NSW by 2050.  This is a *very* close call on Rowell Pl, Taylors Lakes. Couple of grass fires - one sparked by a car on fire in a paddock.  @7NewsMelbourne   pic.twitter.com/8CAW8O8KOC The NSW Greens and environment groups have described the Berejiklian government’s response to an inquiry into the state’s koala population as weak.  The inquiry found last year that koalas would go extinct in NSW unless the government acted urgently to protect koala habitat. The government said on Monday it would support 11 of the parliamentary inquiry’s 42 recommendations and gave in principle support to an additional 17.  The remaining 14 were noted, which the Greens MLC and inquiry chair  Cate Faehrmann  was another way of saying “rejected”. She said: This is an extremely disappointing response from the NSW government and shows they have no commitment to save koalas from extinction, let alone doubling their numbers by 2050. Recommendations such as the government urgently investigating the ‘utilisation of core koala habitat on private land and in state forests to replenish koala habitat lost in the bushfires’ appear to be rejected out of hand. The  Coalition  almost split last year over koala policy and in December reverted to a 25-year-old state environmental planning policy (Sepp) after failing to reach agreement on koala protections in a new Sepp and pass legislation through the upper house. Berejiklian said the government would look to draft a new koala policy this year.
Sex and the City to return for new series, stars confirm:	On a very basic level, it is only television. But there is TV that comes and goes and then there is television that defines an era. The hullabaloo that has greeted news that  Sex and the City  will be given a 2021 makeover, places it firmly in the latter category. The excitement follows confirmation from the US streaming service HBO Max of the long-swirling rumours that the video-on-demand arm of the prestige TV brand was considering commissioning a revival of the 90s and 00s show On Sunday night, three of the four stars of the original show,  Sarah Jessica Parker , Cynthia Nixon, and Kristin Davis, shared a trailer for the series on social media platforms. The reboot will be titled And Just Like That… and will be executive produced by Parker, Davis, Nixon, and Michael Patrick King. The promise is that the essential elements will be the same - the glitziness, the frankness of women talking about their lives and their sexuality, the stunning scenes of the New York cityscape. But there will be one key difference that is already causing a degree of doubt and reflection:  Kim Cattrall , who played the fourth member of the original group, Samantha, will not be returning for the rebooted series. At its staggeringly successful height, there were repeated accounts of friction between cast members and two years ago Cattrall made it clear that she felt her association with the series was over.  “I went past the finish line playing Samantha Jones because I loved Sex and the City,” she said. “It was a blessing in so many ways but after the second movie I’d had enough. I couldn’t understand why they wouldn’t just replace me with another actress instead of wasting time bullying. No means no.” First airing in 1998,   Sex and the City orbited around fashion-obsessed sex and relationships newspaper columnist Carrie Bradshaw (Parker) and her three friends, Miranda (Nixon), Charlotte (Davis) and Samantha (Cattrall). The show ran for six seasons, winning seven Emmys and eight Golden Globe awards. Based on the book by author Candace Bushnell and created for TV by Darren Star, the series was praised for its forthrightness about sex and criticised for its lack of diversity and its flippant treatment of some issues. The main thrust of the plot focused on the on-again off-again relationship between Carrie and her main love interest, Mr Big. Two feature films followed the TV series in 2004, both of which were written and directed by King. While they were commercially successful, they fared less well with critics, with  Sex and the City 2  (2010) receiving a particularly scathing critical reception. The weekend’s trailer, comprised mainly of shots of New York, reveals little by way of story details for the new series. A statement from  HBO  Max’s parent company, WarnerMedia, announcing the reboot was similarly vague, saying the series would “follow Carrie, Miranda and Charlotte as they navigate the journey from the complicated reality of life and friendship in their 30s to the even more complicated reality of life and friendship in their 50s”. Enthusiastic responses on Twitter and Instagram suggested there is still a sizeable audience for the show but there were also dissenting voices from some who say the original series was of its time and now seems dated. The focus on three straight white women and their particularly close cultural circle is likely to need a specific rethink for current times. Casting a cultural eye over the series in 2018, Chelsea Fairless, fashion editor, designer and co-founder of Every Outfit on Sex and the City and the #WokeCharlotte meme told the Guardian: “That show was as white as it gets. They didn’t ever have a person of colour as a series regular.” She said some crass scenes that would cause offence now: Samantha wearing a post-chemotherapy afro wig, Carrie’s sporting “ghetto gold” didn’t register as offensive on first viewing. “I’m white and I wasn’t educated or a particularly good ally at that point in my life.” But she added: “I did take issue with their handling of certain queer issues back in the 90s, because that is my community.” The new series will comprise of 10, half-hour episodes, and is scheduled to begin production in late spring in New York this year.
:	W hat worries Bill Gates most? The booming population of Africa looms over his foundation’s  latest global survey . By the end of this century there will be 4 billion more people on Earth – and 3 billion of these extra souls will be born in Africa. The challenge, he says, is that “Africa must almost quadruple its agricultural productivity to feed itself. That’s very daunting.” The philanthropist is torn between sending out a message of hope and a message of fear when I meet him at his foundation’s spacious campus in the heart of his hometown, Seattle. He is reaching for what works best to revive the west’s faltering conscience in the face of “America first” nationalism and rising pull-up-the-drawbridge populism in Europe. The spirit of generosity is under assault as government aid budgets  come under constant sniper fire  from right-wing politicians and their media. Half of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation spending goes to Africa. The funds put into the foundation by themselves and fellow philanthropist Warren Buffett now amount to more than than $50bn (£38bn). Until last year Gates, the Microsoft founder, was the world’s richest man. He has now been  overtaken by Amazon’s Jeff Bezos . Gates’ first instinct is optimism. Just consider the astonishing story of how far and how fast people have been brought out of abject poverty in a very short time. Since 2000, a billion people have been taken well over the line of $1.90-a-day wretchedness (£1.45), with the same uplift among those previously living on $3.20 a day. The foundation’s report bursts with remarkable data – too few people know about the galloping progress of humankind. Take India, where only 18 years ago almost one in five children were not enrolled in primary school – now, 97% attend classes. Look at the indicators on the report’s global scorecard for the UN’s  sustainable development goals  for 2030, and most things are improving almost everywhere. But there is a marked variation in the future trajectory: progress depends on the level of future investment. Today, the west takes some persuading that things are getting better, especially in Europe where countries like Britain have suffered a decade of falling real living standards and eye-watering austerity. The upbeat message of Gates – as well as those in his late friend Hans Rosling’s book  Factfulness , and Steven Pinker’s  Enlightenment Now  – telling us most of the world is on an unprecedented upswing, jars with our reality. Yet it is so: the world has never seen such a rapid rise in prosperity among most of the poor. Eager to encourage western countries to keep giving aid, Gates is well aware that Britain – as elsewhere – suffers frequent political attacks on its aid budget. The UK, Sweden and Norway are among the few reaching the UN aid spending target of  0.7% of gross national income , and all feel the cold blast of an anti-foreigner political grudge. “If you are saving lives for a very small amount of money, people should feel good about that,” Gates says emphatically, protesting at current cynicism about international aid organisations. Look what can be done, he keeps saying, pointing as an example to the brilliant education system in Vietnam, a poor country whose results outstrip far richer ones. If Britain needs encouragement, he says, “the data about the impact has been amazing. The UK has been very generous to the vaccine fund, for two miraculous vaccines – one for pneumonia, one for diarrhoea.” These sicknesses are now preventable “at extremely low cost to all the children of the world. The UK led that effort and saved over 10 million lives.” Do people across the UK know that? He admits a failure to spread the good news. “We’re being challenged to explain.” Everyone should know this message of hope. “We’re talking about uplifting the human condition in a fairly dramatic way.” But if hope doesn’t beat the new nativism infecting the western world, then fear is Gates’ ammunition of last resort. Ignore Africa at your peril. “The stability of  Africa  makes a huge difference to the entire world.” Here come the threats: “A pandemic like Ebola can spread very fast,” he warns, and many others spread even faster if there are no local health services to contain them. Migration is the other threat to touch Europe’s politics. Syria was a small country, he reminds us, yet its civil war exodus has “challenged the asylum system”. But watch out because “Africa is another order of magnitude”. The huge African youth boom is a strong theme in the report, where in a world of ageing and shrinking populations, Africa’s demographic bulge could be an asset or a threat. So it would be wise “to make their lives attractive” not just out of “pure human caring”. Invest in Africa’s young, their human capital, health and education, support more productive agriculture, protect subsistence farmers against climate change and see how self-interest blends with good works. Africa, he always stresses, is not one country. Of its 54 nations, many are leaping ahead, Ghana, Botswana and Rwanda among them. Those causing concern are the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Nigeria. On his recent visit he warned Nigerians against the country’s growing inequality, where oil wealth for a few is leaving millions behind. The foundation has spent $1bn so far on Nigeria. He says: “Their health system is worse than poorer countries, their agricultural advice largely broken down.” Government resources are low because “their level of taxation is one of the lowest in the world”. He sounds puzzled: “You would think politicians would compete on the basis of, ‘Hey, I’m going to run a primary health system really well, I’m going to get vaccination coverage up, I’m going to save lives …’ But other issues about religion and ethnicity come to the fore.” Gates is something of a political naif. After all, I point out, look at us in the west. Look at the gross and rising inequality in the US and UK, look at the need for better public services, yet politics is all too often about culture wars and identity issues – Brexit for us, guns and abortion for America. Look at the problem of homelessness, with tent cities on the streets of his rich Seattle, a most liberal city, where only 8% voted Trump. Yes, he’s trying to help the homelessness crisis: he gives £350m a year to US causes. So we reachthe great blond elephant in the room, President Trump, who has  stopped funding family planning organisations  that also offer abortions , stalling access to contraception where women need it most. Trump also attacked the foreign aid budget, but “fortunately the Congress, including a lot of Republicans, said no”. How much can Gates influence him? Here, he steps with the caution of a barefoot man crossing broken glass, anxious to say nothing that could further imperil America’s aid budget. “We have to work with Trump himself and the whole administration on ‘What is your vision for Africa?’ And as a human being who cares about human beings, as a country who doesn’t want to go fight foreign wars or deal with pandemics that are out of control …” Did that pitch work? What helped was the famous warning of Trump’s defence secretary, General James Mattis, that soft power – state department diplomacy and aid – prevents the need for hard power: “If you don’t fully fund the state department then I need to buy more ammunition.” Is Trump persuadable? Gates pauses to pace a cautious reply: “Yes, one of the things you can say, a plus or minus, is in very few areas does he have a fixed ideology. If there’s something where he feels he can look smart … particularly if it’s doing things in a different way than was done before, then yes, I think he’s open-minded.” But the truth is that it would be hard to find two mega-wealthy men further apart in their view of the world, their mission or their morality than Trump and Gates. While Trump slashes tax for the rich, Gates constantly calls for the wealthy to be taxed more. “The fact that people aren’t for an estate tax [inheritance tax] is kind of mind-boggling to me.” He says creation of hereditary aristocracies dampens dynamism. “It’s amazing we allow people to have gigantic amounts of money when the state should take more of that.” He wants higher tax on corporate profits too. Famously, he boasts he has paid $6bn in tax, more than anyone on Earth, “and gladly so”. He sounds perplexed by the forces of darkness that fail to see the need for equality at home and globally, that oppose redistribution through taxes and that sneer at the spirit of philanthropy. Surely, he says at the end of our interview, “the improvement in the world is something people should be excited about”. The Now generation is a series produced in collaboration with the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. You can read more about it  here
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
‘It has hit my dignity’: women fight for equal treatment from Indian army:	N idhi Rao* has 13 years’ experience serving in the communications wing of the Indian army. Now she is looking for work online and doesn’t know where to start. “I am jobless in the middle of a pandemic, with no financial security.” When Rao joined the army, female officers were contracted for five years, after which time they might get an extension of five more years. Unlike men, they were not offered a permanent job. Later, the initial commission period was changed to 10 years, which could be extended a further four years. While men retired with pensions and other benefits, women could never reach the pensionable service length of 20 years, and remained out of the senior ranks. In 2010, after a  group of female officers took their case to court , a ruling was made to put women on a par with men, but the Indian government challenged the order and refused to implement it. After a decade-long legal battle, in February last year India’s supreme court  ruled the situation discriminatory  and granted the women permanent status and entitlement to army pensions. The authorities set up a board, dividing women into categories. Those with 14 or more years’ service were given either a permanent commission (PC) or the option to retire with a pension. Those with 10-14 years’ service were selected for a permanent position or released from the army without a pension. In November, the army declared that  422 women out of 615  had been picked for permanent jobs. Rao was not among them. She says there were 68 such women from her service bracket who would be leaving without a pension. “Most of us are past our mid-30s and are married and have children. Some are expecting a baby; some could not plan it due to the job uncertainty,” she says. “After serving the institution for more than a decade, they are asking us to go and restart our careers, at this age, in the Covid-hit market. Who will hire us? Where do we go?” Anjali Sinha*, another affected soldier, says: “When I was pregnant, they asked me to run 5km and I did. When I gave birth, I rejoined within a week for fear of being relegated. I have worked in some of the most difficult terrains of the country, all while dealing with an unsupportive husband and family. And all this for what?” Sinha is in the 11th year of her service. She says: “I was deemed fit till a few months ago. But now when I am demanding PC, I have been declared unfit. More than anything, it has hit my dignity. I am questioning my worth every single day.” The female officers claim  a lack of transparency  in the selection process and say the true number granted PC may be lower than the army claims. What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth? Prakash Patil, an army veteran, says women undergo the same military training as men but while most of the male officers are absorbed into permanent roles and offered career progression opportunities, most of the women have to drop out. “When women were first inducted into the army in 1992, they were eulogised,” he says. “Newspapers published their interviews and compared them to female warriors of the past. But this antagonised many within the army, who simply could not bear the arrival of women. Hence, at every stage, women were made to prove themselves.” Rao says that once she lived with her baby in a tent in the desert, and on another occasion faced extreme pressure from her seniors to move to another location even though she was in the later stages of a high-riskpregnancy. Sinha says: “Men taunt us over maternity leave all the time. And, ironically, the same men then go on to take two-year-long breaks for specialised courses.” When male officers opt for permanent roles they can choose to study advanced technical courses, Patil says. But women miss out on the opportunity to take such degrees, reducing their chances of getting back into the job market. In September, Patil wrote to India’s president, Ram Nath Kovind, asking that the authorities grant permanency or pension to the 68 women, or help them get an advanced degree. He hasn’t received a reply. “What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth?” he says. “You cannot just leave out the women in their twilight years.” Lawyer Rakesh Kumar represents some of the 68 affected. “These women have been subjected to the policy’s gender bias. Further, there is no reasonable basis to distinguish them from those who have completed 14 years,” she says. “They should be at least allowed to serve 20 years.” Rao and Sinha believe it is a deliberate ploy to keep women out of uniform. There are about 1,500 women in the Indian army, less than 4% of the total strength. They are still  banned from combat roles . “Most of the meritorious women in our batch have been chucked out,” Sinha says. “Most are absolutely fit and have no disciplinary cases against us. We have international shooters, bikers, and mountaineers who have represented  India  abroad and won medals for their work. Were they so afraid of us eating up command posts in future?” *Names  have been changed . Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Top UK bosses are paid 115 times more than average worker, analysis finds:	Bosses of top British companies will have made more money by teatime on Wednesday than the average UK worker will earn in the entire year, according to an independent analysis of the vast gap in pay between chief executives and everyone else. The chief executives of FTSE 100 companies are paid a median average of £3.6m a year, which works out at 115 times the £31,461 collected by full-time UK workers on average, according to research by the High  Pay  Centre thinktank. On an hourly basis the bosses will have earned more by 5.30pm on Wednesday 6 January than the average worker will pick up across the whole of 2021. Warren Kenny, acting general secretary of the GMB union which represents more than 600,000 workers, said: “These repugnant figures expose the sheer scale of inequality and exploitation in the workplace. “The workers who have made heroic sacrifices to keep society together during the [coronavirus] outbreak deserve better – it is time for corporate leaders, shareholders and politicians to wake up and take action.” Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said the fact that bosses had earned so much money already “tells you everything you need to know about how unfair our economy is”. “Our army of minimum wage workers – carers, shop assistants and delivery drivers – have kept the country going through the pandemic. Not these CEO’s at the top raking in far more than their share,” she said. “ If the government is serious about levelling up Britain, it needs to start by levelling up pay and conditions for those we most rely on, and stop the threat to freeze key workers’ pay.” Luke Hildyard, the director of the High Pay Centre, which campaigns for executive pay restraint, said: “Pay for top CEOs today is about 120 times that of the typical UK worker. Estimates suggest it was around 50 times at the turn of the millennium or 20 times in the early 1980s.” The online supermarket  Ocado has been singled out  as having the biggest pay gap between those at the top and those on the shop floor. Its chief executive,  Tim Steiner, was paid £58.7m in 2019  , which works out at 2,605 times the £22,500 paid to the online grocery delivery company’s staff on average. It means Steiner was paid about 10 times as much as the average Ocado worker’s annual salary for just one day’s work. The High Pay Centre estimates that chief executive pay levels remained essentially flat in their analysis over the past year, while pay for UK workers had increased slightly. It means that CEOs have to work 34 hours of the year to surpass median earnings, rather than just 33 hours in 2020. The thinktank’s calculations assume “a highly demanding workload” for CEOs of 320 12-hour days of work a year. This equates to hourly pay of £941 an hour. It would take a worker on the full minimum wage rate of £8.72 an hour 212 years to earn the same as the average CEO earns in a year.
I hear people say that people who receive Centrelink are lazy. Hello, I want to work!:	Name:  Madeleine Rose Age:  22 Dreams of:  Being a teacher After a festive, blissful few weeks celebrating Christmas and New Years, I am able to finally relax and reflect. I was able to spend so much time with my family, who I barely got to see last year. I’m just so thankful that Victoria managed to get our second wave under control and that I was able to have some time completely unafraid to catch Covid. Though with that being said, tribulations are still very much present in my life. I’m still without a job, despite applying for what seems like hundreds of roles. That is an exaggeration; I must admit the real number is about 70. I need a job which can work with my schooling. This means I have applied for a lot of retail and hospitality jobs, but nowhere is hiring. Even the cafe I used to work at isn’t hiring because they don’t have the demand. Applying for these casual jobs is not an easy process anymore. Each job application requires a cover letter, then they either have questionnaires or a 20-minute long test. Plus it’s incredibly hard to find organisations or employers willing to hire someone without two years’ experience in that field. I only have a few months of being a barista on my resume – but how am I meant to get experience? Am I supposed to volunteer for two years without getting money to live? I don’t know what to do. I don’t have anyone to “help” give me a foot in the door, or whatever the saying is. I have not received one email back, not one text or call stating if I have been rejected or been accepted to go for an interview. I feel like I’m constantly getting discouraged and whatever I do, I’m failing. It is so tempting just to quit trying to get a job. It would also be a lot less stressful. However I think of what the alternative, of not having a job, would mean and that thought is terrifying. I hear people say constantly that people who receive Centrelink are lazy and want to bludge off the system and don’t want to work. Hello, I want to work! I want to get a job and contribute to society again, but what am I meant to do if nowhere will hire me? Pre-Covid, I had a job and was studying at uni. Though it was tough and oftentimes exhausting, it felt great to know that I was being proactive. But now, I have nothing. Uni doesn’t start for another two months. How else am I able to chase my dreams? During all this I have noticed something truly bizarre. My eyesight is extremely poor and I can barely see how I used it to. I think this is one of the side effects of lockdown no one predicted. I mean, staring at a TV screen, iPad screen and phone screen for nine months straight has made my eyesight so poor that I definitely need glasses. Which is another expense I cannot afford at the minute. I haven’t seen an optometrist to get tested, partly due to being afraid to see the damage done to my eyes, and also stupidly, I’m worried about the expensive bill that I will get from it. So now I have to deal with my constant headaches and watch as things become more blurred in the background. I have also rapidly put on weight during lockdown. It is my own fault really. You would think that being at home 24/7 for nine months would give one time to work on their health, but that has not been the case for me. Not at all. I have ordered so much takeaway combined with not doing any exercise at all. This has definitely made me feel more incapable of doing the things that I used to before, like I’m struggling to walk to the bus stop or enjoying playing in the sand at the beach. Now more than ever before, I have to start prioritising my health, even if it inconveniences me. So now my new year resolution for 2021 is to get a job and be healthier. Hopefully 2021 is the year I can stick to my goals.
US job market weakens in December, fuelling hopes of more stimulus – as it happened:	Just after Wall Street opened, the main indices hit new all-time highs. The Nasdaq rose more than 100 points to 13,176 while the Dow Jones touched 31,140 and the S&P 500 climbed to 3,824. Over here, the FTSE 100 index is flat, Germany’s Dax is 0.71% higher, France’s CAC has gained 0.5% and Italy’s FTSE MiB is unchanged. Stock markets shrugged off news that the  US economy unexpectedly shed 140,000 jobs in December , the first decline since April, while the jobless rate remained at 6.7%. Investors are betting on more fiscal stimulus from the incoming president Joe Biden, as both chambers of US Congress are now controlled by Democrats. In the eurozone, the unemployment rate fell unexpectedly to 8.3% in November  but youth unemployment rose, to 18.4%.  German industrial production was strong , keeping alive hopes that Europe’s biggest economy avoided a double dip recession. Oil prices have climbed to 11-month highs and bitcoin has hit a new record high. Thank you for reading! Have a good weekend. We’ll be back on Monday. Stay safe - JK The S&P 500 and the tech-focused Nasdaq have hit fresh record highs. Trading has begun on Wall Street, and shares are up ! The global economy has just had its worst year of the modern age and 2021 has not got off to the best of starts either,  writes the Guardian’s economics editor Larry Elliott . Yet  stock markets  appear impervious to bad news, with the MSCI world index of developed market shares 10% above its pre-crisis peak. There are a number of reasons why equity markets are so hot. The US dollar erased gains made before the payrolls figures, and is now down 0.09% against a basket of major currencies. Ayush Ansal, chief investment officer at the UK hedge fund Crimson Black Capital, says: The dollar remained fairly resilient in the immediate aftermath of the print as such dire data will reinforce the prospect of the incoming administration reigniting the country with a major fiscal stimulus package. The fact the Democrats now control the Senate, too, gives policymakers in the new administration carte blanche to supercharge the economy and try and move the country on from the unprecedented events on Capitol Hill. Wall Street is now looking forward, to a time beyond Trump, but at the same time market watchers are acutely aware that this is still arguably the most tense time in American political history for decades. In financial markets, European bourses are holding on to their gains, while the FTSE 100 index in London is flat at 6,852. Despite the weakness in the job market, the  US economy  is unlikely to fall back into recession, as a $900bn stimulus programme has been agreed by Congress and the incoming president Joe Biden is expected to expand spending further to prop up the economy. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, said: The December jobs report marks the first drop in payrolls since April, and an end to the labour market progress that’s been underway since the recovery from the pandemic began back in May. Given the accelerated rise in coronavirus cases recently and the associated drop back in activity, this was not entirely unexpected. Yet it will not go unnoticed by policymakers. With a Blue sweep controlling Congress, further fiscal stimulus is the name of the game and today’s data will only assist that agenda. By contrast, the market reaction to today’s weak data is set to be muted. Investors are already looking through this temporary period of economic weakness and instead focusing on the brighter outlook where fiscal spending, monetary stimulus and mass distribution of the COVID-19 vaccines together ensure the US economy quickly returns to its pre-pandemic path. Here is our full story on the weak US jobs numbers. The recovery in the US jobs market collapsed in December, the last full month of Donald Trump’s presidency, as coronavirus infections soared across the country,  writes Dominic Rushe in New York . The US lost 140,000 jobs in December, down from a gain of 245,000 in November, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The loss ended seven months of jobs growth with the leisure and hospitality sector once again bearing the biggest losses. The unemployment rate stayed at 6.7%, close to twice as high as it was in February before Covid-19 hit the US. It is also three percentage points higher than the 4.5% rate Trump inherited from his predecessor Barack Obama. In the leisure and hospitality sector, 498,000 jobs were lost in December, taking losses in this sector to 3.9 million since February,  the US Labor Department said . Most of the latest loss (372,000) was at establishments serving food and drink. Other areas fared better: Factory jobs increased by 38,000 after an upwardly revised rise of 35,000 in November. Jobs in construction and retail increased by 51,000 and 120,500 respectively. It is the first decline in non-farm payrolls in eight months, and suggests the US jobs market recovery stalled in December. The fall was largely due to job losses at restaurants, bars, cafes and hotels. Adam Button, chief currency analyst at Forex Live, says : The headline was poor but the positive revisions over the last two months mitigated the damage. The earnings numbers are interesting but I’m inclined to think that’s due to lower wage workers losing their jobs. Average hourly earnings rose by 0.8%, while economists had expected a 0.2% gain. The  US economy  shed 140,000 jobs in December, according to the latest US non-farm payrolls data. Economists had expected an increase of 71,000. However, November’s increase was revised higher to 336,000 from 245,000, and October’s rise was revised to 654,00 from 610,000. The unemployment rate remained at 6.7%. U.S. payrolls shrink in December, by 140,000. Another piece of evidence that the  #economy  was losing momentum as 2020 closed. More stimulus needed.  pic.twitter.com/HUumWXc9uZ The US non-farm payrolls data comes out in a couple of minutes. The non-farm payroll (NFP) figure is a key economic indicator for the United States economy. It is also referred to as the monthly market mover. Find out why it has been given this nickname here:  https://t.co/yOUVEEqhc5   pic.twitter.com/d9ZGWpcPuP In other good news, the Covid-19 vaccine developed by BioNTech and Pfizer has been shown to work against a key mutation in the more contagious coronavirus variants discovered in the UK and South Africa.  A laboratory study by Pfizer and and the University of Texas, which has not been reviewed by peers yet, found that the vaccine can neutralise the virus with the so-called N501Y mutation of the spike protein. More  here . You can read more about the  Moderna vaccine approval  on our coronavirus live blog: The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said: We have already vaccinated nearly 1.5 million people across the UK and Moderna’s vaccine will allow us to accelerate our vaccination programme even further once doses become available from the spring. Futures tracking Wall Street’s main indices have climbed to new highs ahead of the US jobs data at 1:30pm GMT. The Dow Jones futures are up nearly 0.3%, the S&P 500 is 0.4% higher and the Nasdaq 0.5% ahead.  All three indices hit record highs yesterday and the S&P closed above 3,800 points for the first time amid expectations of a bigger stimulus package and infrastructure spending once Joe Biden takes office, triggering buying of financial, industrial and material stocks.
Hyundai's value surges by $9bn amid reports of Apple electric car deal:	Hyundai’s value surged by $9bn (£6.6bn) on Friday after reports that it could join with  Apple  in developing a driverless electric vehicle – despite confusion as it backtracked on a statement acknowledging “early discussion” with the iPhone manufacturer. Investors sent the South Korean carmaker’s share price on the Seoul exchange up almost 20%, as local media reported a possible tie-up on electric cars and batteries with Apple, which has been  developing its own vehicle technology . Reports on South Korea’s Economic Daily claimed the two firms were in talks. Hyundai originally issued a statement saying: “Apple and Hyundai are in discussion, but as it is early stage, nothing has been decided.” A subsequent statement to the stock exchange from Hyundai omitted any reference to Apple, merely saying there were “requests for cooperation on joint development of autonomous electric vehicles from various companies”. Last month it was reported that Apple was hoping to  launch a self-driving personal vehicle by 2024 , which, a source told Reuters, could represent an evolution in electric car battery technology in the way the iPhone evolved mobile phones. It was suggested that Apple could look for a traditional manufacturing partner to help make the car. Apple did not comment on the Hyundai statement. The scramble to invest in Hyundai comes after a year in which the share price of the market leader in electric vehicles, Tesla, has rocketed – to the extent that chief executive and major shareholder  Elon Musk this week overtook  Amazon’s Jeff Bezos as the world’s richest man. An Apple vehicle would have the design cachet to compete with the California company, which  shipped almost 500,000 vehicles  last year and has pushed the boundaries of autonomous driving as well as electric car technology. Hyundai has been keen to burnish its credentials, last month announcing it would develop in-house its own electric car platform and battery systems, expecting to extend the range of a single charge to 500km. It has also had an eye on more futuristic technologies, establishing a self-driving joint venture, Motional, with car component supplier Aptiv and ploughing $2bn into the new firm. Motional has announced plans with ride-hailing firm Lyft to launch robotaxis in the US from 2023. An investor in robotics firms, Hyundai in 2019 unveiled a  concept “walking” robocar  for tougher terrain. Apple is notoriously tight-lipped about its product development plans but it has been reported to have been working on  Project Titan , its electric and autonomous car vision, since 2014.
Capitol attack: two men arrested over zip-tie handcuff allegations:	Two men who are believed to have been seen carrying plastic “zip tie” handcuffs during the deadly riot at the US Capitol – suggesting plans to kidnap lawmakers in an attempt to overturn Donald Trump’s election defeat – were arrested on Sunday. The US Department of Justice announced charges against Larry Rendell Brock of Texas and Eric Gavelek Munchel of Tennessee and said the cases were being prosecuted by the US attorney for the District of Columbia and the counterterrorism section of the DoJ. “It is alleged that Brock was identified as one of the individuals who unlawfully entered the US Capitol,”  a DoJ statement said , adding that he had been “wearing a green helmet, green tactical vest with patches, black and camo jacket, and beige pants holding a white flex cuff, which is used by law enforcement to restrain and/or detain subjects”. Munchel was alleged to have been photographed “carrying plastic restraints, an item in a holster on his right hip, and a cellphone mounted on his chest with the camera facing outward”. The DoJ also said the FBI was still “looking for individuals who may have incited or promoted violence of any kind”. The news came as more graphic details of  violence and brutality in the riot  emerged and as a number of suspects sat in custody. Donald Trump  seems certain to be impeached over the riot, which he incited in remarks to supporters outside the White House on Wednesday. South Carolina Democrat James Clyburn, the House majority whip, told Fox News Sunday: “If we are the people’s House, let’s do the people’s work and let’s vote to impeach this president.” Alarming footage of the riot showed a bloodied officer crushed in a doorway and screaming. Other officers were reportedly beaten with pipes; one was seen tumbling over a railing into a crowd below after being body-slammed from behind. Brian Sicknick, 42 and a 12-year veteran officer, died after he was  struck in the head  with a fire extinguisher while “physically engaging” the rioters, Capitol police said. On Sunday it was reported that  another Capitol officer had died , though the death was not immediately linked to the riot. Speaking to CBS’s Face the Nation, the Missouri Republican senator Roy Blunt said: “Officer Sicknick, now Officer [Howard] Liebengood, both their lives were ended this week. “I’ll be interested in finding out if there was a connection with Officer Liebengood. But mostly I’m interested in reaching out to both of these families.  “These are people we saw every day, particularly Officer Liebengood, who was very much assigned to the Senate side of the building. And, you know, you have that loss. “You have four other deaths of people who got involved in something that they absolutely should not have gotten involved in.” One pro-Trump rioter was shot and killed by law enforcement. The other deaths involved medical emergencies. The attack forced lawmakers to go into hiding for hours, delaying their vote to affirm Joe Biden’s election win. Police arrested one man alleged to have brought guns and explosives to Washington; another was heavily armed and allegedly threatened to kill House speaker Nancy Pelosi. Chants of “Hang Mike Pence”, the vice-president, were heard during the riot. In photos and videos many participants identified themselves, shouting their names or posting selfies to social profiles – some while openly taunting the prospect of prosecution and many not wearing masks against the threat of Covid-19, thereby aiding their identification. According to the Miami Herald, Adam Johnson of Parrish, Florida, posted on social media that he was in Washington. Those posts were deleted but users identified the 36-year-old father of five as a man smiling while stealing Pelosi’s lectern. He was arrested on Friday on a federal warrant. Another man, seen wearing face paint and a horned fur hat in the Senate chamber, was charged with counts including violent entry and disorderly conduct on Capitol grounds. Jacob Anthony Chansley of Arizona, a self-styled “QAnon shaman” more commonly known as Jake Angeli, remained in custody in Arizona pending a detention hearing. Prosecutors said additional cases remained under seal and dozens of people were sought by federal agents. The US attorney in Washington vowed that “all options were on the table” for charges, including possibly sedition. Doug Jensen, a 41-year-old Iowa man, was jailed early on Saturday on federal charges including trespassing and disorderly conduct. Video posted online showed a man who appeared to be Jensen pursuing a Black officer up an interior flight of stairs as a mob trailed behind. At several points, the officer said “get back”, to no avail. Richard Barnett, an Arkansas man shown in a widely seen photo sitting in Pelosi’s office with his boots on her desk, was arrested on Friday. Barnett, 60, turned himself in and was jailed in Fayetteville, without bond pending an initial court appearance. Derrick Evans, a West Virginia state lawmaker who posted videos showing himself pushing his way inside the Capitol, was arrested on Friday by the FBI and charged with entering restricted federal property. Evans submitted a letter of resignation to West Virginia governor Jim Justice and apologised. He livestreamed himself rushing into the building with Trump supporters and was seen fist-bumping a police officer and shouting: “Our house!” The mob was enraged over Trump’s election loss, which the president continues to baselessly claim was the result of fraud. Several  Republicans  and cabinet officials have excoriated Trump. Two senators have called for him to resign. Former acting White House chief of staff Mick Mulvaney told Fox News Sunday he was “shocked”, “angered” and “embarrassed”. “I feel a lot of emotions this week,” said Mulvaney, who resigned as Trump’s Northern Ireland envoy. “And I’m still trying to figure out what I could have done differently. I’ve been out of the White House for eight months.” Fox News host Chris Wallace suggested the former congressman, like others in his party, “didn’t have the spine” to stand up to Trump.
Melania Trump pays tribute to dead of Capitol attack but casts herself as victim:	Melania Trump  broke her silence on the attack on the Capitol on Monday – to issue a statement saying that she honored all those who died, including four supporters of her husband, who incited the mob to violent action. But she also used the opportunity to portray herself as a victim, saying the shocking and violent attack on one of the hearts of American democracy had led to “salacious gossip, unwarranted personal attacks and false misleading accusations” about her. Donald Trump continues to refuse to admit the reality of his electoral defeat by Joe Biden, although he has conceded that he will leave office on 20 January. The first lady published  a statement on the White House website , under the title “Our Path Forward”. “It has been inspiring,” she wrote, “to witness firsthand what the people of our great nation will do for one another, especially when we are at our most vulnerable. “… Most recently, my heart goes out to: air force veteran Ashli Babbit, Benjamin Philips, Kevin Greeson, Rosanne Boyland, and Capitol police officers Brian Sicknick and Howard Liebengood. I pray for their families comfort and strength during this difficult time.” Sicknick died after confronting the pro-Trump rioters who attacked the Capitol, and being hit in the head with a fire extinguisher.  Liebengood , who also defended the Capitol,  reportedly  killed himself. Whether his case is linked to the Capitol attack remains unclear. Babbit, whose social media use  showed her to be a devoted conspiracy theorist , was shot and killed by a law enforcement officer as she and others sought to force entry into the inner sanctums of the Capitol. The others who died suffered medical emergencies. Trump supporters were arrested, charges including bringing guns and explosives to Washington, threatening to kill the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, and roving the Capitol  carrying plastic “zip-tie” handcuffs , suggesting plans to kidnap lawmakers. Chants of “ Hang Mike Pence ” were heard, aimed at Trump’s vice-president. White nationalists and neo-Nazis were also among the crowd, which was overwhelmingly white. Trump had told the mob to march on the Capitol and “fight like hell” in his attempt to overturn election defeat by Biden. He has since disowned those who rioted on his instruction, but refuses to admit defeat and faces calls for removal via the 25th amendment or impeachment. The first lady said she was “disappointed and disheartened with what happened last week”. But after resignations among senior aides  reportedly  appalled by her initial silence over the riot – which occurred while she was  supervising a photo shoot  – she added: “I find it shameful that surrounding these tragic events there has been salacious gossip, unwarranted personal attacks and false misleading accusations on me – from people who are looking to be relevant and have an agenda. “This time is solely about healing our country and its citizens. It should not be used for personal gain.” In a passage which carried faint echoes of a condemnation of her husband by another high-profile American born in central Europe –  Arnold Schwarzenegger  – the Slovenia-born Trump said: “Our nation must heal in a civil manner. Make no mistake about it, I absolutely condemn the violence that has occurred on our nation’s Capitol. Violence is never acceptable. “… I would like to call on the citizens of this country to take a moment, pause, and look at things from all perspectives. “I implore people to stop the violence, never make assumptions based on the color of a person’s skin or use differing political ideologies as a basis for aggression and viciousness. We must listen to one another, focus on what unites us, and rise above what divides us. “It is inspiring to see that so many have found a passion and enthusiasm in participating in an election, but we must not allow that passion to turn to violence.” She also said it had been “the honor of my lifetime to serve as your first lady”. That service has just a few days left to run. Though Donald Trump faces a second impeachment, he looks set to remain in office until inauguration day. He is, however, reported to be likely to leave Washington before then, taking his family with him.
Developing economies need a fairer way to help them decarbonise:	W ith the US president-elect Joe Biden’s incoming administration promising a fresh, rational approach to climate change, now is an ideal time to make the case for a  World Carbon Bank  that would transfer and coordinate aid and technical assistance to help developing countries decarbonise. The proposed  Green New Deal  in the US and the European commission’s  European Green Deal  have laudable environmental goals but are too inward-looking. When an entire building is burning, to concentrate firefighting resources on one floor would only delay, not prevent, its destruction. According to the International Energy Agency, almost all the net growth in carbon dioxide emissions over the next two decades will come from emerging markets. Although China recently pledged to achieve zero net emissions by  2060 , it is sobering to consider that it accounts for half of the world’s coal output and half of its coal consumption. India, too, is  highly dependent  on its plentiful coal reserves, and will likely remain so despite strong advances in solar power. For all the fanfare accompanying the 2015  Paris climate agreement , the share of clean energy in global energy investment is still only  about 34% , almost exactly the level five years ago. Wind and solar account for only 8% of global energy. The IEA estimates that allowing existing power plants to operate for the remainder of their expected lifespans in their current form would by itself cause global temperatures to rise by  1.7C  relative to pre-industrial levels. Right now, the  most widely discussed approach  to encouraging developing economies to cut their CO 2  emissions is a carbon border tax on imports from countries without adequate carbon-pricing systems. The EU is  considering  such a measure and the Climate Leadership Council (whose members include the incoming US Treasury secretary Janet Yellen) also has  advocated  it. Economists almost universally favour  carbon taxes  (Europe’s carbon-pricing system is a clumsier version) so that producers and consumers take account of how their actions affect the global commons. A border-tax adjustment is aimed at prodding developing economies to introduce their own carbon taxes. The policy is conceptually sound but is too static and difficult to implement. Developing economies have neither the resources nor the technology to transform themselves overnight For starters, developing economies have neither the resources nor the technology to transform themselves overnight. Part of the reason advanced economies have been able to mitigate their CO2   emissions is that global manufacturing has migrated to emerging markets that have invested heavily in energy. The average age of coal plants in Asia is  12 years , compared with 43 years in advanced economies. Given that the lifespan of a coal plant is about 50 years, and coal is one of the few natural resources that China and India possess in abundance, the cost to developing Asia of decommissioning its coal plants is huge. And then there is Africa, where the number of people lacking access to electricity has risen during the Covid-19 pandemic, to almost  600 million . The gap between the developing world’s ability to deal with climate change and the ambitious plans being discussed in advanced economies is just another example of the huge disparity in wealth and resources between the global north and the global south. In response to the coronavirus crisis, for example, advanced economies  marshalled  fiscal and credit support in 2020 averaging over 16% of GDP, compared with 6% in emerging markets and 2% in developing economies, according to the International Monetary Fund. And this wide gap does not take into account the potential for pandemic-related debt build-ups to morph into a full-blown developing-country debt crisis over the next couple of years, making decarbonisation even more difficult. Global carbon pricing is an essential part of any long-term solution to the climate crisis but advanced economies need to provide the developing world with a carrot and not just a stick. This should come in the form of highly concessional financing, combined with technical expertise and sharing of best practices – all guided by a World Carbon Bank. The IMF, the World Bank and regional development banks have an important role to play but their mandates are too diffuse for them to deal effectively with the climate challenge on their own. Meanwhile, those who think that government-to-government assistance should not play any role in climate solutions need to bear in mind that state-owned firms, which are not terribly responsive to economic incentives, increasingly  dominate  the global coal industry. Is it too optimistic to think that inwardly focused advanced economies will ever be willing to earmark large amounts of aid – at least $100bn to $200bn a year – to help the developing world meet climate goals? The response to the Covid-19 crisis so far offers little encouragement; the G20’s Debt Service Suspension Initiative has delivered a  few billion dollars  of relief to 40 very poor countries but that pales in comparison to the trillions that rich countries have spent on their own citizens. An enhanced carbon tax or pricing regime could be one source of sustainable funding over the longer term but the problem is too urgent to wait for this to fall into place. The goal of achieving zero net CO2 emissions by 2050, which the EU has adopted and the US is likely to do soon, is praiseworthy. But not-in-my-backyard, or nimby, environmentalism is no way to solve a global problem. •  Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard University and was the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund from 2001 to 2003. ©  Project Syndicate
Bobi Wine confronted by Ugandan police during appeal for ICC inquiry:	Police in  Uganda  have confronted the presidential candidate Bobi Wine during an online press conference where he announced a petition to the international criminal court to investigate rights abuses in the country. During the meeting with journalists on Thursday evening, a week ahead of tense elections in Uganda, officers appeared to haul Wine from a vehicle while he pleaded: “I am not even allowed to park on the side of the road.” Wine said police fired live rounds and teargas and arrested his campaign team in the latest episode of  an escalating crackdown  on him and his team by state security forces ahead of the elections. In a defiant statement posted on Twitter, Wine said his battle to unseat the Ugandan president,  Yoweri Museveni , would continue. “Today they arrested all the 23 members of our new campaign team & impounded the cars. They thought they had broken our back,” he wrote. “The wave is unstoppable! #WeAreRemovingADictator.” The God we serve never sleeps! Today they arrested all the 23 members of our new campaign team & impounded the cars. They thought they had broken our back. I literally went to Namayingo alone. But this is how we were recieved! The wave is unstoppable! #WeAreRemovingADictator   pic.twitter.com/uMv17SCWcq The confrontation played out hours after  the deadly riot in the US Capitol  led to questions about whether some governments would be emboldened to push back harder against people invoking democratic ideals like fair elections. Wine has drawn the ire of the 76-year-old Museveni, who has governed Uganda since 1986 and who he has repeatedly branded a dictator. The president retains strong support in Uganda, with decades of economic growth and subsidies winning him a mass following, particularly in rural areas. Yet Wine’s campaign has galvanised staunch opposition to Museveni, and his stand against an old ruling elite and inequality has inspired young people in urban areas, and many across the continent. In response to a strong challenge to Museveni’s rule, Uganda has experienced its worst political violence in a generation and there have been repeated arrests and attacks on opposition figures. Hours after Wine announced his candidacy in November, he was arrested, and  more than 50 people were shot dead by security forces  in the protests that followed. Those deaths form a critical part of Wine’s petition to the ICC to investigate alleged acts of torture, mutilation and murder of civilian protesters. The petition by Wine and two other alleged torture victims mentions Museveni, the security minister Elly Tumwine, and other security officials. Wine was a popular singer before he won a seat in parliament and attracted national attention as the beret-wearing leader of a movement known as People Power. In December, Wine  said one of his bodyguards was killed by military police  who ran him over as Wine’s convoy was taking a wounded journalist to seek medical help. Military police denied involvement, saying the bodyguard had fallen from a speeding car. Last week  Wine told the Guardian  in an interview that he is forced to wear a bulletproof jacket, describing the campaign as “like a war and a battlefield”. “The regime is after our lives. It’s after hurting and incapacitating us. Every day we live is as if it’s the last one,” he said. Authorities have clamped down on opposition rallies,  stating they are in breach of Covid-19 restrictions . Last month the government wrote to Google, asking it to shut down 14 YouTube video channels that often host opposition figures because it said they had incited riots. Fears have also grown that the internet could be shut down on election day, 14 January, after similar moves in the last election in 2016. The Associated Press contributed to this report
China tightens curbs as cases surge; Denmark restricts all travel – as it happened:	A quick recap of what has happened in the past few hours: We will be closing off this blog soon. You can find our ongoing live coverage  here  and our new blog  here . Viral fragments of Covid-19 have been detected at a sewerage plant in south-east  Queensland . Fragments were  detected at the Redcliffe wastewater treatment plant yesterday,  in a sample taken from the plant earlier in the week. Queensland’s chief health officer,  Dr Jeanette Young , said: This does not mean we have new cases of Covid-19 in these communities, but we are treating this detection with absolute caution.  A positive sewage result means that someone who has been infected was shedding the virus. Infected people can shed viral fragments and that shedding can happen for several weeks after the person is no longer infectious. She added: Given the recent case of community transmission in Brisbane and the regular detection of cases in other states, I am urging anyone who feels unwell in the communities of  Clontarf, Deception Bay, Kippa-Ring, Margate, Newport, Redcliffe, Rothwell, Scarborough and Woody Point  to get tested and isolate ... If there is a case we are not yet aware of, it is critical we detect it through our testing mechanisms as quickly as possible to contain any potential spread. Australia ’s federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , says he will be discharged from hospital in Sydney this afternoon. He spent the night in the Royal Prince Alfred hospital after a car accident in Marrickville yesterday. Will be discharged from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital this afternoon and continue treatment as an outpatient- thank you for all the good wishes and a huge thanks to the paramedics, police, doctors, nurses, orderlies, radiographers and other hospital staff - you are the best Back in  Australia , Labor’s Indigenous affairs spokeswoman,  Linda Burney , senator  Patrick Dodson  and  Warren Snowden  have said  a consultation report on creating an Indigenous voice to government  “fails” because the models it proposes would not be able to provide full and frank advice, and be protected against abolition. In a joint statement, they said:  Labor thanks members of the advisory groups who worked on this interim report under difficult circumstances. Many will be disappointed with the government’s refusal to consider a constitutionally enshrined voice to the parliament. Three and a half years ago, First Nations leaders clearly expressed our desire for a First Nations voice to the parliament enshrined in the constitution – through the Uluru Statement – while the government banned its advisory group from even considering this. It is also difficult to see any progress being made before the next election. It is critical to real and lasting progress for First Nations people that we have a say in the policies and laws that affect us. A voice must be able to provide full and frank advice. It must be secure and it should not be subject to the whims of the government of the day. This report fails in that context. Labor remains committed to all three elements of the Uluru Statement: a constitutionally enshrined First Nations voice to the parliament; a Makarrata Committee to oversee a process for agreement and treaty-making; as well as a process for Truth-telling. Mainland  China  reported 33 new cases of Covid-19  on Friday, down from 53 on Thursday.  Most of the cases were in Hebei province, where a coronavirus cluster has grown by more than 130 cases in the past week.  From Reuters: T he National Health Commission said in a statement that  14 of the 17 locally transmitted infections were in Hebei , the province surrounding Beijing which entered a “wartime mode” this week as it battles a new cluster of coronavirus infections. Shijiazhuang, Hebei’s capital, announced on Saturday it would suspend service on its subway . Earlier this week, authorities banned people from leaving the city in an effort to curb the spread of the disease. Shijiazhuang is launching mass testing across its population of 11 million. On 8 January, municipal authorities told residents they must stay home for at least seven days even after they complete a nucleic acid test. The commission also reported  38 new asymptomatic cases, down from 57 a day earlier .   China does not classify these patients, who have been infected by the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes the disease but are not yet showing any Covid-19 symptoms, as confirmed cases.  Speaking of cases of the UK variant in  Australia , New South Wales authorities have released a statement saying a woman who was carrying that strain, and was released from hotel quarantine on 5 January after completing an isolation period and going 72 hours without any symptoms, was  not infectious when she returned to the community . They said: The person had been medically assessed the day before, met all exit criteria in place at the time, and on the basis of those criteria were considered clear of Covid-19. On the 7 January, genome sequencing found the person had been infected with the new UK variant of Covid-19. As a precaution, the person was immediately contacted by NSW Health and asked to isolate for retesting.  The person returned a positive test with a high CT value, which indicates low levels of infection, and returned to the Special Health Accommodation . This person attended several venues in Burwood in Sydney’s inner west on 6 and 7 January, which, as a precaution, were included in a public health alert released by NSW Health on Friday night. The person has one household contact who has tested negative to date. The full list of NSW exposure sites is  here . The  UK variant of Covid-19 has been detected in a case at the Howard Springs quarantine facility in the Northern Territory  in Australia. It’s the first time the variant has been detected in the NT. It has also been detected in Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia and Victoria.  Genomic sequencing revelled that a 26-year-old woman, who arrived at Howard Springs on an Australian government repatriation flight on 30 December and tested positive to Covid-19 on 31 December, was carrying the variant. The NT government said the woman remains under the care of health officials and under isolation.  Passengers and air crew on the same flight have been tested twice already with no positive cases resulting, and will be retested today.  China has announced fresh lockdowns in Hebei province, which borders Beijing, in a bid to stamp out a resurgence in infections before Lunar New Year. From AFP: Two Chinese cities south of Beijing further tightened virus restrictions Saturday  as authorities race to stamp out a resurgence in infections. China has largely brought its domestic outbreak under control after the coronavirus first emerged in Wuhan in late 2019 – but a spike in Hebei province, bordering Beijing, has sparked fresh lockdowns ahead of the Lunar New Year next month. Hebei has reported over 130 confirmed Covid-19 cases in the past week, with more than 200 more asymptomatic infections. Most of the cases were in Shijiazhuang city, which along with its surrounding areas is home to 11 million people. Several other infections were reported in neighbouring Xingtai city, home to 7 million. Shijiazhuang suspended subway operations from Saturday morning to aid “prevention and control of the outbreak”, authorities said. Major highways leading into the city, around 300km (200 miles) south of Beijing, have already been closed and inter-city passenger travel halted. Overnight, Xingtai announced a week-long stay-at-home order to residents in order to curb its outbreak. The curbs come ahead of the Lunar New Year, when hundreds of millions criss-cross China to visit family and friends, with National Health Commission vice-minister Zeng Yixin warning Saturday the festival “will further boost the risk of transmission”. Authorities are racing to roll out vaccines, with more than 9m doses given so far, Zeng added. Health authorities recently gave conditional approval to a vaccine candidate by Chinese pharma giant Sinopharm, with emergency use jabs already administered in the later part of 2020. Health authorities in  Victoria, Australia , have added one new potential exposure site in Melbourne. Anyone who attended  Block 7 Dumplings in Ringwood on 29 December from 8.10pm to 8.45pm  has been advised to monitor themselves for symptoms and get tested and isolate should they appear. You can read the full list of Victorian exposure sites  here . T hree people in Queensland have been fined for not wearing a face mask , after face masks became mandatory in greater Brisbane at 6pm last night.  Police handed out “hundreds” of free masks in greater Brisbane on Friday night, the Queensland police deputy commissioner,  Steve Gollschewski ,   told reporters today. On three occasions those persons were actually offered the masks, refused to wear them, offered again and were given directions to go home because they shouldn’t have been out. Police were left with no alternative but to take enforcement action, which they did. A fourth person was fined for being in an unauthorised area, and all were hit with a $1,334 fine for failing to comply with the chief health officer’s directions. Future fines for failing to wear a mask will be $200, but Gollschewski said infringement notices were not yet ready to be issued. Police are handing out masks rather than fines – our officers have 40,000 masks that they can hand out, so I think they’ve got plenty. But we need the community to listen to the messaging and if the police officer engages with you and says, ‘You need to put this mask on’, you need to put the mask on, so it is a pretty good deal. Australia ’s chief nursing and midwifery officer,  Alison McMillan , has just given a coronavirus update in Melbourne.  She spoke about the new guidelines from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia, which I’ve mentioned a few times today, on getting rapid genomic testing for positive cases in hotel quarantine, extending the required isolation period to 14 days, and getting an exit test. The  United States has  set a new daily record for new coronavirus cases , with 290,000 cases reported in 24 hours, according to the Johns Hopkins global tally. Some 3,676 people in the US died with the virus in the same period.  There have been 21.8m cases and 368,685 deaths in the US since the pandemic began. Mexico has reported 14,362 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 1,038 deaths .  It is one of the highest daily case increases and brings the total number of cases in Mexico since the pandemic began to 1,507,931, with 132,069 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the health ministry has said.  Coronavirus  border restrictions are  also causing problems at the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe . Zimbabwe has reintroduced movement restrictions following a surge in Covid-19 infections, which have doubled to 18,000 cases since the start of November. South Africa is the worst-affected nation in  Africa , with more than 1.17m infections and 31,800 fatalities since the pandemic began and unprecedented daily figures of more than 20,000 cases reported several times this week. More on this from AFP: Zimbabwean truck driver  Wallace Muzondiwa  queued four days in his vehicle to enter neighbouring South Africa after thousands of people rushed to the border to escape new Zimbabwean movement restrictions this week. The surge overwhelmed immigration authorities at the Beitbridge border post, South Africa’s second-busiest entry port, where angry crowds were stranded by the backlog. “The situation is very, very, very hectic,” said Muzondiwa, desperate to get back on the road after officials finally approved his coronavirus test and additional pandemic-related paperwork. “The line is going very, very slowly and the sun is very hot,” he complained. Flustered travellers hurried past with their luggage, hopping into minivan taxis parked alongside sizzling barbecue stands selling chicken wings on the go. Coronavirus has complicated cumbersome land border crossings in southern Africa, where trucks can sometimes wait days to get through sluggish customs. “What causes the delays at the borders are the documents,” explained South African driver Sinki Tshangise, 44, who has criss-crossed between Botswana, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe for almost a decade. Negative Covid-19 certificates often expire before arrival, he added, forcing drivers to pay for more testing on the road. “I don’t think I can afford to pay at each and every border,” said Tshangise. “It’s a real struggle.”
Nigeria cattle crisis: how drought and urbanisation led to deadly land grabs:	In February last year, Sunday Ikenna’s fields were green and lush. Then, one evening, a herd of cattle led into the farm by roving pastoralists crushed, ate, and uprooted the crops. “I lost everything. The situation was sorrowful, watching another human being destroy your farm,” says Ikenna, a father of 10 who farms in Ukpabi-Nimbo in Enugu state, southern  Nigeria . “I farmed a smaller portion this year because I am still scared of another invasion.” Ikenna’s experience is not an isolated event. In the past few years there have been a growing number of skirmishes between farmers and cattle herders searching for pasture and water. For many years the clashes were problematic, but the two groups usually managed to reach a mutual accommodation. But in the past two decades, the climate crisis has contributed to altering that old order, and what used to be a friendly arrangement has become a crisis marked by looting, raids, cattle rustling and premeditated killings. In 2016, Ukpabi-Nimbo, Ikenna’s community, was attacked, allegedly by cattle herders, resulting in the death of 46 people, according to one local media report. “Nimbo will never be the same after that morning,” Ikenna says of the attack. At the root of the crisis, according to experts, is Nigeria’s teeming cattle population, which has more than doubled from an  estimated  9.2 million in 1981 to  around 20 million , making it one of the world’s largest. Nigeria’s human population has grown too, to about 200 million, the highest in  Africa  by far. This has led to cities sprawling ever larger and wider, in some cases into formerly designated cattle routes and reserves. Routes that dated back to the 1950s, in line with colonial arrangements, have either been overrun or dominated by new human settlements – pushing herders further into contested territories. Grazing space that should accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more In rural communities, smallholder farmers are claiming large swathes of grazing land. “It means that grazing space, for example, that should originally accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more,” says Ifeanyi Ubah, a cattle rancher based in eastern Nigeria. Nigeria is, moreover, a crossroads for cattle from other countries: transhumance migrants from Cameroon, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad routinely pass through in search of better climate, pasture and more plentiful water. Though there are fewer than 100 official border crossings into the country, Abba Moro, an ex-government official who headed the ministry of interior, was quoted as saying that there  were more than 1,499 illegal entry routes  into the country as of 2013. Terrorist groups have become involved in the situation. Boko Haram has been accused of using money obtained from the sale of rustled cattle to fund its deadly operations. On one occasion, Boko Haram militants killed 19 herders as they attempted to steal their cattle. A rising number of attacks has led to the  reported loss  of two million cattle and the death of 600 herders, many of whom have been forced to vacate the fertile Lake Chad basin in search of new lands. But the climate crisis is the biggest factor driving tensions. Most parts of northern Nigeria have suffered severe desertification and drought. Mean annual rainfall in this region has  dropped below  600mm, compared with 3,500mm in the south coast area.  This change threatens the livelihoods of around 40 million people,  especially livestock and smallholder  farmers. Large numbers of cattle herders are being forced to move from traditional grazing areas to central and southern Nigeria when dry periods start – a situation that heightens competition and heralds more clashes. “While growing up, I saw trees, forest, rivers and streams in most parts of northern Nigeria. The grasses grew and it was more than enough for the cattle,” says Bala Ardo, one of the leaders of cattle herders in south-east Nigeria. “But it’s no more. The situation has forced the average herder to seek pasture and water in places they never would have visited in the past, as he struggles to find drinkable water for himself and family and then his animals.” The government, meanwhile, has only taken piecemeal action. In 2018, the federal government proposed  colonies for cattle  and funded grazing camps across various states in the country. But local leaders were resistant, and fears grew in the south in particular that ethnic groups such as the Muslim Fulani would use the scheme to  grab land . Some researchers  estimate  that the members of the Fulani ethnic group own 90% of Nigeria’s livestock.  As the climate crisis continues, the government has set up the National Livestock Transformation Plan, which aims to modernise the livestock sector through a series of phased interventions from 2018 to 2027. Ranches for breeding and processing will be created, and several pilot projects have already been established. But this plan, too, is encountering difficulties. According to Khalid Salisu, a journalist in one of the pilot project regions, “It doesn’t serve the needs of cattle herders adequately. The herders in the ranches are struggling to find enough water and pastures to keep their herds alive during the dry season.” In the absence of effective solutions from the central government, states and communities are proposing various remedies. In Benue state, southern Nigeria, for example, legislation in 2017 banned open cattle grazing. The law required herders to rent or buy lands to host their ranches. The heart of the problem is the need to persuade herders to give up treating land and water as a free resource. It will be difficult to persuade them to move to capital-intensive ranching, said Ubah. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved Abubakar Sambo, the leader of the northern community in Enugu state, says the herders must be consulted before fresh initiatives are launched. “The policies received by cattle herders largely on radio and television cannot work. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved.” He believes younger herders need to be educated and sent to study model ranching systems in other countries. “What the herders have achieved [cattle population growth] despite all the challenges is remarkable. It shows the huge potential of the livestock sector,” says Ardo. “Imagine what the result could be if the government put the right structure and policies in place.” Sign up for the  Animals farmed monthly update  to get a roundup of the best farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at  animalsfarmed@theguardian.com
‘This is Africa’s generational cause,’ says Uganda’s election challenger:	Millions of voters in  Uganda  will cast their votes this week in an election pitting a 76-year-old president seeking his sixth term against a former popular musician half his age. The contest between  Bobi Wine , 38, and  Yoweri Museveni , who has been in power since 1986, is being keenly watched across the continent, where veteran leaders are coming under pressure to give way to politicians more representative of Africa’s increasingly youthful, urban and educated population. Wine has explicitly linked his campaign to efforts elsewhere across  Africa  to oust veteran leaders, and told the  Observer  that his was “a generational cause”. “The oppressed people can’t stay oppressed for ever. History has taught us that even the most brutal and famous dictators have come down, crumbling to the power of the people,” Wine said. “My warning to Museveni is to learn from history. It’s important that you respect the voices of the people of Uganda because, if you do not, then you will also end up in the dustbin of history like your friends [Muammar] Gaddafi, [Robert] Mugabe and [Omar al-] Bashir. The campaign has already been marked by the worst political violence in Uganda for decades,  with more than 50 people shot dead by security forces  over two days of protests following the arrest of Wine in November. On 1 December, police fired shots into Wine’s car, prompting him to briefly suspend his campaign. Since then, a bodyguard has been killed when run over by a police truck, and Wine was arrested for a second time. Opposition supporters have been routinely dispersed by security forces using teargas and rubber bullets. Journalists have been harassed, and human rights activists and high-profile critics of the government have been detained. International watchdogs such as Amnesty International say measures implemented ostensibly to fight Covid-19 are being applied selectively to prevent the opposition campaigning effectively. Wine said: “The campaign is crazy. Every day we are met with heavily armed military officers. I am afraid and concerned every day. I fear for my life and lives of my comrades in the struggle. “The regime is after our lives. Every day we live is as if it’s the last one.” On 7 January,  police confronted Wine during an online press conference  where he announced a petition to the international criminal court to investigate rights abuses in Uganda. Known to supporters as “the ghetto president”, the former singer broke into formal politics in 2017 when he won a seat in Uganda’s national assembly. He has since been badly assaulted and detained many times. Wine, whose real name is Robert Kyagulanyi, grew up in poverty in Kampala before his successful musical career. As a politician, he has attracted enthusiastic support from among Uganda’s young and urban population who want change. The median age in the country is less than 16. Flavia Namukasa, 23, was among hundreds of jubilant supporters who attended Wine’s campaign rally in the central town of Rakai, 200km from the capital Kampala, in late December. “We have come out in big numbers to support Bobi Wine. He is our only hope. He will be able to address our misery, daily suffering and high unemployment rates,” she said. But Wine faces an experienced opponent who can count on loyalty from individuals and institutions that have benefited from his rule over decades. Museveni is seeking a sixth term after MPs removed constitutional age limits on the presidency, and has the support of the security forces and much of the bureaucracy. Some voters have been rattled by the violence associated with recent protests, which they blame on the opposition. More importantly, decades of economic growth and subsidies have won Museveni a mass following in rural areas. “My next president still remains Museveni. Although they call him Mzee [old man], he is not weak. He is still strong and able to lead this country,” said Richard Kiboneka, a 62-year-old local leader in Mbalwa in the central district of Wakiso. Though few deny Museveni’s early achievements – from 1992 to 2013 the proportion of Ugandan households living in poverty was halved – serious economic problems were increasingly evident, even before the hammer blow of the pandemic. While some 700,000 young people reach working age every year in Uganda, only enough jobs for one in 10 are created,  according to the World Bank.  Poor basic services, corruption, expensive healthcare and overcrowded classrooms have also fuelled discontent in urban areas in particular. Museveni has not responded to criticism of his record,  instead accusing Wine and other opposition leaders of being “traitors”  who planned “insurrection … with their foreign backers”. At one rally, the president said that the protesters were “ being used by outsiders … homosexuals and others who don’t like the stability  and independence of Uganda”. Judith Nabakooba, Uganda’s minister for information, communications technology and national guidance, said that Museveni had guaranteed peace and stability “for so many years”. “He is a respectable leader. He has a full and wider view of Uganda, east Africa, Africa and internationally. He is tested. He knows where we have come from … and knows where to take us. To secure our future, we really need to support President Museveni,” she said. Though Museveni is expected to win the contest, the former rebel leader is likely to emerge weakened, and the poll may usher in a period of instability in Uganda. The former British colony has never had a peaceful transition of power, and previous elections have been marred by allegations of vote buying,  rigging  and  fraud . Wine said that “when people turn up in huge numbers and vote, there will be no way the regime can try to alter the voice and the will of the people”. Analysts have expressed concerns about democracy across eastern and southern Africa in recent years, although they say the picture is as varied within these regions as it is across the continent. The recent election in Tanzania was  marred by widespread repression,  while crackdowns in Zimbabwe have led to journalists and political activists being jailed for months without being found guilty of any offence. In Malawi, however,  Lazarus Chakwera  won power in a fresh poll after the judges overturned a 2019 election amid allegations of fraud. Patience Akumu , a Ugandan journalist and analyst, said officials’ claim that only Museveni could guarantee security was unfounded. “I think it tells us how flimsy the existing security is, if it relies on one man. The strongmen of the continent are falling one by one, and Museveni will go eventually,” Akumu told the  Observer . “Uganda, Africa, must face this fact.”
‘It’s being built on our blood’: the true cost of Saudi Arabia’s $500bn megacity:	“The future has a new home,” proclaims the website. “It’s a virgin area that has a lot of beauty,” says the voice over a string section soundtrack as the  promotional video  tracks colour-tinted panoramic shots of picturesque desert expanses, and deep azure lagoons. “Better humans, better society,” it boasts extravagantly. The brainchild of Crown Prince  Mohammed bin Salman , the new city state of Neom, named from a combination of the Greek word for “new” and the Arabic term for “future”, is intended to cover an area the size of Belgium at the far north of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea coastline. There has been no shortage of outlandish promises for the $500bn (£400bn) city-state. According to  strategy documents leaked last year , the project may include a huge artificial moon, glow-in-the-dark beaches, flying drone-powered taxis, robotic butlers to clean the homes of residents and a Jurassic Park-style attraction featuring animatronic lizards. Advertising materials stressed Neom will be built on “virgin” land, ready to be conquered with futuristic technology. “In 10 years from now we will be looking back and we will say we were the first ones to come here,” declares a Neom staff member featured in the video. Yet part of the site is the home of the Huwaitat tribe, who have spanned  Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Sinai peninsula for generations, tracing their lineage back before the founding of the Saudi state. At least 20,000 members of the tribe now face eviction due to the project, with no information about where they will live in the future. “For the Huwaitat tribe, Neom is being built on our blood, on our bones,” says Alia Hayel Aboutiyah al-Huwaiti, an outspoken activist and member of the tribe living in London. “It’s definitely not for the people already living there! It’s for tourists, people with money. But not for the original people living there.” For some Saudis, the Huwaiti tribe among them, Neom, with its parallel legal system reporting directly to the king, represents an elite version of Saudi society, one designed simply to shut them out. Residents and visitors to the site will probably be allowed to drink alcohol and enjoy fine dining in a futuristic version of paradise that is also set to include a vast  data-gathering network , including drone and facial-recognition technology covering the entire city-state. The  death  of Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti on 13 April highlighted the tension between the tribe and the kingdom’s development plans. A resident of the town of Khuraibat, he had become the face of the tribes’ criticism of their forced eviction, voicing complaints in videos posted to social media, and appearing in others’ videos.  One  piece of footage showed him confronting a Saudi official who visited the town to speak with residents. Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti made one of his last  videos  in mid-April. “They have begun the process of removing people, beginning with surveying homes with the intent of removing people and deporting them from their land,” he said, referring to the security forces in his town. “They arrested anyone who said they’re against deportation, they don’t want to leave, they want to remain [in] their homes, that they don’t want money. “I would not be surprised if they come to kill me in my house now, and place a weapon next to me,” he added. Later the same day, he shot a video from his rooftop of the police down below. “See them? The police have come to get me,” he  said . Others from Khuraibat recorded  videos  of gunfire from outside his house. Later, they recorded  footage  inside his house, pockmarked with bullet holes. In a statement, the Saudi authorities  claimed  he’d been killed in a shootout with regional security forces, stating that Abdul Rahim injured two after he shot back. His supporters have described the shooting as “an extrajudicial killing”. So too have rights groups. “They killed him to set an example – anyone opening their mouth gets the same treatment,” says Alia al-Huwaiti. According to the Saudi rights group Al Qst, the authorities have  since  worked to cover up Abdul Rahim’s killing and placate the tribe. “They are hoping to pull off a major publicity stunt by getting prominent figures among the Huwaitat to publicly disown Abdul Rahim and ‘renew their allegiance’ to the king,” said the group. This was accompanied by the arrest of eight members of the tribe. For Alia al-Huwaiti, the killing of Abdul Rahim and the forced displacement of the Huwaitat people highlights the kingdom’s lack of care towards tribal communities long dominated and suppressed by the state. “MBS [Mohammad Bin Salman] began by telling the tribes: ‘We will develop your area, you will make money.’ They believed him at first. By 2019, they said ‘We will empty three villages, and force people to move,’” she says. “There is nothing called a tribe for Mohammed bin Salman,” she adds. “He doesn’t care about the tribes.” Alia said she has received death threats for posting about the plight of Abdul Rahim and the tribe on social media, including threats she has reported to the British police. The public relations team for Neom, as well as executives from the management consulting firm Teneo, hired by Saudi authorities  for  more than $2m  last year to represent the project, did not return requests for comment. The Saudi Arabian embassy in Washington DC did not respond to a request for comment. But Ali Shihabi,  a member of the Neom advisory board , told the Guardian that the displaced members of the tribe would be compensated. “Practice in Saudi has been that people have to accept it, and have usually done so because the government has a tradition of compensating generously.” He said he did not know how much members of the tribe would be compensated, or when. “We anticipated there might be problems, especially with as large of a land grab as Neom. It’s inevitable that there would be some kind of forced displacement happening,” says James Suzano, of the European-Saudi Organisation for Human Rights. “When the state has done this before, it was accompanied by human rights violations.” The destruction of communities on the Neom site follows decades of tensions between the House of Saud and the tribes it has ruled over since the creation of the Saudi state in 1932. Exerting control over the land through construction projects or destruction of some heritage sites have marked this rule. In 2017, the UN  condemned  the kingdom’s forced demolition of the walled city of Awamia, in the eastern Qatif region, as violating human rights. Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur for cultural rights, said that “historic buildings have been irremediably burned down and damaged by the use of various weapons by the military, forcing residents out of their homes and of the neighbourhood, fleeing for their lives”. A $10bn King Abdullah financial district in Riyadh,  intended  as a “special zone,” has sputtered since its inception in 2006, weathering construction delays and confusion over its purpose, even after government attempts at a relaunch in 2016. Critics of Neom say the project risks the same fate. Construction is ploughing ahead despite the challenges of the pandemic and the  historic drop  in the price of oil, Saudi’s primary export. The project is part of the crown prince’s flagship Vision 2030 project, intended to diversify the economy away from oil, which has sustained the kingdom since the early 20th century. Yet the funds required to see Neom realised will inevitably require oil wealth. “It’s quite revealing that [Neom] is more of a vanity project targeting the domestic elite and an international audience in terms of a new Saudi, one that’s open and economically or socially liberal,” says Josh Cooper, of Al Qst. “But at the same time, not allowing the involvement of local actors or interests in these decision-making processes.” For Cooper, Neom is less a shining vision of the future than a grim symbol of Saudi human rights violations, underscored by the treatment of the Huwaitat tribe. “It shows the lack of platforms people have to express their opinions, even on less contentious matters than civil or political rights,” he says.
Trump impeachment: House charges president with inciting an insurrection – live:	Alex Mooney said he objected to Democrats’ resolution about invoking the 25th amendment because he wanted a floor debate on the measure. Mooney, a Republican of West Virginia, blocked a proposal from  Steny Hoyer,  the House majority leader, to adopt the resolution by unanimous consent. Today I objected to Speaker Pelosi’s attempt to adopt via unanimous consent a resolution calling on Vice President Mike Pence to invoke the 25th Amendment to remove President Trump.  pic.twitter.com/FdDdAm6b4y “Speaker Pelosi should not attempt to adopt a resolution of this magnitude without any debate on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives,” Mooney said in a statement. “It is wrong to have sent members of Congress home and then try to adopt without any debate a precedent-setting resolution that could imperil our Republic. The U.S. House must never adopt a resolution that demands the removal of a duly elected president, without any hearings, debate or recorded votes.” After Mooney objected to the resolution, the House adjourned until 9 am ET tomorrow morning, when there will be a roll call vote on the measure. The resolution calls on  Mike Pence  to invoke the 25th amendment to remove  Donald Trump  from office, even though that seems very unlikely to happen. House majority leader  Steny Hoyer  confirmed that Democratic leadership is currently planning to hold a vote on the article of impeachment against  Donald Trump  in two days. “There may well be a vote on impeachment on Wednesday,” Hoyer told reporters on Capitol Hill. Hoyer added that the goal was to immediately send the article of impeachment to the Senate, leaving the president’s fate up to the Republican-controlled chamber. It’s very unclear whether two-thirds of senators would agree to removing Trump from office, as required by the constitution. David Cicilline,  one of the Democratic congressmen who helped draft the article of impeachment, told a CNN reporter that he was confident the article would attract majority support in the House. Cicilline added that he believed some Republican members would support impeachment, which could come up for a vote as soon as Wednesday. “We have the numbers to pass it,” the Rhode Island congressman said. Rep. David Cicilline, a leader of the impeachment effort, expresses confidence there will be majority support to pass the impeachment resolution and thinks vote could be Wednesday. Says some GOP members will support. “We have the numbers to pass it,” he told me The article of impeachment charges  Donald Trump  with having incited an insurrection in connection to the violent riot at the US Capitol last week. “Resolved, That Donald John Trump, President of the United States, is impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors,” the article says. “President Trump gravely endangered the security of the United States and its institutions of Government. He threatened the integrity of the democratic system, interfered with the peaceful transition of power, and imperiled a coequal branch of Government. He thereby betrayed his trust as President, to the manifest injury of the people of the United States.  “Wherefore, Donald John Trump, by such conduct, has demonstrated that he will remain a threat to national security, democracy, and the Constitution if allowed to remain in office, and has acted in a manner grossly incompatible with self-governance and the rule of law. Donald John Trump thus warrants impeachment and trial, removal from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, or profit under the United States.” A group of House  Democrats  has formally introduced an article of impeachment against  Donald Trump , charging him with “incitement to insurrection” in connection to the violent riot at the Capitol last week. The Article of Impeachment: Incitement to Insurrection, drafted by Rep  @davidcicilline ,  @RepRaskin , me &  @HouseJudiciary  staff, has now been formally introduced at the House pro forma session today.  https://t.co/Y6ntbSXF9G   pic.twitter.com/MfB4CpqC6C The article was introduced by  Ted Lieu  of California,  David Cicilline  of Rhode Island and  Jamie Raskin  of Maryland. If the House votes to impeach Trump, he will become the first president in US history to ever be impeached twice. Moments ago, House majority leader  Steny Hoyer  introduced a resolution from congressman  Jamie Raskin  calling on the vice-president to invoke the 25th amendment and remove  Donald Trump  from office. The resolution urged  Mike Pence  to “declare what is obvious to a horrified Nation: That the President is unable to successfully discharge the duties and powers of his office.” . @LeaderHoyer  asks for Unanimous Consent on H.R. 21 calling on  @VP  Pence to convene and mobilize the cabinet to invoke Section 4 of the 25th amendment.  @RepAlexMooney  objects.  pic.twitter.com/IoEoOfuUxj As expected, the resolution was not adopted by unanimous consent, after Republican  Alex Mooney  of West Virginia objected to the request. The House now stands in recess until 9 am et tomorrow morning, when the chamber with consider Raskin’s resolution.  The House is now in session,  and  Democrats  are expected to soon introduce an article of impeachment against  Donald Trump. Presiding over the session, Democrat  Debbie Dingell  began the day by reading the resignation of the House sergeant at arms,  Paul Irving. The resignation was accepted without objection. Dingell then swore in the new House sergeant at arms. The New York State Bar Association has launched an investigation to determine whether to expel Rudy Giuliani from its membership. The legal group announced the inquiry in  a statement , noting it has received “hundreds of complaints in recent months” about Giuliani’s work for  Donald Trump. The association specifically criticized Giuliani for his role in inciting a violent mob to storm the US Capitol last week. Shortly before the riot occurred, Giuliani said at a pro-Trump rally in Washington, “If we’re wrong, we will be made fools of, but if we’re right a lot of them will go to jail. Let’s have trial by combat.”  “As the nation’s largest voluntary state bar association, NYSBA has a responsibility to defend and protect the rule of law,” the group said in its statement. “Based on these complaints, and the statement Mr. Giuliani uttered shortly before the attack on the Capitol, NYSBA President Scott M. Karson has launched an inquiry pursuant to the Association’s bylaws to determine whether Mr. Giuliani should be removed from the membership rolls of the Association.” David Cicilline said he will be introducing an article of impeachment against  Donald Trump  in about 15 minutes. “ Just landed in Washington where I will be introducing an article of impeachment against the President for Incitement of Insurrection at 11am,” the Rhode Island congressman said in a new tweet. Just landed in Washington where I will be introducing an article of impeachment against the President for Incitement of Insurrection at 11am. Cicilline has spearheaded the impeachment effort alongside two of his fellow House  Democrats, Ted Lieu  and  Jamie Raskin. Drafts of the article that have circulated in recent days charge the president with inciting an insurrection, in connection to the violent riot at the Capitol last week. The mayor of DC is asking the interior department to cancel any public gathering permits in the city from today until January 24,  which would cover  Joe Biden ’s inauguration on January 20. NEW: Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser requests Interior secretary "cancel any and all public gathering permits in the District of Columbia, and deny any applications for a public gathering during the period January 11 - January 24."  https://t.co/rfwVxIHGt0   pic.twitter.com/3hpNXZYzC7 Muriel Bowser  asked Americans not to come to Washington for the inauguration, urging people to instead celebrate the event “virtually.” The Democratic mayor emphasized that the city is dedicated to avoiding another violent event like the pro-Trump riot at the Capitol last week. Bowser asked the federal government to coordinate with Congress and the supreme court to develop a security plan to protect federal property during the inauguration. The mayor’s announcements come amid intensifying concerns about more violence around the inauguration. Richard Luscombe reports for the Guardian: A black woman whose sister was  shot and killed by US Capitol police  in Washington eight years ago has said the “restraint” shown by the same agency to  Donald Trump ’s insurrectionist mob, compared with actions in Black Lives Matter protests last summer, is “hurtful”. Valarie Carey criticised officers for what she said was an inability to deal with black people, and said some police were either racist or dealing with “culture shock”. “To see the disparity in the treatment of individuals … who have no respect for our nation’s Capitol, vandalizing and actually committing assaults and they get to walk away unharmed and not even arrested, it’s hurtful,” Carey  told CNN. “They were treated with entitlement and it’s ridiculous. We all know had it been a black person or brown person that situation would have been different.” Carey’s sister Miriam, 34, a dental hygienist from Connecticut, was killed in October 2013 after her car collided with a security barrier and struck an off-duty Secret Service officer at the White House. She drove off, pursued by several marked police vehicles, and was shot when she attempted to drive away from officers who surrounded her car with guns drawn. Her 18-month-old daughter was found in the back seat, unharmed. Joe Biden is reportedly getting frustrated with his pandemic advisory team  amid concerns that his administration will fall short of its goal to distribute 100 million vaccine doses in his first 100 days in office. Politico  reports :  Biden has expressed criticism on multiple occasions to groups of transition officials — including one confrontation where Biden conveyed to Covid coordinator  Jeff Zients  and his deputy,  Natalie Quillian , that their team was underperforming. The tensions have surfaced as Biden’s advisers plan a dramatic scale-up of vaccinations starting Jan. 20, when the incoming team inherits a troubled Trump administration vaccine rollout that has fallen well short of its initial targets. In interviews, multiple senior transition officials defended Zients and stressed the enormity of the challenge, noting that the Trump administration has refused to share key information for weeks. Still, the U.S. has conducted around 7 million vaccinations over its first three weeks, well below the million-a-day rate Biden will need to hit. While some Biden advisers insist it’s possible to make good on the 100-million vow, others are privately worried that the federal response is already so chaotic that it will take a herculean effort to pull it off. Biden will receive his second dose of the Pfizer coronavirus vaccine later today, after meeting with his transition advisers.
Global Dispatch: sign up for a different world view:	Discover our pick of breaking stories and hard-hitting features, uncovered by our correspondents across Africa, Asia, South and Central America and beyond. We bring you the voices and opinions of people living under extraordinary circumstances along with expert analysis of the key issues from the most authoritative voices: the developing world in words, pictures, podcast and video.  See the latest edition here . *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
How a 'tree mortgage' scheme could turn an Indian town carbon neutral:	In the misty, hilly terrain of Wayanad, in the southern Indian state of Kerala, the people with any access to land in the quiet town of Meenangadi have been out counting their trees. Sheeja CG, a 46-year-old farmer, has lived among coffee, coconut and pepper plantations all her life but last month she increased her income dramatically by mortgaging 53 of her trees at the local bank, in return for a sum of 2,650 rupees (£26.96), or 50 rupees each. She was one of the first beneficiaries of the state-sponsored scheme. It’s a simple incentive with big gains: plant a tree, and after three years residents can mortgage each sapling for an interest-free loan that can be renewed annually for 10 years. The money need be repaid only if the tree is chopped down. Kerala, with its sweeping, spice-filled forested landscape has been troubled in recent years by an ailing farming sector, deforestation which has led to loss of biodiversity, and the climate crisis making summers much warmer, especially in the Wayanad, which used to be comfortably cool. Suicides of farmers, landslides and floods have made the headlines. Farmers have been compelled to fell trees to supplement their income. Against such a background, the tree banking project, facilitated by a 10 crores rupee (£1.01m) grant from the state government, comes as a big incentive to keep them rooted to the ground. “With temperatures almost five degrees higher than normal, I’ve faced a crop loss of 25%. The loan from the tree banking scheme will ease financial pressure. I will buy manure for my farm,” says Sheeja. I have faced a crop loss of 25%. The loan from the tree banking scheme will ease financial pressure Prolonged dry spells and erratic rainfall have made the region increasingly vulnerable, with shrinking paddy farms and a threat to cash crops such as pepper and coffee. According to the  Kerala State Action Plan on Climate Change , Wayanad is one of the four major climate change hotspots in the state. But the tree banking scheme has an ambition to reverse the damage and turn Meenangadi, a town of about 35,000 people into a carbon neutral region. The  Carbon Neutral Meenangadi Project  is the first of its kind in India, and has changed the way the community lives and works. “An energy audit in 2018 found Meenangadi had 15,000 tonnes of excess carbon. We are working on ways to bring it down to zero,” says Meenangadi’s  panchayat  (local government) president, Beena Vijayan. To balance the carbon emissions, a meticulous action plan has been set in motion. “We have held more than 500 meetings with farmers in every nook and corner on waste management, recycling plastic, solar lighting and panels, manufacturing environment friendly coffee and using high-efficiency stoves,” says Vijayan. Encouraging tree planting is a first step. “It is a model project for the whole district of Wayanad. It took root three years ago, when we prepared a nursery with 33 types of saplings under the national rural employment guarantee scheme. We planted 300,000 saplings in 250 homes in Meenangadi and common areas,” says Vijayan. “With the trees now mature, we rolled out the tree banking scheme and received about 200 applications that are being processed.” It was Kerala’s finance minster, TM Thomas Isaac, who first mooted the idea, saying it wouldguarantee a sustainable income for farmers in the district and vastly improve the socio-economic environment. “Wayanad has the lowest per capita income in Kerala state, so the aim is to double the income of the farmers without overly industrialising the region,” says Jayakumar C, founderof Thanal, the environment agency that is implementing the project. The trees also bring supplementary income to the residents, through the sale of fruit and other products, he adds. Among the thickets around her red-roofed cottage is a cluster of jackfruit trees that Sheeja has mortgaged, white tags hanging from their branches. The trees are monitored through an app. “We go from farm to farm with a team of volunteers to survey the trees that have matured, take photographs and map them on our monitoring system,” says Ajith Tomy, the project coordinator. “We will implement the project in 23 other  panchayats  in Wayanad by 2021. We plan to plant about 10m trees in the next few years.” For Sumathy Valiyakolli, the loan has come through at just the right time, as expenses for her brother’s medical treatment are mounting. She says: “It’s been very helpful. I will plant more trees and mortgage a higher number next year.” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Gender conversion 'therapy' made me suicidal. I fear for other young Nigerians:	W hen I was nine, my parents took me to a traditional healer. He used a razor to make three incisions on the insteps of my feet, my wrists, my elbows, my forehead and on the back of my neck. As blood started to flow, the healer rubbed a concoction of herbs into the incisions and gave me a potion to drink. He took alligator pepper and rubbed it on various parts of my body. There was a rooster, into which he cast the “demon” inside me. The rooster was slaughtered and thrown into the river, supposedly taking my sexuality with it. In boarding school, I met a boy who I would say was my first love. We talked about everything and liked to take long walks. But he struggled. I watched him struggle to accept his sexuality. He felt there was something wrong with him but I didn’t know how to help him. For me it was different. It wasn’t just about sexuality; it was also about gender. I was born male but I have never felt like a man. When I was 22, in university, I met a transgender woman. She was a lot more open, more cosmopolitan, more upfront about what she wanted. I’d never met anyone like her. We had a sisterhood –– fun, graceful, pure. It was as if the scales fell from my eyes. What part of me has been lost in the effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form? My family was not happy about our friendship. They said I was bringing shame to the family. They took me to a Catholic priest to cast away the stubborn spirit that made me different. The priest told me that God had intended a great path for me, but some negative force had diverted me from it. He made me believe I could change. For a year, I fasted, I went to mass and took communion. I recited all the prayers as though my life depended on it. And it felt as if it did, you see, with the way everyone treated me. But I was all right. I always was. The main issue with conversion therapy is that victims don’t talk about it. It tends to make something that is so wrong look right. The worst part is when they are able to convince you that change can happen, that there is indeed something wrong with you, that you are a mistake of nature, an anomaly. It messes you up.  The encounter with the healer was many years ago, but the memory is still harrowing. What part of me has been lost in an effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form? I’m 43 now. Still gay, still a trans woman. Still looking over my shoulder fearing that someone might want to hurt me. I’m much more scared than the average person. And I’m not the only one. Exposure to gender identity conversion efforts can have  severe adverse  effects on mental health. There are thousands of young people in Nigeria being subjected to these dangerous practices in a bid to “cure” them. There are no structures in Nigeria to deal with these psychological scars. That’s why we need our community. We need to have conversations about safety and security, especially with regard to familial relationships and dating. We need to openly talk about the devastating impact of conversion therapy. I have contemplated suicide several times. I attempted it once; relieved that it failed.  I’ve noticed that when people have a personal experience –– they find out their partner or friend or child is LGBTQ+ –– they become less aggressive. I think my mother always knew, even as she went through the motions of trying to convert me. At some point she realised it wasn’t something she could struggle against. My father never accepted my reality, even until he died. He didn’t know how to deal with it. People need to realise that the world is not black and white; it’s in colour.  Many people, like my friend in university, left for other countries where they thought they could live freely. But nowhere is safe. Brazil, Ecuador, Taiwan, Malta and  Germany  are the only countries in the world that have banned conversion therapy. Nigeria is a hostile place. The  Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act  makes our existences illegal. I have not been able to undergo surgery here because there’s no access to medical care to support transitioning.  I know that if I look after myself, I will be fine. I’m concerned about the younger ones. The  Commonwealth Equality Network  is working towards decriminalisation of homosexuality in Commonwealth countries. I look forward to freedom. It may not be in my time. But we must keep fighting. Just so future generations will not live through the same things I have lived through. •  The author, from  Nigeria , wished to remain anonymous to protect her safety In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email  jo@samaritans.org  or  jo@samaritans.ie . In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is  1-800-273-8255 . In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at  www.befrienders.org . Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Idi Amin challenged my dad to a wrestling match – then chickened out:	My father, Samson “Sunlight” Okiror, lived an extraordinary life. He was a soldier, a rebel and one of Uganda’s most famous sportsmen. A wrestler and heavyweight lifter, he could lift a car off the ground. He could tie a rope to a Land Rover and stop it from moving when the engine was turned on. He could stretch steel chains and springs. He travelled across east  Africa  and to Europe to train and perform. It wasn’t a profession his family had considered. Samson was born into a farming family in the eastern Ugandan district of Serere. I was told he had a single bone in his forearms. But at 16 he was offered a job that changed the course of his life. He became store keeper for the 4 th  battalion of the British King’s African Rifles. Even as a boy, he was strong, and his strength was noticed in the army. In 1965, the army gave him surgery on his right hand, which had been damaged by burns sustained as a child. To strengthen his arm after the operation, dad started lifting weights. By 1970, he was a second lieutenant in the Ugandan army, and had become a renowned professional heavyweight lifter and wrestler. He was called the “golden rock of Africa”, known for his crowd-pulling stunts – he earned mythical status in April 1975 when he anchored a helicopter, holding it down with chains as it hovered overhead. Two months later, he successfully pulled a ferry in Lake Nalubaale 100 metres to the docking area. In 1977 the Voice of  Uganda  newspaper called “Sunlight” Okiror the country’s greatest athlete. Amin cancelled the match claiming he was too busy but, the whispers went, really fearing humiliation from Africa's leaders His skills reached the attention of Idi Amin, then president, who challenged my father to a wrestling match. The much-anticipated bout was slated for 28 July 1975 in Kampala, during a summit of what is now the African Union. Amin cancelled the match, claiming he was too busy, but, the whispers went, really fearing humiliation before Africa’s leaders. “You see my [honourable] son of the soil, that I have had no good time to practise. The visitors are due to come, we people of Uganda must prepare to welcome them. We don’t need to wrestle now,” Amin told my dad at a meeting at State House. Later, Amin would hire a plane to fly dad to Germany for training and performances. “Our country lacks foreign exchange. While you are there, collect as much [as you can] and send to your country. OK?” Amin instructed him. I was born in 1979 and grew up hearing the stories – the man whom the most brutal military dictator feared to wrestle. He was a great dad. Very tough, but loving. He loved us, his children, and his wives so much. He used to drive us around in his minibus and land cruiser. At the time, we lived both in Serere and Kampala. Our home was the only one in the whole village with a tiled roof. People used to stop him on the street. Some people called him “Power Mike” – in reference to Michael Okpara, the 1970s Nigerian wrestler and former African heavyweight champion. By the time Yoweri Museveni became president in 1986, dad was the Ugandan army’s director of sports. But he grew increasingly frustrated with what he saw as Museveni’s poor governance and in May 1987, he joined the sons of Teso, launching the Uganda People’s Army (UPA) rebellion. He was commander of the UPA’s headquarters brigade when he was killed in March 1991, aged 44. I was at school when I heard the news and joined a group of children in running to the village, where hundreds of people had already gathered, to see if the strongman was really dead. Seeing my dad’s body riddled with bullets and lying in a pool of blood, I broke down and cried: “God be with you, dad, till we meet again.” His death was a rude awakening for a 12-year-old boy whose mother had already left the family, and who had until then lived a privileged life. Our powerful family disintegrated. I had to leave home, as my grandmother couldn’t provide for me. I did odd jobs in people’s homes to make ends meet. At times I slept without a meal. The family has struggled ever since. My dad’s army pension has never been paid nor have we received any compensation for the property and cattle lost during the insurgency in the north of the country. Recently I started thinking about my dad’s legacy and his contribution to sport. I posted some pictures of him on Facebook and  Twitter  and began to hear, once again, stories about the “golden rock”. “I actually watched one of his shows in Lira town during Idi Amin’s time,” commented one person, Djegeti Omara, on one of my Facebook posts. “It was very entertaining. I watched him hold a vehicle and it couldn’t move. I still remember that episode,” he said. “Yes, he was a great man,” wrote Lawrence Okae, national chairman for the opposition party, Uganda People’s Congress. “As he parked [his vehicle] … a towering, well-built, seemingly tough-looking, confident man came out,” he said. “It’s at this moment we got to know it belongs to ‘Power Mike’ – Okiror, a man who could pull down an aeroplane.” People still remember my father fondly. Perhaps it is not a surprise that the Ugandan government has never considered his legacy. On the 30th anniversary of his death next year, I would like that to change. I would like my father’s achievements to be honoured – for a sports arena or an annual tournament to bear his name.  “Sunlight” Okiror lifted the country’s flag high through his sport. For that I believe he now deserves some recognition. Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
'There is no noise': inside the controversial Bhasan Char refugee camp – a photo essay:	I wanted to come here. No one forced me, and my wife also agreed in a snap. To be honest, though, I didn’t tell my brother. He lives where I used to live – Kutupalong camp. He is very against this island for some reason. He might have tried to stop me coming if I dared to discuss the topic. So I didn’t. I only told him after I arrived. I was amazed that he didn’t yell at me. Instead he wondered if he would ever see me again and even got a bit emotional. ‘The children have nothing to do but play. They said school will start soon’ Now when we phone each other, we compare facts and figures. On the island, we get 15kg of rice per head. They get only 13kg in the camps. We get 500g more dal and 1kg more potatoes here too. I am winning so far in our comparisons. We have been here just over one month. We are getting used to it. ‘I heard from one journalist that they spent $350m on this island. He told me I should be happy. I should not complain about anything’ For some reason, I don’t sleep properly. When I lie awake, in the dead of night, I can hear the sea and sometimes the horn of berthing ships. I feel a bit strange then but by the morning that feeling goes away. My children ask if their little friends from our neighbourhood back in the camp will come to the island. I really don’t know what to tell them. I guess they will find new friends here soon when their school starts.  There are tall buildings here. Refugees are not permitted in upper floors. Maybe they think we will kill ourselves? There are a lot of children here, and when they play and get noisy it makes this island feel better, to tell you the truth –and less abnormal. The buildings are all the same here. We live on the ground floor. There are some tall buildings.  Refugees  are not permitted on the upper floors. Maybe they think we will kill ourselves? ‘Right now this place is OK. But with thousands more, I am not sure’ We can only ascend if there is a cyclone. Those floors are used by administration and [for] other purposes. When I think of the camp, I miss getting together with my mates in our favourite tea stalls after Maghrib or Isha prayers. I miss the Burmese tea and coffee mixes we get in the camps like Rich Mix. And I miss  boma   lapase , which you mix with water. That stuff is addictive. ‘Most of the refugees here I think are children. Without children this place would seem even more abnormal’ I feel sad and guilty about my parents. I guess I also abandoned those kids I used to give private tuition to. I worry about them. If I hadn’t fallen into debt and if the thugs in the camp didn’t harass me like they used to – so much so that I feared for my life – I guess I wouldn’t be here. God knows. Most of all, I hope my parents will forgive me some day.  ‘In the camp, there is a lot of noise. Here there is no noise. Sometimes we hear a ship sound. It is very strange’
Making waves: the hit Indian island radio station leading climate conversations:	Selvarani Mari is a fisher and seaweed collector who lives on Pamban Island of Tamil Nadu, on the southernmost tip of  India . Every day she helps her husband cast the fishing nets, maintains rafts for cultivating seaweed, and dives into the ocean to gather sargassum. But she always makes time to listen to the radio. Mari, 33, and her friends and family all unfailingly tune into  Kadal Osai  on 90.4FM, India’s first local  radio station for a fishing community . With guests including from older people from the villages sharing their fishing wisdom or chatting about the climate crisis, the station has become an integral part of local life, featuring gossip, jokes, old songs and news on fish prices and sea conditions. Gayathri Usman, head of Kadal Osai, fell in love with the station when she visited the area, and stayed on to run it. “While a majority of the 12-member crew is from the same community, I am the odd one out,” she says. “Our shows are popular because they are entertaining, useful, and, more importantly, in a local dialect of Tamil that the fishing community understands and finds comfort in,” she says. Started by businessman Armstrong Fernando, himself from a fishing family, Kadal Osai (“the sound of the ocean” in Tamil) began in August 2016 with just a few hours of transmission daily, before going full-time in 2019. Alongside updates on weather, marine affairs and fish prices, advice on safe and sustainable fishing and the preservation of coral reefs, the station also conducts on and off-air workshops on the climate crisis and biodiversity. On the fringes of India’s mainland, across the water from Sri Lanka, Pamban and the surrounding 20 islands and coral reefs are part of the richly biodiverse  Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve , and home to 47 hamlets of the indigenous Marakeyars, engaged in fishing for centuries. “Due to poor signal reception, the fishing community cannot solely depend on the All India  Radio  [India’s national broadcaster], especially while at sea. In such a scenario, it is Kadal Osai – with a coverage area of 5-10km – that they tune into,” says Usman. In the past few years, the climate crisis has had a drastic effect on marine life and local livelihoods. Senthil Rajan is a microbiologist at a seaweed cultivation site in Pamban. “It has become increasingly difficult to predict and interpret water levels in the ocean, cyclone formations, and potential fishing zones. The erratic weather patterns have led to an unprecedented rise in sea levels as well as the height of the waves, thus affecting many seaweed cultivating sites,” says Rajan. “In such a scenario, tapping into the traditional knowledge of the fishing community, remains a rich source of learning.” Understanding this need to share knowledge with the next generation, Kadal Osai invites experienced fishers to talk with experts about the effects of over-exploitation on marine resources, and the importance of integrating traditional and modern fishing methods. “Using umbrella terms such as climate change and global warming with this coastal community may not drive home the point effectively. So, we juxtapose the knowledge passed down the generations with the right mix of anecdotes and scientific techniques and keep the dialogue going on climate change,” says Usman.  We keep the dialogue going on climate change Radio is one of the most powerful methods of communication in India, with enormous reach among its 1.38bn population. Even prime minister Narendra Modi has a monthly programme.  Unicef collaborated with 215 community radio stations in India, such as Kadal Osai, to create awareness around  ending child marriage,  something which has been on the decline in India, by 2030. “We started the ‘Kutty Chutty Express’ to inform children on the ill-effects of child marriages through skits, quizzes and roadshows, as well as conducting workshops,” says Usman. The station also publicises the number for  Childline India Foundation , which operates the country’s first 24-hour hotline for children in distress. During the pandemic, Kadal Osai has become a bridge between the authorities and the coastal communities. It created awareness of the importance of sanitising and social distancing, and also distributed free masks. “In the initial months, we tried to break a myth among islanders – who believed that they were safe from Covid-19, being surrounded by the salty sea water. Now, since the lockdown has been relaxed, we highlight that ostracising affected people isn’t the solution,” says Usman, as she signs off to go live on 90.4FM, and continue her mission to entertain and inform her faithful community of listeners. Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
'Agent of foreign interests': Museveni lashes out at Uganda election rival:	As Uganda readies for an election on Thursday, President  Yoweri Museveni  is doubling down on his main rival and preparing himself for a sixth term in office. After 35 years in power, he faces a powerful opponent, the popular singer Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, 38, known by his stage name Bobi Wine,  who has captured the hearts of a new generation  by protesting against corruption and youth unemployment. Speaking at his ranch in Kisozi, west of the capital, Museveni said Wine was “an agent of foreign interests” promoting homosexuality. “Western elements”, especially Europeans from countries he declined to name, were backing his rival, Museveni said in an interview. “He gets quite a lot of encouragement from foreigners and homosexuals,” he said. “Homosexuals are very happy with Bobi Wine. I think they even send him support.” Traditionally, homosexuality was tolerated in  Uganda  but in recent years evangelist pastors with a large following have whipped up hatred of gay people, turning it into a political issue. Wearing a shirt in sunshine yellow – the colour of his National Resistance Movement – Museveni sat on a red plush velvet chair under an acacia tree, as aides fussed around with a fly swat, wipes and tissues. Determined that the 76-year-old leader should not contract coronavirus, everyone on the ranch wore masks. A young man in beige jeans and a pale shirt that partially hid the pistol on his belt wielded a huge bottle of disinfectant that he sprayed randomly in the air. A TV microphone was removed for extra sanitising, before being placed half a metre from the president. Museveni, who came to power in 1986 by defeating Milton Obote in a bush war, said he was still “a freedom fighter.” After the atrocities committed by Obote and previously by Idi Amin, he stabilised the country and encouraged foreign investment. However, Uganda remains amongst the poorest countries in the world. Three-quarters of Ugandans were not born in 1986, and most young voters are more concerned about finding a job than about wars gone by. “Those youth who feel marginalised, that’s a healthy internal force,” said the president, pointing out that young people had only survived because of immunisation programmes he had introduced. He denied that his age was a barrier to re-election, even though, back in 1986 he wrote that “the problem of  Africa  in general and Uganda in particular is not the people but leaders who want to overstay in power.” In 2005, Uganda’s parliament removed the two-term limit for presidents, and in 2018 amended the constitution to allow candidates over 75 years to run, paving the way for Museveni to contest this year. Like  Robert Mugabe , who also railed against colonialists and gay people, and who ruled Zimbabwe for 37 years until he was ousted in a coup at the age of 93, Museveni sees no reason to step down. “You think the problem of Uganda is because I’ve been in government for a long time,” he said. “But we don’t agree with that – as long as it is decided on democratically.” How democratic the election will be is open to question. In the past few weeks, several of Wine’s associates have been killed or arrested.  He has been banned from campaigning, detained and beaten  on multiple occasions, supposedly because rallies breach Covid restrictions. Last Friday, Johnson Byabashaija, Uganda’s commissioner general of prisons, said that there was plenty of room in prison for an expected spike in arrests during election week. In November,  at least 54 people were shot dead by security forces  after Wine’s supporters rioted protesting against his arrest. While acknowledging that the security forces pulled the trigger, Museveni blamed the opposition for the killings, including those of passers-by. “The opposition are the ones who wanted to organise an insurrection because they want to organise here what happened in Libya,” he said. “Some died in crossfire.” In the town of Madu, a few miles north of Museveni’s ranch, Wine’s sister, Betty Ssentamu, who is running for parliament, was roaring around in a minivan decorated with pictures of herself and her brother. Wearing a scarlet and gold basuti, a traditional long dress, with a headband reading “People Power” tied round her long braids, she shouted to the crowd, “I have come to challenge everyone! Bobi Wine is the only president who fights for equal rights, and for the common person!” Dozens of boda bodas – motorcycle taxis – hurtled around with her, the riders punching their fists in the air as bystanders cheered and danced. The spontaneous rally was illegal, and Wine knows that he will be detained if he tries to campaign in similar fashion this week. Speaking in the garden of his house near Kampala, attired in dark red narrow trousers and a shirt patterned with Chinese-style dragons, he said that he could see in himself something of the youthful freedom fighter Museveni had once been. “I used to adore Gen Museveni,” he said. “When we were children every plane that passed we would cry, ‘Hi Museveni!’, but slowly he has become a despicable character.” If Wine were to win a majority of the votes, and the electoral commission permitted him to declare victory – by no means a certainty – it is unclear whether the institutions of state would accept the result. The military, the police and the ministries are loyal to Museveni. The Special Forces Group, headed by the president’s son Lt Gen Muhoozi Kainerugaba, provides him with a personal armed force, while secret intelligence agents operate a parallel security structure. “What you should realise is that, in the case of Uganda, the person you’re talking to is very experienced,” said Museveni. “There are not many things in the world that I don’t know. So, when I’m handling a situation, you should know that I know what I’m doing.” Lindsey Hilsum is International Editor for Channel 4 News  Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
