Floods, storms and searing heat: 2020 in extreme weather:	This year has broken a series of unwelcome weather records. Last month was the warmest November in history. This followed the hottest January, May and September. All-time temperature peaks were registered from the Antarctic to the Arctic. Since the start of the year, Australia, Siberia and California have suffered record fires. The Atlantic has generated record storms. Ice in the Laptev Sea has started forming later than ever.The coronavirus pandemic may have dominated the news and temporarily reduced emissions. But 2020 has also demonstrated the increasingly evident impact of human-driven global heating. The six hottest years in human history have all occurred since 2014. That sequence will certainly continue for a seventh year. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) will soon know whether 2020 will take first, second or third place in the all-time ranking.Scientists are surprised temperatures have been so high in the absence of an El Niño, the phenomenon that boosts warmer years such as the current record, 2016. On the contrary, the latter half of this year there was the emergence of a cooling La Niña, which churned up chillier-than-normal waters in the equatorial Pacific. Petteri Taalas, the secretary-general of the WMO, said that without this influence, 2020 would certainly have been the warmest year ever measured.In climate terms, the long-term trend is more important than individual records, but it is the latter that directly affects lives and livelihoods. Unusual heat, drought, fires or storms can be caused by natural variation, local factors or industrial emissions, but scientists are increasingly able to identify that extreme weather events are more frequent and intense as greenhouse gases build up in the atmosphere.“2020 has been another very hot year. We see very strongly the impact of what that means on the changing intensity and likelihood of extreme weather events,” said Friederike Otto, the associate director of the Environmental Change Institute at University of Oxford and co-lead of the World Weather Attribution initiative (WWA). “Every year of more emissions and increasing global mean temperature has an impact on people.”Humankind’s fingerprint was particularly evident in the Siberian heatwave, which was made at least 600 times more probable by humans, and the Australian bushfires, which were made more than 30% more likely.Here is how this year unfolded with global heating at 1.1C above pre-industrial levels. This toll may seem horrifying, but it is just a sample – and will be modest compared with a future world on course for more than 3C of warming.1 JanuaryRecord floods in Indonesia kill at least 19 people, with 62,000 evacuated. The national meteorological agency reports the highest daily rainfall seen in Jakarta since records began in 1866: “This is not ordinary rain.”4 JanuaryTemperatures in the Sydney basin hit a new high of 48.9C, the latest in a series of records in Australia. Bushfires create a 620 miles (1,000km) wide, 21 miles high smoke cloud, three times bigger than anything seen in the world before. It spreads so far that black charcoal reaches Antarctica. Scientists describe it as “a new benchmark on the magnitude of stratospheric perturbations”.6 FebruaryRecord mainland Antarctic heat. The Argentinian research base Esperanza on the northern tip of the Antarctic peninsula, measures a new high for the southern continent of 18.4C (65.3F).9 FebruaryRecord Antarctic island heat. The 20.75C logged by Brazilian scientists at Seymour Island is almost a full degree higher than the previous record of 19.8C in 1982. This has still to be confirmed by the WMO.31 MarchThe Australian bushfire season comes to an end after more than six months of destruction – 33 fatalities, 3,000 homes burned, and more than 10m hectares (25m acres) razed. Wildlife deaths are estimated at more than 1bn mammals, birds and reptiles combined, and hundreds of billions of insects. From the beginning of September 2019 to 23 February 2020, bushfires have emitted 434m tonnes of carbon dioxide, equivalent to about three-quarters of the discharges of Australian industry. Studies by the WWA indicate the bushfires were made at least 30% more probable by human-driven climate change. The summer of 2019-2020 is the second-hottest ever, after the previous year’s summer.30 AprilAsia and Europe record their warmest first four months ever. In China, Yunnan reports the worst drought in 10 years. The Yunnan drought sparks seven forest fires and leaves 1.5 million people with water shortages.11 MayDevastating floods in Kenya and Uganda after heavy rain lead to 200 deaths, and the displacement of at least 400,000 people. 20 May Super-cyclone Amphan is the fiercest storm to hit the Bay of Bengal this century, with winds of 118mph (190kmh). Two million people are evacuated, 129 killed. It is the costliest tropical cyclone on record, with losses in India of $14bn (£10bn).20 JuneRecord Arctic heat. The Russian town of Verkhoyansk registers 38C (more than 100F) amid a freakishly prolonged Siberian heatwave. Siberian wildfires cover almost 1m hectares and release 59m tonnes of carbon dioxide, surpassing last year’s record. On average, temperatures in this region of the Arctic have been 5C above average in the first six months of the year. Scientists from the WWA say this was made at least 600 times more probable by human emissions.24 JulyA third of Bangladesh is underwater after the most prolonged monsoon flooding this century, killing 550 and affecting 9.6 million people across the subcontinent.31 JulyLowest Arctic sea ice extent for July since the beginning of satellite observations in 1979. The 7.1m km2 is 27% below the 1981-2010 average for this time of year.13 AugustTwo months of record rainfall in southern China kills 219 people, prompts the evacuation of 4 million, and causes $26bn in economic losses. The Three Gorges Dam inflow hits a record 72,000 cubic meters a second. The megacity of Chongqing is put on its highest flooding alert since 1981.16 AugustHottest summer ever in the northern hemisphere. Death Valley records a temperature of 54.4C (129.9F), the third-highest on Earth since 1931 (and the two previous records are in question).26 AugustRecord fires in California. More than 405,000 hectares burn in nine days – more than three times the average in the “normal” wildfire season. At least five people are killed, and more than 100,000 evacuated.28 AugustRecord rain in Karachi of 231mm (9 in) in a single day. Pakistan has the wettest month in its history.4-12 September Record flooding in the Sahel region of Africa affects 500,000 people. The White and Blue Nile burst banks. The average level of the Blue Nile reaches 17.43 metres (57.19ft), the highest since Sudan started measuring in 1912. Senegal records 124mm of rain over a seven-hour downpour – the amount that would usually be expected across the entire rainy season from July to September. Sudan imposes a three-month state of emergency on 4 September, after rains destroys about 100,000 houses and kills more than 100 people. In Nigeria, flooding damages 500,000 hectares of farm produce, amounting to about 5bn naira (£9.8m), according to NKC African Economics.12 SeptemberRecord fires, blazing since August, consume 28% of the Pantanal, the world’s largest tropical wetlands, spanning Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay. Fires also consume 2.2m hectares of the Amazon.3 OctoberThe UK has its wettest day on record after Storm Alex, with enough rain to fill Loch Ness.4 October Wildfires in California spread over  1.6m hectares , a new annual record for the most hectares burned in a single year.31 OctoberThe lowest Arctic sea ice extent for the month of October, after the latest ever start to ice formation in Laptev Sea.2 NovemberPhilippines hit by Typhoon Goni, one of the strongest storms in history with gusts of up to 192 mph. At least 20 people are killed and almost a million evacuated.17 November Iota, the strongest hurricane on record to strike Nicaragua, triggers catastrophic flooding and landslides. At least 40 people die across Central America and Colombia. It follows Hurricane Eta – the first time on record the Atlantic has had two major hurricanes in November.22 NovemberSomalia is devastated by Cyclone Gati, the strongest storm to hit this part of world since records in this region began five years ago. Rainfall in two days equals the two-year average. At least eight dead.1 DecemberRecord-breaking Atlantic hurricane season ends. Thirty storms grew strong enough to earn a name, beating 2005’s record of 28 storms. The WMO ran out of storm names by September, turning to the Greek alphabet for labels for the first time since 2005.4 DecemberThe bushfire season starts early in Australia with devastating wildfires on Fraser Island as experts worry that the months ahead could be disastrous.12 DecemberThe World Meteorological Agency says 2020 is certain to be among the three hottest years ever recorded. Although global emissions are likely to have fallen by 7% this year, carbon concentrations in the atmosphere continue to rise. The UN reports global heating in on course to reach 3.2C by the end of the century because governments are not taking sufficient climate action to keep temperatures to the Paris Agreement target of 1.5C to 2C. All eyes are now on the UN climate conference (Cop26) in Glasgow next year.30 DecemberAlmost one year on from the first reported case of Covid-19 in Wuhan, China, the worldwide death toll of the pandemic has passed 1.6 million people and is estimated to cause $28tn of losses. Scientists have warned such outbreaks will become more common as the world’s natural life support systems, including the climate, break down as a result of rising temperatures, deforestation and the illegal wildlife trade. The UN secretary general says humanity has been waging war on nature, and that making peace will be the defining task of the 21st century.
Tesla almost hits 500,000-car delivery target for 2020 despite pandemic:	Tesla reported record deliveries of its electric cars in the last three months of 2020, coming within a whisker of achieving the half-million target for the year set by its chief executive, Elon Musk.The California-based manufacturer’s annual sales rose by 36% after a final quarter that exceeded analysts’ expectations, delivering a total of 499,550 cars in 2020.Tesla delivered 180,570 electric vehicles between October and December, falling just short of the overall target Musk had set at the beginning of the year, before the start of the coronavirus pandemic.Covid-19 forced the shutdown of the company’s Fremont US assembly plant in the spring, but Musk urged employees to increase production to hit the target, and last week offered incentives including free “self-driving” options worth $10,000 (£7,300) on Tesla cars whose paperwork and delivery was completed in the last days of December.Despite apparently missing the target, Tesla said it had “produced and delivered half a million vehicles, in line with our most recent guidance”, and Musk hailed it as a “major milestone”.He tweeted: “So proud of the Tesla team for achieving this major milestone! At the start of Tesla thought we had (optimistically) a 10% chance of surviving at all.”So proud of the Tesla team for achieving this major milestone! At the start of Tesla, I thought we had (optimistically) a 10% chance of surviving at all. https://t.co/xCqTL5TGlEMore than 509,000 cars were made by the manufacturer in 2020. Production of its Model Y SUV has also begun in its Chinese plant in Shanghai, with deliveries expected to begin shortly, Tesla said.Tesla’s share price, which rose eightfold in 2020, ended the year at more than $705, valuing the company at $669bn – 20% of which is owned by Musk himself, who is the world’s second-richest man. It overtook Toyota earlier in the year as the world’s most valuable carmaker and last month joined the prestigious Wall Street S&P index, immediately becoming its sixth most valuable listed company.
'I've never seen anything like it': 2020 smashes records in global markets:	2020 has been the most remarkable year for the global financial markets. After the Covid-19 pandemic triggered the worst crash in a generation, unprecedented stimulus measures and vaccine breakthroughs have sent stocks roaring back to record highs.In a year in which at least 1.7 million people died from coronavirus and unemployment soared in a global recession, world stock markets are ending 2020 up 13% – despite the latest surge in cases forcing further lockdowns this winter.The year began with immediate drama, when the Iranian general Qassem Suleimani was killed in a US drone strike at Baghdad airport, sending oil prices higher and markets lower. But fears of Middle East conflict soon took a back seat as troubling reports of an unidentified pneumonia-like illness in Wuhan, China, emerged.By the start of the Lunar New Year in mid-January, at least 26 people had died. Beijing’s stock market plunged 8% in its worst rout in more than four years when it reopened after the holiday, amid a scramble to shut cinemas, suspend travel, close factories and make people work from home.Weeks later, as the virus spread, the shock that the Lombardy region in Italy was imposing its own lockdown triggered Europe’s worst stock market meltdown in decades. The realisation that politicians would deliberately freeze economic activity to try to slow the virus and prevent health systems being overwhelmed created a month of unprecedented financial turmoil.David Miller, investment director at Quilter Cheviot, says that as a working investment manager, 2020 was both scary and fascinating.“We were facing a disease that we didn’t understand, and which could have been the equivalent of medieval plague. We now know that it’s really unpleasant but not nearly as bad as it could have been, but we didn’t know that at the time,” Miller explains.“Plus, governments had stopped the global economy – something that had never been done before. Would that lead to an economic depression that would make the 1930s look tame?”Heavy falls in the last week of February were followed by a massive selloff on the bourses in March as investors braced for a global recession and Donald Trump shocked the markets by banning flights from Europe.GUARDIAN: Stock markets in biggest fall since 2008 #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/1FX7ivVZZTThe UK’s FTSE 100 suffered its worst day since the 2008 financial crisis on 9 March, falling 7% on “Crash Monday”, followed by a horror show three days later when London and New York both posted their worst days since the 1987 crash, shedding a further 10% each.Wall Street’s long bull market died, not with a bang but a wave of selling that briefly saw the Dow lose all its gains under President Trump.At its worst, the selloff wiped out a third of the blue-chip FTSE 100 index’s value. Having started the year at 7,542 points, it had fallen to about 5,000 points by mid-March – its lowest level since 2011 – during its worst quarter since 1987.The pound was also hammered, falling below $1.20 to its lowest level since 1985 amid a wild scramble for US dollars. Sterling was no one’s idea of a safe haven in a pandemic.But what felt like economic Armageddon in March was actually the buying opportunity of a lifetime – if you had the nerve to pile into the stock market in the early stages of the lockdown.The cavalry had arrived, with central bankers slashing borrowing costs to record lows and launching massive new asset purchase programmes, while governments tried to prop up their economies with packages such as the UK’s job retention scheme.Holger Schmieding, chief economist at the German bank Berenberg, says central banks, finance ministers and regulators deserve praise for acting fast and effectively.“Despite a plunge in output by up to 30% within two months and a bout of serious financial turmoil in early March, the world did not descend into a genuine financial crisis,” Schmieding says.Miller agrees that those support packages for businesses and households were vital. “No one has ever stopped economic activity and locked down a country like we did this year. This is a first.”As the Covid crisis escalated, the financial sector was in better shape than before the 2008 crisis. So in 2020, although there were queues outside the supermarkets, there was no repeat of the run on Northern Rock 13 years ago.Miller says his experience of previous recessions over a 40-year career in the City gave “useful perspective” for 2020’s drama, but this year’s events were still unprecedented.But hard on the heels of cratering equities and the ailing pound came another shock – Saudi Arabia and Russia launched an oil-price war.With air and road travel in deep freeze, an oil glut was already filling up every spare tanker. Riyadh dramatically turning the taps up, not off, sent US oil futures plunging below zero as investors scrambled to offload contracts.The spring also brought grim economic news – more than 20.5 million Americans lost their jobs in April alone, sending the US unemployment rate soaring to 14.7%, its highest level since the second world war.But the markets were recovering much faster than the real economy, thanks to those huge stimulus programmes. Some analysts and investors were cautious, fearing the consequences of a second wave of Covid-19, but the rally had legs. After its worst quarter in over 30 years, the FTSE 100 posted its best three months since 2010 between April and June, as global markets staged a rapid rebound.Tech companies were the clear early winners – as the pandemic pressed the fast-forward button on the move towards digitisation, video-conferencing and online shopping.“The speed of the recovery caught everyone off guard,” explains Stephen Innes, chief global markets strategist at Axi. “The pandemic has compressed what we thought was going to happen over the next five years into three or six months.”By the summer, economies were emerging from their deepest peacetime recessions, and attention turned to the recovery. Talk that frenzied money-printing by central banks would lead to an inflationary boom swept the gold price to $2,000 per ounce for the first time ever in August.Global markets recovered their pandemic losses as investors began to price in a return to economic normality in 2021, and the prospect of yet more stimulus measures.Tom Stevenson, investment director for personal investing at Fidelity International, says there hasn’t been the same sense of panic as in 2008, apart from the rapid slide in February and March.“Even though this year has been difficult for many, I wouldn’t say investment-wise it’s been more challenging than 2008-09. Back then, the crisis felt much closer to the financial markets, and unlike the credit crunch, the pandemic has always seemed like a problem with a solution, namely the vaccine,” Stevenson explains.2020 also brought a fresh wave of retail investors to the market. The FAANG technology titans of Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix and Google-owner Alphabet helped the Nasdaq to jump more than 40% this year. Tesla enjoyed the most astonishing run, up almost 700% in 2020.22 January US president Donald Trump: “We have it totally under control. It’s one person coming in from China [with the coronavirus]. We have it under control. It’s going to be just fine.”9 March Deutsche Bank strategist George Saravelos: “The market is in the process of pricing a global recession.”18 March Pershing Square manager Bill Ackman: “Hell is coming … America will end as we know it. I’m sorry to say so, unless we take this option [a one-month break]. We need to shut it down now.... This is the only answer”.19 March Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey: “We are in an absolutely unprecedented situation. Just the sheer uncertainty we’re having to deal with ... is absolutely being writ large in financial markets.”14 April IMF chief economist Gita Gopinath: “It is very likely that this year the global economy will experience its worst recession since the Great Depression, surpassing that seen during the global financial crisis a decade ago.”14 July Allianz’s chief economic adviser Mohamed El-Erian: “The financial stress caused by Covid-19 is far from over. Investors should brace for non-payments to spread far beyond the most vulnerable corporate and sovereign borrowers, in a reckoning that threatens to drag prices lower.”6 October US Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell: “The recovery will be stronger and move faster if monetary policy and fiscal policy continue to work side by side to provide support to the economy until it is clearly out of the woods.”2 November The then CBI director-general Carolyn Fairbairn: “Gas tanks are depleted, factories run down in so many businesses across the country, in retail, in hospitality. Our aviation sector is absolutely on its knees. We are heading into winter, a bleak midwinter. This is the run-up to Christmas. It is the most important time for so many firms.”23 November Ryan Detrick, chief market strategist at LPL Financial: “Although 30,000 [points on the Dow] isn’t much different than 29,999, there is something special about those big milestone numbers.”Those stock market gains boosted the wealthiest the most, intensifying the economic inequality created by a pandemic that hit lower-paid workers in areas such as hospitality particularly hard.“The people who most need the money don’t have it to invest, unless they took a flier on Amazon or Tesla, but most didn’t,” Innes points out.The London market lagged behind the wider rally, though, hamstrung by its lack of big tech firms, and abundance of miners, oil giants and banks, all bruised by the global downturn.By the autumn, a resurgence of Covid-19 cases and new restrictions pushed the FTSE 100 back down to a six-month low. But then came a record-breaking November for global markets.Many on Wall Street had started 2020 quietly expecting Donald Trump to be re-elected. Never mind the unpredictability and trade wars, went the theory, just enjoy the promise of lower taxes and deregulation.But by the time Joe Biden had triumphed, money had already poured into renewable energy stocks, along with cyclical companies, in anticipation of increased spending on infrastructure and new stimulus moves from a Democratic White House.Biden’s win prompted a rally after a weak October, which accelerated when Pfizer brought the news everyone had been hoping for – successful vaccine trial data. Global stock markets surged to new record highs, with a frenzy of buying lifting beleaguered “value” stocks such as airlines and hospitality firms, on optimism of a better 2021.The year wrapped up with fresh records, as the Federal Reserve pledged to keep monetary police very loose until the US economy had recovered. First the Dow hit 30,000 points, then bitcoin broke through to $20,000, and raced to $28,000 days later. Quite a revival, given the cryptocurrency had slumped to $6,000 during the March crash. The tech boom refused to abate, with Airbnb’s share price doubling as it floated on the Nasdaq.As the year ends, MSCI’s All Country World index of global shares is more than 13% higher for the year, and two-thirds higher than its March lows.Innes says 2020 was the toughest of his 30-year career. “I’ve never seen anything like it, both the pace of the compression, and then the rebound. Things happened 20, 30 times faster than ever seen before, and I’ve never seen such a strong, concerted, reaction from central bankers either.”Brexit also weighed on UK stocks this year, and was one reason the FTSE 100 fell behind other markets – and is still down 12% for the year. As negotiations reached a climax in December, the pound hit a 31-month high over $1.36, then suffered a late wobble before the final deal was agreed. Although the agreement is thinner than hoped, particularly for services, UK stocks still rallied to a nine-month high once fears of a disorderly Brexit abated.Those huge stimulus packages also drove government bond yields to fresh record lows – the UK can now borrow for free for five years. While welcome news for finance ministers facing huge deficits, such low returns also push investors into riskier assets like equities in search of returns.But it was another rough year for those who trusted their savings to the bank, rather than risking the ups and downs of the financial markets. With interest rates at record lows, cash savings have languished again.“Deposit rates at high street banks are barely above zero and even tying your money up for 10 years in UK government bonds [gilts] will currently earn less than half a per cent per annum, if held to maturity,” says Simon Young, portfolio manager at AXA Investment Managers.
Chelsea v Manchester City: Premier League – live!:	Leicester have moved up to third after a 2-1 win at Newcastle. John Brewin has more.Pre-match readingEderson is out with Covid-19, so the American goalkeeper Zack Steffen will make his Premier League debut for Manchester City. Nathan Ake, Ferran Torres, Aymeric Laporte, Eric Garcia, Kyle Walker, Gabriel Jesus and Tommy Doyle are also missing from the squad. Ake and Laporte are injured; the rest have tested positive for Covid.The superb Hakim Ziyech returns to the Chelsea team, and Timo Werner gets a start at centre-forward. Olivier Giroud, Callum Hudson-Odoi, Jorginho and Andreas Christensen, who started the 1-1 draw against Villa last year, are left out.Chelsea (possible 4-3-3) Mendy; Azpilicueta, Zouma, Thiago, Chilwell; Kovacic, Kante, Mount; Ziyech, Werner, Pulisic.Substitutes: Kepa, Rudiger, Emerson, Jorginho, Gilmour, Havertz, Abraham, Giroud, Hudson-Odoi.Manchester City (possible 4-2-3-1) Steffen; Cancelo, Stones, Dias, Zinchecnko; Rodri, Gundogan; Silva, De Bruyne, Foden; Sterling.Substitutes: Carson, Mendy, Harwood-Bells, Mbete, Fernandinho, Aguero, Mahrez, Delap.Referee Anthony Taylor.Birthday Song by Frankie Cosmos, written when she was a teenager, is 68 seconds of classic pop: charming, contemptuous, wise and melancholy. The opening lyric – “Just because I am a certain age/Doesn’t mean that I am any older than I was yesterday” – captures the vague absurdity of the milestones most of us cling onto, and came to mind when thinking about this afternoon’s game between Chelsea and Manchester City at Stamford Bridge.Sure, it’s 2021 now, but the pains of 2020 haven’t disappeared miraculously into the ether. Covid-19 is still the bane of our existence, and is affecting Premier League clubs more than ever. Manchester City will reportedly be without five players this afternoon, including Kyle Walker and Gabriel Jesus, because of positive Covid tests. We’ll soon find out who the others are.City’s problems make this a good chance for Chelsea to improve their dismal recent form. They’ve taken just four points from their last five games, though most of their struggled have been away from home. Only Liverpool have taken more points and scored more goals at home this season than Chelsea, though George Graham’s Manchester City will make them work very hard for every chance.The two teams are level on 26 points, though City have two games in hand so a defeat today wouldn’t kill their title chances. It’s a bigger game for Chelsea because of that, the glacially mounting pressure on Frank Lampard and because they have both home and Covid advantage. It’s not necessarily a must-win, but it’s surely a mustn’t-lose. Kick off 4.30pm. 
England arrive in Sri Lanka for two-Test series and pass first round of Covid tests:	England touched down in Sri Lanka on Sunday for the two-Test series between the teams later this month with a number of stringent coronavirus protocols in place for the tourists’ arrival.A 23-man playing group, comprising 16 squad members and seven reserves, plus coaching staff were tested for Covid-19 when they landed at the Mattala Rajapaksa international airport in Hambantota after a chartered flight. Each member of the travelling party, who were sprayed with disinfectant by airport staff in full protective suits, returned negative test results – as was the case before they left London.They will now begin their mandatory period of quarantine in Hambantota, starting with isolating in individual hotel rooms until Tuesday, when they will be subject to another round of screening for the virus.If those results come back negative then the players will be able to train on Tuesday afternoon, starting preparations for a series which was supposed to take place last March but was postponed because of the pandemic.Both Tests will take place behind closed doors in Galle, with the first match set to start on 14 January and the second scheduled to begin eight days later. There are strict measures in place to cope with coronavirus in Sri Lanka, which has reported 211 deaths and 44,371 cases according to Johns Hopkins University.The Sri Lanka government suspended commercial flights arriving into the country from the UK last month, meaning England had to travel via a privately chartered plane.
Seven groundbreaking female photographers – in pictures:	In 2018, to mark the centenary of the act that paved the way to universal suffrage in the UK, the Royal Photographic Society ran a campaign to identify outstanding female photographers from around the world. Nearly 5,000 were nominated, and a final 100 were selected. The independent charity Hundred+ Heroines was founded by Del Barrett, previously vice president of the RPS, to amplify their influence, and to seek to establish them as household names. The organisation is committed to challenging the under-representation of women in photography, and to encouraging a wider public interest in their work.Tshepiso Mazibuko documents her township, capturing chance meetings between herself and her community.Mazibuko was born in Thokoza, South Africa, in 1995. Using photography to create social and political commentary, Mazibuko is inspired by her personal relationship with her immediate environment. Exploring everyday life, she documents her township, capturing chance meetings between herself and her community.Her photography illustrates and strengthens connections between localised experience, landscape and history. She lives and works in Thokoza.The series By an Eyewitness stages a number of deathsAkhlaghi, born in 1978 in Shiraz, Iran, focuses on conceptual art and staged photography. By an Eyewitness, a series of seventeen photographs, stages what Akhlaghi refers to as the “mysterious deaths” of journalists, politicians, activists and film-makers.Assassinations, torture, accidents, suspicious and natural deaths are all represented; the photographs are at once a record of localised and national distress, and an attempt to navigate the turbulence of Iran’s modern history.Pairing images with explanatory texts in both English and Farsi, each work balances historical reconstruction with the conflicting accounts that arise in the aftermath of trauma.Arpita Shah’s work often focuses on the notion of home, belonging and shifting cultural identities.Shah is a photographic artist based in the UK. She spent an earlier part of her life living between India, Ireland and the Middle East.This migratory experience is reflected in her practice, which often focuses on the notion of home, belonging and shifting cultural identities.Her series Nalini is an ongoing project that focuses on the intimacy, distance and tensions between the generations of women in Shah’s family, and how their histories, memories and bodies are intertwined.Katrin Koenning’s series Swell is a protest against the Australian government’s restrictions on green activism. Koenning is a photographer from the Ruhr in Germany, now based in Melbourne, Australia. While situated in the documentary tradition, her distinctive visual style reflects her intuitive, experimental approach.Her current series,  Swell, is a protest against the Australian government’s restrictions on green activism and conservational philanthropy.Juxtaposing mini-ecologies across Australia with details of the human body, the work highlights the vital connection between people and place to encourage collective urgency.Tanya Habjouqa’s Sacred Space Oddity project explores the overlap between the sacred and profaneHabjouqa is a Texan-Jordanian photojournalist, artist and educator with a primary interest in gender, social and human rights issues in the Middle East. Her work has been cited as a powerful investigation of interrelation between religion, politics, economics and cultural production.Her collaborative project Sacred Space Oddity explores overlap between the sacred and profane in the lives of Palestinians and Israelis, challenging the dichotomy between secular and religious practices.Diana Markosian’s series Santa Barbara re-enacts the story of her childhoodMarkosian is an American-Russian documentary photographer, writer, and film-maker of Armenian descent. Known for her photo essays, her work is characterised by intimate explorations of national and familial history.In her series  Santa Barbara she re-enacts the story of her childhood, recreating her mother’s escape from post-Soviet Russia to Santa Barbara, California, through film and photographs.Featuring film stills from the 1980s soap opera Santa Barbara – the first American TV show broadcast in Russia – alongside staged archival family photographs, Markosian’s work blurs the distinction between fact and fiction.Margaret Courtney-Clarke’s latest book When Tears Don’t Matter portrays the lives of the remaining bushmen in the Kalahari in eastern Namibia.Courtney-Clarke, born in Namibia in 1949, is a documentary photographer whose work frequently explores the resilience of communities enduring the rapidly shifting landscapes of Namibia.Her latest book, When Tears Don’t Matter, portrays the lives of the remaining bushmen in the Kalahari in eastern Namibia, who eke out a living amid the daunting demands of nature. Attracted by human passage, destruction and intervention, Courtney-Clarke captures the life of the community and shares in its perpetually unfolding story.
Animals and plants reclaim Scotland's abandoned spaces: photo essay:	Since the idea of rewilding took hold, it has generally been seen as a rural pursuit involving withdrawal from farmland so that animals and vegetation can restore their own ecology.At its most herbivorous, it includes allowing hedgerows or scrub to flourish unchecked. At its most primal, it involves deliberately releasing animals such as beavers or wolves in the belief that the re-entry of a single alpha species brings with it a cascade of ecological benefits.Either way, rewilding has come to be associated with big acreages, whether that be at Knepp Park in Sussex or at the 18,000-acre Glenfeshie estate in the Cairngorms. The perception is that it is expensive, far away and often inaccessible. It certainly isn’t something that just anyone can do.But what if the wildest places of all were right under our feet? In the forgotten spaces in our cities, rewilding has always happened naturally, , land falling under stone and resurging again, concrete lids flipped off before submerging once more. In the margins and the demilitarised zones, the abandoned embankments, the bits we don’t want or the lands already contaminated beyond human tolerance, ecology is thriving.In some places – such as the land around the abandoned Chernobyl nuclear plant in Ukraine – plant and insect life has adapted to the extreme conditions: boars have moved in, there is a new radiation-munching fungus and, in the thin strip of no-man’s land between the borders of North and South Korea, leopards and Asiatic black bears have been spotted. In the past century, Greenham Common in Berkshire has transformed from open heathland grazing to the home of US Trident missiles to an SSSI nature reserve with a weedy runway.In Scotland, the 40-mile strip between Glasgow and Edinburgh has always been mined, for not just coal, but stone, gravel, lead and even gold. After centuries of hard pickings, parts of Lanarkshire and Ayrshire have an upended appearance. What was underground is now on top and what was above has gone below, with buildings and bridges slumped over old drift mines and razor-lined spoil heaps terraced by extraction tracks. Wildfowl nest on lochs made from old coal holes and an orchid called Young’s helleborine, discovered in 1975, favours only the best iron ore.The Ardeer peninsula in Ayrshire is home to the unusually bracing combination of a nudist beach and an explosives factory once owned and operated by the Alfred Nobel Company. Parts of the site are still in use, but most of the 330-acre site was long ago abandoned. Along the cracks in the old pipelines and through the decaying buildings, it would be quicker to list the native plants that are no longer there than those that are.In theory, industry and mining companies are supposed to follow restoration plans for abandoned sites, but in practice they often plead poverty. Besides, ecologists sometimes find themselves ensnared in a paradox. Public feeling is that big business should be obliged to make good what it has taken, but human attempts to restore land are often amateurish. Planting a few conifers and flinging around a mix of wildflowers may be a quick fix, but sometimes it appears that the best thing to do is nothing.The M74 motorway runs up the front of Scotland past new windfarms and second world war PoW camps. Not far from Broken Cross, Europe’s largest opencast coal mine, there’s Castle Dangerous. In 1913 the 13th Earl of Home tried to lift local unemployment at Douglas by allowing mining nearby. The mining unseated the castle, it was demolished, and the flooded workings (known locally as the Black Hole) are now so patterned with commuting birdlife that it resembles an avian Heathrow.Further up the motorway, near Port Glasgow, the old timber ponds attract birds of a seaborne kind. The ponds are shallow estuarine mudflats divided by ancient wooden stakes (or stabs) and were once used to grade and store logs for shipbuilding. It is an atmospheric place, the stabs shrouded in black weed like cartoon ghouls while beyond them the lights of Dunbarton shine over the water. Poking around in the mud and sunken tyres I hear a curlew for the first time this year, its song for an instant rhyming with an ambulance siren.On the other side of the Clyde, between the Erskine Bridge and the old John Brown shipyard, lies what used to be the Beardmore naval construction works in Dalmuir. In the early 20th century it produced munitions, planes, submarines and warships before being converted into a fuel-supply depot and then being gradually abandoned.Now a cycle path runs through it, but otherwise there is nothing new here except nature: golden leaves of birch springing from the concrete jetty, hawkweed drifting Ophelia-like in the drowned oil storage tanks, wrens nesting in the rusted embankments, mallards cackling from the blackthorn scrub. “Have you seen the deer?” asks a dog walker. There are two, apparently – one red, one roe, both favouring the grazing just beneath the giant electricity pylon.Dalmuir is beautiful, dangerous – and almost certainly contaminated. Like many of the other sites, it has always been used by more than just squirrels and crows. Since industry retreated it has been a flytip, a heroin shooting gallery and probably a place to dispose of worse things than just old mattresses.Halflands like these can be among the most joyous and optimistic places on earth, but they can also carry with them a polluting sense of menace. Finding them means that you may end up meandering across an indeterminate line between a walk in the park and full-scale urban exploration; you explore at your own risk. Some places encourage public interest and others, despite Scotland’s differing access laws, discourage it.They also have a habit of vanishing. Brownfield sites tend to be classified as wasteland, and with the pressure on housing, they are first in line for redevelopment. Ardeer is intended for “regeneration” and Dalmuir will shortly be dug up to make way for the Scottish Marine Technology Park, a deepwater ship hoist and a new small-vessel fabrication yard. Malin Group, which owns the site, says it will create 600 short-term jobs and give a multimillion-pound boost to the local economy, which it claims is “sure to bring back to life this area of the river”.
Share a story with the Guardian:	Get in touch with your news tips and stories by filling in our encrypted form below. Click here for other ways to contact the Guardian securely.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here.We will contact you if one of our journalists is interested in following up on your story.
Tell us about your return to the UK from countries on the quarantine list:	We would like to hear from people about their experiences arriving at UK airports, ports and train stations from countries on the quarantine list, such as Croatia, France, Spain and Luxembourg.Were you required to fill out a test and trace form? Was your temperature taken? Were you given a QR code for scanning? Did anyone check your passport? Was there any information indicating you needed to isolate for 14 days? We are also interested in hearing from people who have been contacted to ensure they have been quarantining.You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project here .If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story.We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to:DoctorsNursesParamedics and EMTsMedical techniciansPharmacistsHome health aidesNursing home staffRespiratory therapistsMental health workersMedical administratorsEnvironmental services staffFood service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilitiesPorters who transport patientsWhile we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can.You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News please click here instead). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care.One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
Tell us: what do you think of the Brexit deal?:	The UK and the EU have struck an agreement on the UK’s future trading and security relationship with the European Union on Christmas Eve, four and half years after the country voted to leave the European Union, and just over a week before the end of the Brexit transition period.As the country leaves the single market and customs union on 31 December, new arrangements allowing for tariff-free trade in goods and close police and judicial cooperation will come into force.We’d like to hear what people think of the deal and how it might affect them.You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
Tell us about your best virtual travel experience of 2020 to win a £200 holiday prize:	Developing itchy feet was one of the many downsides of 2020, though many people escaped via the internet in creative and fascinating ways. Maybe you discovered a fantastic genre of music on a foreign radio station, had one of the world’s leading art galleries all to yourself on a virtual tour, or got as close to a live cultural experience as it was possible to get during lockdown at an online gig, classical concert or theatre performance.Whatever it was and wherever it took you, please tell us about your favourite virtual travel discovery of 2020. Keep your tip to about 100 wordsThe best tip of the week, chosen by travel expert Tom Hall, will win a £200 voucher for a stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe the paper too.We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition.The competition closes on Tuesday 12 January at 9am GMTHave a look at our past winners and other tipsRead the terms and conditions hereIf you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
10 songs that bring back memories of my travels: Cerys Matthews’ playlist:	“Go to Addis!” Three words from author and poet Lemn Sissay made me book a flight and finally head to Ethiopia – a land of music, history, food and nature. The trip was too short, though we did meet Mulatu Astatke, father of Ethio-jazz, on his home turf, visited a coffee plantation and drank the best coffee in the world, saw several hippos and fell in love with the marabou storks, as tall as me and as characterful as our older generations. We tried tej (honey wine) at the Fendika Cultural Centre in Addis Ababa, saw the young generation play and dance to ancient songs, then watched a DJ session by Melaku, surrounded by his record collection. Also check out Hailu Mergia and Homesickness by Tsegué Maryam Guèbronwells.This song is indelibly associated with the 1976 Notting Hill carnival and race riots, but a few bars of it take me to San San, a quiet stretch of beach near Port Antonio in Jamaica, where local mento band the Jolly Boys play their version. Junior Murvin lived on the same hillside, and this tune resonates miles away. It was playing again on the decks at the Geejam Studio in Port Antonio, by when I had a sorrel martini in hand and I was gazing upwards through the canopy of the trees in this area famous for its verdant giants. I recognised varieties of climbing plants usually left languishing, gathering dust, in office corners back home. Teac Hiudai Beag’s bar in Gweedore, County Donegal: midwinter, full wind, young children and peace on a bar stool with great Guinness. Our three little ones, none older than seven, danced to and with the Murphy family in session, then watched Altan on New Year’s Eve in the local arts centre, and later listened to ghost stories – all in the shadow of a snow-covered Mount Errigal.At the Iridium jazz club on Broadway, Les Paul was so switched on, talking about bluesman Pegleg Howell like it was yesterday. On the same trip to New York, we headed to the Terra Blues bar on Bleecker Street; then Sunday afternoon was spent at Smalls in the West Village, and the intimate jazz sessions that simply cannot be lost to Covid. Check out the club’s fly-on-the-wall camera that streams live sessions.Yusef’s attitude to music reminds me of great local music venues – you don’t always have to travel for great trips. I used to stroll into Mau Mau on London’s Portobello Road (now sadly closed), stay gripped to my other half and take in whatever its jazz re:freshed sessions had to offer that night. It was an experience that only the passing of time has showed the real value of. We witnessed a generation of soon-to-be-seminal London jazz players stake their claims. Check out a clip or two of Nubya Garcia on YouTube, and you’ll get an idea of the magic they created.So much can be learned through music. As a child I’d drink in the politics and life that were found in the best pan-world songs. To end up singing with this Delta blues legend, who was a colleague and friend of Robert Johnson, was something I will never forget. Three chords and so much to say, he was in his 90s when I met and sang with him in the humidity of a Mississippi afternoon, guitar in hand, on a porch, sweating and swatting away the mosquitoes.OK, hand on heart, I’d enjoyed too many mojitos a few days previously in El Floridita bar, where Hemingway used to drink in Havana, and ended up singing the first verse of the Irish folk ballad Spancil Hill a few too may times … I couldn’t remember the rest of the words. Then I endured a flight on an ancient plane through an electric storm after an eight-hour delay because of technical difficulties (I’m a nervous flyer at the best of times). But then I got to spend time in the cradle of son cubano music – Casa de la Trova in Santiago – with its huge cigars, dancing of gymnastic capabilities (not me) and some standout acoustics, all played live, electric-free by world-leading local players.I was standing in the middle of this little industrial village called Lerwick in Shetland. The cobbled square ends abruptly and becomes a mooring for oil boats from all nations. Right there: a mooring up to the middle of the pedestrian centre! There are tiny stone-fronted shops and cottages, a paved centre, and then the huge red-and-white hulks of steel ships forming a border to the square. Add to that scene slowly falling mammoth snowflakes and crystal-clear air. Then a door suddenly opened to belch out Oasis’s Supersonic – played on accordions. It was a snow globe kind of evening that I never wanted to leave.Walking the heights of Caernarfon Castle, eating food in the local pubs such as the 16th-century Black Boy Inn, reading about the history of the city walls, borders and migration … And then visiting the leading exponent of the Welsh triple harp, Llio Rhydderch, at home among a collection of harps that date back to the 18th century, when Abram Wood and his Roma family settled in Wales, took up playing the three-stringed harp and saved the tradition, allowing the pedal-free harp to become the national instrument of Wales. Llio was a pupil of “Queen of the Harp” Nansi Richards, who learned from the Wood family. I was in heaven listening to Llio’s versions of local airs from Ynys Mon (Angelsey), and I dreamed of Miles Davis arriving, and listening to him and Llio improvising on these ancient melodies.My perfect day in Paris would start with coffee and a view over the Seine followed by a browse through the bookshelves of Shakespeare and Company, then a wander around the central districts of Paris, looking for that perfect spot for a picnic lunch beside the river to devour a new book and une demi-bouteille de vin. This tune, recorded by Sidney Bechet and French jazz clarinettist Claude Luter, bottles the Parisian summer haze, and serves as a taster for a late-night boogie in the Latin Quarter at jazz club Le Caveau de la Huchette (opened in 1946).Cerys Matthews’ new album, We Come From the Sun, is released on 15 January on Decca. Pre-order at cerysmatthews.lnk.to/WCFTSSo
Sign up for Word of Mouth: the best of Guardian Food every week:	Each week we’ll keep you up-to-date with all the food coverage from the Guardian and the Observer. We’ll send you the latest recipes from Yotam Ottolenghi, Nigel Slater, Meera Sodha and all our star cooks, stand-out food features and seasonal eating inspiration, plus restaurant reviews from Grace Dent and Jay Rayner.Sign up below to start receiving the best of our culinary journalism in one mouth-watering weekly email.Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football or travel, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Design Review: get the newsletter for the way we live now:	‘Design’ is a word used to describe architecture and products, ideas and visual arts. Design makes your sofa comfortable, but it can also save the planet if you’re developing innovative building materials. In this age, every aspect of design is considered by the switched-on reader, so the Design Review newsletter focuses on thinking and process as much as products to buy.The way we think about lifestyle is changing. As our focus turns to sustainability and away from the short fix of fashion and trends, we have updated our lifestyle journalism to reflect this. Following on from the Observer’s quarterly Design magazine, our monthly newsletter to bring you more of these features and stories.***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties.Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
'Hold my beer': Australian surfer Mikey Wright charges into Hawaii surf to rescue struggling swimmer:	An Australian pro surfer who stepped in to rescue a woman being swept away by strong currents in Hawaii says he did not stop to consider his own safety because he “just knew that she needed help”.Mikey Wright was looking out over a beach, thought to be on Oahu’s north shore, when he saw a beachgoer struggling in the surf.Wright posted footage of the rescue on Instagram with the caption: “Hold my beer.”Although other beachgoers could be seen trying to help and reach the struggling swimmer, the current was too strong.Up steps Wright, declaring, the swimmer is “going to need to get saved”.Some of the beachgoers can be heard on the video doubting Wright, with someone heard saying, “You can’t save him.”But that doesn’t stop the pro surfer handing over his phone, which is still filming, jumping the fence and charging into the surf.Fighting the surging ocean and difficult conditions, Wright dives in and picks up the woman, and although they were submerged multiple times, successfully pulls her out of the surf.A group of people awaited them on the beach, helping them from the water and pulling them to safety.“I didn’t question if I was in danger,” Wright, 24, later told the American Broadcasting Corporation. “I just knew that she needed help. This lady was in a very tricky situation. Even for a confident person in the water, that’s not somewhere you want to be.”Making the rescue all the more dangerous were sharp volcanic rocks and 15-foot waves that were breaking so close together they took on “the force of two waves”. Wright said his sister, who also went into the water, helped to warn when this was occurring.The video was also posted by Wright’s sister, Tyler, who captioned it himself by saying “Closing out 2020 with some hero shit by [Mikey].”It has been reposted by surfers around the world, and has been viewed thousands of times, as people celebrate Wright’s bravery.Many took to comment on Wright’s post, praising the 24-year-old and championing his selfless act.Mick Fanning, former world champion surfer, wrote: “Wow that could of ended really bad!! Well done.”Another comment came from Jessi Miley-Dyer, a former championship tour surfer, who said, “Who needs a cape when you have a mullet.”Wright comes from a family of surfers, including brother Owen and two-time women’s world champion Tyler, all from the the New South Wales south coast town of Culburra.The siblings were in Hawaii for the Pipeline Masters event, held just before Christmas.Mikey placed 17th in the men’s event, but Tyler won the first women’s tour title at Hawaii’s famed Pipeline break, making it an overall successful trip for the family.
The alternative 2020 sports awards: quotes, storms and animal cameos:	As clubs reacted to the new normal: Arsenal – unveiling £230k-a-week Thomas Partey (“#NoThomasNoPartey”) a day after making their dinosaur redundant. Arsenal said job cuts, including Gunnersaurus, were “sad but essential” for “ensuring we operate in a sustainable and responsible way”.Also making sad changes: 1) Daniel Levy – trying to furlough staff and introduce 20% pay cuts before public opinion turned. Levy said the criticism of a tax‑exile‑owned club asking for public money “had been felt all the more keenly because of our track record of good works – and our huge sense of responsibility to care”.2) Fenway Sports Group, walking back their decision to furlough Liverpool staff soon after reporting a £42m club profit, having “come to the wrong conclusion last week … we are truly sorry for that”.And 3) Mike Ashley, furloughing Newcastle staff to “safeguard the future of the club” while also trying to sell it to Saudi sportswashers. In March Ashley clarified his broader stance on the pandemic after media criticised his lockdown attempt to keep Sports Direct open and put its prices up. Ashley: “There has been no dress rehearsal for what we as a nation are currently tackling … I for one am immensely proud of our government, our NHS and all of our key workers.”Was Newcastle fans raising over £20,000 for a food bank by donating their £14.95 pay-per-view fees. PPV – backed by Ashley in October “due to there being no realistic or viable alternative” – was dropped in November.Taken in 2018 but finding new life online in 2020, as the public got a feel for the man throwing a protective ring around the nation.Came in November – Allegra Stratton, new head of the No 10 briefing unit hired to tidy up government crisis messaging – pocket-tweeting a lo-res photo of Tony Pulis captioned “Pppppppp”. No explanation followed, it was deleted, she moved on.The moment No 10 knew cut-through was complete: 29 May: TV viewers watching Sydney Roosters v South Sydney Rabbitohs at Australia’s Bankwest Stadium – where fans could pay $22 to have a cardboard cutout of themselves in the stand – spotting one of Dominic Cummings.He’s travelled to Sydney now. Cummings doesn’t give a shit! pic.twitter.com/BbTRllHrQm• Also given airtime during the cutout scheme, before the NRL launched “a review of the vetting process”: Harold Shipman watching Newcastle Knights v Penrith Panthers, and Adolf Hitler, photoshopped into the stands by Fox Sports’ The Matty Johns Show. Fox said sorry after a viewer backlash: “We sincerely apologise for the offence the image has caused.”Was Inter’s Ashley Young, filling a government comms hole in March with a 12-tweet thread of Covid advice, based on his experience as Italy struggled.• Among 2020’s less successful attempts to step up:1) Kyle Walker, urging followers in April to “stay at home, protect the NHS and save lives” without telling them he’d hired two escorts for a £2k lockdown home visit the previous day.2) @jofraarcher, bursting England cricket’s biosecure bubble for a trip home, 13 days after warning followers: “Coronavirus is the biggest global crisis for children since World War Two.”And 3) @JackGrealish, crashing his car while wearing mismatched slippers outside a friend’s house the morning after telling fans: “Stay home. Only leave your house to buy food, medicine, or to exercise. This is urgent. Protect the NHS. Stay at home. Save lives.” Grealish said he was “deeply embarrassed … I obviously urge everyone to follow the rules, I know for a fact I’ll be doing that,” then broke them again this month. Dean Smith: “These are challenging times for us all.”Came in November amid restriction exemptions for chauffeurs, “high-value” fliers and grouse-shooters: a £135m bailout for rugby union, and £12m for rugby league. No 10 denied favouring “Tory sports”; RFU head Bill Sweeney called the settlement “very pleasing”.Was sport’s leading anti-vaxxer Novak Djokovic, whose summer Adria Tour featured hugging, topless dancing, full stands and then multiple positive Covid tests, including for him and his wife. Djokovic said he put the event on “with a pure heart and sincere intentions” but “we were wrong … I pray for everyone’s recovery”.1) 21 May: Matt Hancock taking questions from Robbie Savage at the daily Covid briefing; and 2) 5 October: Hancock admitting a major Covid data loss in the Commons while next door Brexit’s Baron Botham of Ravensworth was making his debut in ermine.Was a fake @MarcusRashforrd account handling the alt-right so he didn’t have to. @KTHopkins: “Dear Marcus Rashford, do you think women should think about how they are going to feed a child before they decide to have it? I do not want to pay to feed other people’s kids. You are welcome to.” The fake account’s reply had two words, and 259.8k likes.1) Breaking news on new government restrictions in October.“There’s been a second lockdown, but for who, Chris Kamara?” pic.twitter.com/4MNd8arxGD2) Plus @visualsatire, staying topical in September.Priti Patel with the hair of Terry Yorath pic.twitter.com/CIKMjJwVUdSouth Korea’s FC Seoul – explaining themselves in May after they were fined for filling empty stands with sex dolls. Seoul said their “inexcusable mistake” was due to “a mix-up with the supplier … it is true they look and feel like real humans, but the manufacturer told us they were not made for sexual use. We double-, and triple-checked this.”• Also not happy: tech suppliers to Japanese baseball side Fukuoka SoftBank Hawks, denying in July that replacing fans with synchronised dancing robots in human and dog form was “too creepy”: “These are often used at construction sites. This is only their first time in entertainment.”Schalke in June, asking fans who bought tickets to matches they were no longer allowed to attend to explain why they wanted refunds: “Why do you need the money now? Elaborate on your case of hardship and if possible submit documentation.” The club apologised for using “impersonal and not very sensitive expressions”.Among many that would not have made sense last year: @SkySports on darts in April: “Gary Anderson ruled out of event due to poor WiFi.”@eastleighFC, not buying into the first lockdown’s inter-club online banter after Havant & Waterlooville’s account asked in March: “Hey, @EastleighFC fancy a little quiz?” @EastleighFC: “No.”German 11th-tier side SG Ripdorf/Molzen II, beaten 37-0 in September after socially distancing from opponents. Only seven Ripdorf players agreed to take part after learning Holdenstedt’s squad had been in contact with an infected person, and “kept a safe distance” during play. “We are thankful for those seven,” said Ripdorf’s co-chair. “There was no perfect solution here.”Today’s official attendance was: 1 A great effort from Tom and his camper van. #BornToBeFylde⚽️ pic.twitter.com/9pQezTifEZWas rugby and golf commentator @MrAndrewCotter covering feeding time for dogs Olive and Mable. Featuring the year’s soundest all-round advice: “Don’t bollocks around wagging your tail.”I was bored. pic.twitter.com/bVoC0hyNzCNaomi Osaka won the US Open having worn a different mask in each round bearing the name of a black victim of violence. “The more retweets it gets … that’s so lame … but the more people talk about it.” See also Lewis Hamilton.FA head Greg Clarke, telling MPs in November about “coloured” players and how gay players made “a life choice”. Clarke resigned hours later: “Sometimes I trip over my words.”Was this from January, in simpler times: Greg Harlow telling World Indoor Bowls Championships partner Nick Brett: “There’s about six inches between the two bowls, so there is just room.” The crowd laughs; Brett finds the six inches.Came in November as Scotland’s Ryan Christie welled up pitch-side after their Euro 2020 qualifier penalties win in Serbia ended a 23-year absence from major men’s tournaments. “It’s the worst thing I’ve ever been through … Just, for everything, you know … ohhhhh. I’m gone.”Just a great interview with Ryan Christie pic.twitter.com/h7yLGVblgFFrom British Transport Police @BTPNotts in July:Officers attended a report of persons in the canal opposite Nottingham station. A Forest fan had jumped in to celebrate a win over local rivals, unaware of the late equaliser ⚽️ #wounded https://t.co/SIdniwNCOSA club statement from @FortWilliamFC in March: “Following unacceptable behaviour of The Ultras supporters group over a number of games this season we have taken the decision to ban this group from home games. They will be able to gain entry individually if accompanied by a parent.”Venue operators playing the wrong national anthem. This year: The ATP Cup, playing Romania’s anthem to honour Moldova before their tie with Belgium in Sydney in January. “We are sincerely sorry and have apologised personally to #TeamMoldova.”Explaining what happened on US election night, and on the nights after, through the medium of Troy Deeney.pic.twitter.com/85FY3B8IBMCame on 30 July: “Fifa president Gianni Infantino faces Swiss criminal proceedings.” Infantino denies wrongdoing. See also: “Infantino joins $3m club” and “Madagascar FA boss ‘goes missing with €25m’”.2017: Ahmad Ahmad wins Africa’s confederation presidency on an anti-corruption ticket as “Africa’s candidate for change … This is sweet victory, thanks to God. I’m the only one who dared present a candidacy for change. Now I’m vying to bring it.” Gianni Infantino: “Ahmad works body and soul for football. He’ll fit into our team.” 2020: Ahmad banned for five years for alleged bribery, abuse of staff and spending CAF money on cars. He denies wrongdoing.As live tweeted by @StevenageFC in January: “45+1’ – Ben Nugent attempts a right-footed volley from inside the Northampton box. Throw-in. 0-0 #WeAreStevenage”; “45+2’ – Charlie Goode shoots from thirty yards. Car park. 0-0 #WeAreStevenage.”Bologna, September:🚨 OFFICIAL 🚨They thought he was a myth, they hunted high and low, they believed he would appear. Now, he's here and he's real 🦕💪Our Flower of Scotland 🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿#WeAreOne pic.twitter.com/4v7OipkWQ2Still demanding better press standards in Italy: Brescia owner Massimo Cellino, 2 February, issuing a statement “categorically denying” media reports that he plans to sack coach Eugenio Corini for the second time inside one season. “We go forward together, with even greater commitment, and with more positivity.” 5 Feb: Sacks him.12 Nov: Nice chairman Jean-Pierre Rivère says fans should lay off Patrick Vieira because “when we are in a boat, in the middle of the sea, we must row together, in one direction, to sail to our solution. We hear what fans say, we’re not deaf, but our role is clear: to support all those in our boat.” 4 Dec: “We thank Patrick for his hard work.”Chris Broad, match referee for the England v Pakistan series, fining son Stuart £2,000 for bad language in August. Broad junior was sanctioned after an “exchange of words” with Yasir Shah; his father also added a demerit point to his disciplinary record.Ajax youth coach Tinus van Teunenbroek, unsurprised in May after FC Cincinnati mistakenly used his photo as they unveiled new manager Jaap Stam. “Often on vacation people shout: ‘Hey, that’s Jaap Stam.’ Really, it happens to me a lot.”This year’s other top corporate social media missteps: a) @chelseaFC, late in January’s transfer window with fans burning for a signing, announcing a shirt sponsor: “You wait 24 days for a signing, then Three come along at once... @ThreeUK #Ch3lsea.” b) @FCBarcelona, upbeat as they identified the real story on 1 December: “ALL ABOUT A RECORD DAY ON SOCIAL MEDIA! Tribute to Diego Maradona breaks records on FC Barcelona’s social media.” And c) @ManUtd, as fans railed against £14.95 PPV fees, using a crying laughing emoji with the question “where are you watching #newmun from?”. As replies stacked up, they deleted it.Seven-year-old snooker fan Jamie, clearing the table in January.Absolutely love this clearance from the pup. The pink to black was another lever. @markwil147 #Snooker #lovingIt pic.twitter.com/xNdujs4d90Was the aftermath of triathlete Mirinda Carfrae losing the virtual Ironman VR Pro Challenge when her husband tripped over the power cable of her smart bike. Carfrae: “He decided to bring my trophies in here and when he walked round the back he kicked out the plug. What an idiot.”Apply critical theory to it then live-tweet your findings. One sample from @daisychristo’s 23-tweet thread from the London Stadium in February: “This aspect of VAR reminds me of nothing so much as German Higher Biblical criticism. If we apply the latest scientific & technological tools to the excavation of Biblical meaning, we’ll get closer to what God meant. Or we might just blow up the foundations on which it all rests.”In a year that needed more of it: triathlete Diego Mentrida stopping on the line in September to let James Teagle win after Teagle took a wrong turn 100m from the finish. “He just read the signs wrong,” said Mentrida. “So I had to stop. He deserved it.”From October. Still amazing, even when you know what’s coming.#AccidentalPartridge pic.twitter.com/jXHTD8adEoHeadlining 12 months of animal cameos:1) A stray cat coming fourth in September’s Balkan U20 Championship 100m in Istanbul; 2) Local alpaca Oscar slowly pitch-invading Carlton Athletic v Ilkley Town in September; 3) A Brazil women’s training game in September held up when a parrot landed on Bruna Benites.4) A stray dog taking a free-kick in a televised game in Turkey, being chased off then returning for more; 5) “Multiple ants” taking against Brazil’s Jacuipense goalkeeper Jordan after he rolled into their hill during a game at Ferroviário; And 6) A wasp getting stuck into snooker referee Ben Williams at the Masters back in January after being picked off the table during Jack Lisowski v Kyren Wilson. Five days later the final was also disrupted by what Dennis Taylor called a “not very funny” fart box left on a seat.A pitch-invading dog earned praise for its ball skills from a live TV commentator after it held up play in a professional Turkish soccer match https://t.co/V2KJ8Jwfor pic.twitter.com/4BneYQ10KwCame for Philadelphia Flyers mascot Gritty: cleared by police in February of punching a teenager who patted him on the head during a meet-and-greet, ending the year as a globally-recognised antifa, anti-Trump icon. Highs included starring on a Four Seasons Total Landscaping T-shirt, and Gritty as Olenna Tyrell from Game of Thrones.The person who created this, is right up there with Michaelangelo. pic.twitter.com/WoyYux2QfFRuthless from Robbie Keane’s four‑year-old son Hudson, mascot at Middlesborough v Spurs in January. Unable to ignore the ball on the centre circle during the formal pre-match photo, Hudson booted it, dribbled slowly downfield, scored slowly, then stared down the crowd.Came in Japan back in January: 29-stone sumo minnow Tokushōryū Makoto bursting into tears of joy after sealing a shock title victory. “Maybe I cried too much,” he reflected later. “But deep down I was feeling like: ‘Is it OK for me to win this championship?’ I was the lowest-ranked... It all feels like a dream. I just don’t feel like myself. I feel like I’m walking on clouds.”
2020 wasn't all bad: sporting tales that lifted the lockdown gloom:	Let’s be honest – it has not been the sporting year any of us wanted, even if you are a Liverpool fan. But sprinkled among the tales of empty stadiums and Covid-19 tests there have been a few more offbeat stories to raise a chuckle and, in some cases, lift the heart as well:You have probably accused your team’s defence of socially distancing at some point in the past nine months. But in September a football club in Germany did it for real. SG Ripdorf/Molzen II from Lower Saxony’s 3 Kreisklasse – the country’s 11th tier – fielded seven players against their local rivals SV Holdenstedt II after it emerged their opponents had been in contact with a player infected with Covid-19 during a recent match. Those who showed up for the game kicked off, stood aside and let Holdenstedt rattle in 37 goals without reply. Their story became a viral sensation, and it took some time for things to die down.Holdenstedt found themselves on the wrong end of a hammering, this time via social media, for inflicting such punishment and the clubs held a meeting to smooth things over. There are, we are happy to confirm, no problems between them. The season rolled along as normal for a while, Ripdorf/Molzen reporting no issues in subsequent fixtures. Amateur football has now been put on hold by the federal government until at least January, though, so all eyes turn to 14 March 2021 – when the rematch with Holdenstedt is scheduled.By day, David Ayres was an operations manager who had driven the ice resurfacer for a minor league ice hockey team, the Toronto Marlies. He also operated as a practice goalie for their NHL big brothers, the Toronto Maple Leafs, but assumed his chances of a shot at the big time were behind him after undergoing a kidney transplant 15 years ago. Then, in February, the Maple Leafs’ opponents, Carolina Hurricanes, lost both of their netminders to injury during the pair’s meeting. Ayres, watching alongside his wife in the stands while eating a reuben sandwich, was the on-call emergency replacement and found himself pressed into unlikely action at the age of 42 – eventually stopping eight shots in a 6-3 win for Carolina. Ayers became a television star for a short time afterwards and his stick was included in a display at the hockey hall of fame, owing to his new-found status as the first emergency goalie ever to win an NHL game. Three days after the match, the Hurricanes flew Ayers to Raleigh before they faced the Dallas Stars and gave him a hero’s reception in their locker room.The occasional domestic disagreement is OK when we’re all holed up together for this long. The keys to rubbing along in harmony are a little give, take and mutual understanding. Not forgetting this time-honoured maxim: “Don’t trip and sever the cable when your wife is in the running to win a prestigious virtual triathlon.” Unfortunately Tim O’Donnell did not keep those wise words to heart when his wife Mirinda Carfrae, a former triathlon world champion, was competing in the inaugural Ironman VR Pro Challenge women’s race from their home in Colorado. Carfrae was going great guns during the event in April, which was broadcast live on Facebook, before O’Donnell stumbled and undid all her good work – losing the connection and sending her tumbling off the leaderboard. Scratchy Zoom calls seem the least of anyone’s troubles by comparison. Since then, Carfrae has announced she is expecting her second child, and another potential cable-wrenching hazard.How do you turn disappointment into opportunity during a pandemic? In Mesut Özil’s case you become a microblogger, tweeting your support to the team that no longer requires your £350,000-a-week services and throwing in the occasional passive-aggressive barb. Who might be Leicester’s greatest threat against an unimaginative Arsenal? According to their sidelined playmaker it was “the creative James Maddison”. What about the most underrated player Özil has ever played with? “Matteo Guendouzi – I’m sure he will be a big football player one day!” On Arsène Wenger? “I think many people around Arsenal are really missing him.” To Piers Morgan, at least one barb regarding infamous telephone-related allegations. Among all this, and several chirpily upbeat commentaries on the club’s games, he offered to pay the salary of Jerry Quy, who wore the famous Gunnersaurus costume for 27 years but was made redundant in October. Whatever one may wonder about Özil’s motivations, he has shown a defter touch on social media than most of his teammates have managed on the pitch since the season began.The schools might have been closed but there was no time for slacking. Gui Khury, an 11-year-old skating boy wonder from Brazil, used his time out of the classroom to an effect that shames the rest of us during the country’s lockdown earlier this year. He took his board out every day and, to widespread astonishment, became the first person ever to land a 1,080 degree turn – effectively a triple spin – on a vertical ramp. The feat was captured on Instagram and Khury, who turned 12 a week before Christmas, has thrilled his 57,000 followers with a range of manoeuvres ever since. It might not be for the faint-hearted – but it definitely beats double maths.
The Fiver Christmas Awards 2020:	Welcome to the 2020 Fiver Christmas Awards. We’ve long lost count of how many times we’ve done this, so don’t be expecting us to furnish you with a number now. All we know is, it’s been too many. You know it too. But despite the grinding familiarity and futility of it all, despite the absolute state of 2020, we go again. It’s a time-honoured festive tradition, see, like crackers, carols and government U-turns. So here it is, merry Christmas, everybody’s trudging on. Charge your glass with a generous shot of your cheapest aftershave, top it up with a little turps, dig out the packet of tablets you should have taken for your bad back a few months ago but decided to save for the holidays, and sink into a gorgeous haze of delight, the better to deal with the next few minutes of existence. Enjoy, enjoy.Here we are, then, with every single celebration now compromised, fans and players alike wondering what minute infraction, invisible to the naked eye, will be discovered by some glaikit po-faced bureaucrat desperate to find any reason whatsoever to spoil everyone’s fun. Are we allowed to celebrate yet? Just look at Scotland hero David Marshall, forced to wait for the check after his heroic penalty save against Serbia, the natural rhythm of the most euphoric moment of his career all jiggered. We could blame the officials who spend hours measuring the length of everyone’s armpit hair while missing manic career-threatening lunges, or the mandarins who signed off on all this technology in the first place. But this one goes to all the pompous techno-pedants who know the price of everything but the value of nothing, and proselytised for this fiasco for years. This is all on them. Pieces of work, every single one.Granny Fiver remembers a time long ago, back in the 70s and 80s, when Barcelona were nothing more than a risible disgrace, tooling around kicking lumps out of folk , making a perennial show of themselves in Europe, straggling miles behind Real Sociedad in the league. Hey, at least they had no fancy notions. Now here we all are again, with the self-styled superclub trailing the Basques in La Liga by six points, having already lost to both Madrid clubs, minnows Cádiz, and Getafe, who are less a football club, more an abrupt exhortation to do one. But of course it all palls in comparison to that 8-2, a match during which Bayern Munich could quite feasibly have scored 13 or 14 goals. Barça more than a club all right. Més que un shower.As captain of Manchester United, Harry Maguire clocked up more than 200 hours of brutally honest post-match deconstruction, in which he held up his hands, fronted up, promised to do better and admitted it isn’t good enough for a club like Manchester United. Every minute of it delivered in a serious tone while wearing the Politician’s Frown of Grave Concern. Bravura performances.And it’s another gong for £80m Harry Maguire!Hats off to Liverpool, whose absurd 7-2 defeat at Aston Villa was so comprehensive, Jack Grealish could have played most of the game wearing a slipper on one foot and a sandal on the other, just as he did when he had his collar felt during lockdown. It was the worst result suffered by a reigning champion in the top flight since Arsenal lost 7-1 at Sunderland in 1953. Speaking of which …Eric Dier, who calmly strode into the stands at the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium with a view to engaging in Socratic dialogue with someone flapping their neck a bit too freely. Imagine the look on our brave critic’s face as a six-foot-two professional athlete bounded purposefully over row after row of seats, breathing through his nose, with a view to delivering a what-for! The Fiver pictures Withnail, seconds after asking who in the Mother Black Cap had called Marwood a “perfumed ponce”.Before the recent Palace-Spurs match, Mr Roy, a man pathologically averse to using 10 words when a thousand will do, was asked for his opinion of the in-form duo of Harry Kane and Son Heung-min. “They’re just good players. Good players are good players, and good players are good players.” An insight into the philosophies and intellectual processes that have stood him in good stead during all those trophy-laden years at Halmstads and Malmö, to Orebo to Neuchatel Xamax, to the Swiss national team and beyond.The one José Mourinho has already composed in his head, word for word, to be delivered when Spurs win the title next May. A smorgasbord of tasty items best served cold.Ally McCoist walks away with this one, for his take on mean and moody Pope’s Newc O’Rangers striker Alfredo Morelos, caught sneering like the love child of Marlon Brando and Billy Idol upon getting the hook against Dundee United. “I’d like a night with him at the comedy club. Just to see if we could get a wee reaction. A wee Christmas night at the comedy club. Do you fancy a bit of that, Alfredo? I can guarantee there’s never been a joke in any cracker that’s made him smile.”Yes, that’s right.All the lads at AFTV, some of whom we’re beginning to seriously worry about now. No good can come of getting this het up, not least because things could be a whole lot worse. When Len Shackleton did for the Gunners in that aforementioned 1953 thrashing, Arsenal were left rock bottom of the First Division with just two points after eight matches. Compared to that, Mikel Arteta’s rabble are on easy street. The 1953 vintage ended the season comfortably in 12th, so history tells us there’s no need to lose the head so spectacularly quite yet. Would any of you like a nice cuddle? We’ll give you a nice cuddle.The group of fans at neoliberal thinktank Millwall FC, who just before kick-off against Derby County cogently made the case for laissez-faire capitalism over centrally planned economies, arguing that the absence of price signals under a socialist structure compromises the efficiency with which goods and services are provided and distributed, all the while admitting a certain irony inherent in the collectivist nature of their protest.Boris Johnson. Because every superhero needs a villainous rival to lock horns with. Think Batman and the Joker, Luke and Darth Vader, Winston Churchill and … ah, well, you get the drift.Gazza – a man who knows a thing or two about unique, complex, misunderstood, beloved geniuses – paying his respects to El Diego on whatever TV-AM is called now. “He was an icon. He was magic! A lot of people go on about the Hand of God. It made Peter Shilton anyway. Shilts, it made you, that goal.” Across the split screen, a purse-mouthed Shilton sat staring ahead in grim silence, gently seething, almost as though he’d just received news of a deal, and we’ve signed away rights to all the fish."Shilts, it made you that goal!" 😅Classic Gazza on @GMB this morning discussing Diego Maradona's infamous 'Hand Of God' goalTo see further tributes from Paul Gascoigne and Peter Shilton watch the full video: https://t.co/RtcN5XfHmq pic.twitter.com/wHT5OAbeP9With the greatest respect to Geoff Hurst, this goes to the great Italian himself. Not least because all of his goals against Brazil at España 82 definitely went in.Right, aye. You are joking, aren’t you?Send your emails, presents and Christmas cards to the.boss@theguardian.com.
The Spins: end-of-year cricket awards for a shambolic 2020:	Spending a fortnight locked in a quarantine hotel with a 10-month-old, as I learned in Perth this month, can inspire any number of strange decisions. For me, this included going back to read the earliest editions of this column. And before going any further, yes, I’m well aware it was this type of behaviour that made me so popular in high school. But it was all with a purpose in mind: to pen this end-of-year reflection, aiming to work out the origin of The Spin annual awards – inventively titled … The Spins.Of course, it was Lawrence Booth who started this newsletter – cricket’s answer to The Fiver – in time for England’s 2002-03 Ashes hiding. By the end of the next home summer, awards season arrived, morphing into a Christmas stocking-stuffer in late 2004. From there it was a handy “get-out clause” – to quote the now-Wisden supremo – when there wasn’t much else on. By the time Andy Bull was on the tools, it was more often than not rebadged as a Test XI of the year, others occasionally flirting with the earlier lampooning style at the end of an English season. Given the shambolic time 2020 has been, I feel compelled to follow suit.The Busted Bubble – Jofra Archer. Let’s instead think of this as the prize for showing up the government for the cowardly hypocrites they are. Just weeks after Dominic Cummings claimed he did nothing wrong driving to Barnard Castle for an eye test, Archer immediately admitted fault for popping home for an hour to see his dog en route to Manchester and was duly punished with a week’s hotel arrest and missed the second Test against West Indies.The Selection Brouhaha – Stuart Broad. In a year of U-turns, England’s forthright seamer got instantly with the vibe. After being dropped from the first Test of the summer despite being his country’s standout bowler in the winter, he didn’t even wait until the end of the match to express his deep disappointment, delivering a masterclass in passive aggression. Promptly restored after the defeat, he proceeded to burst up not just the ICC bowling rankings but the all-rounder charts too. Naturally, Joe Root’s team didn’t lose another Test.The Backscratcher – Cricket South Africa. Across the most testing year that most sports administrators will face, and it’s hard to expect great things from an organisation that began the year with big recent losses and a chief executive being audited for financial misconduct. But still, CSA managed a display of ineptitude that was spectacular enough to stand out, requiring more words than I can justify. Then, when they attempted a biosecure bubble in a country charging towards a million Covid infections, it was breached and England went home.The Afridi Farewell – Mohammad Amir. This remains a developing story with the Pakistan quick last week, aged only 28, pulling the pin on all international cricket on the basis that his omissions from the team have left him “mentally tortured”. As we know, the left-arm speedster has been through plenty, which now includes two varieties of international retirement in two years. He started young, so it’s pleasing to see he’s getting in early chasing the Shahid Afridi record for most departures. As for Boom Boom? At age 40 (or so), he’s now leading a franchise in Sri Lanka’s new T20 league! Be still, beating heart.The So-Close Somerset – New Zealand. The award for finishing second when in sight of glory goes to the Black Caps who missed out on a chance to get the ICC top spot in Test cricket for the first time. This was despite being told a win in Wellington against West Indies would take them to No 1. Alas, those supplying the information hadn’t crunched the numbers correctly, with Australia still ahead, 116.461 to 116.375. Barest of margins, anybody? Oh, and runners-up in 2020’s Bob Willis Trophy were, somewhat inevitably, Somerset.The Decision Deferral System – women’s cricket. Consider how many men’s engagements have been met during the crisis. Sadly, no such luck for the women, the most egregious example when the 2021 World Cup – set for New Zealand in February, a virtually Covid-free country – was postponed until 2022 to the dismay of many, including Heather Knight. At least the MCG was full for the women’s T20 final, days before the world changed in March, Katy Perry earning the Lou Bega Panama Hat for best cricket/pop crossover.The Conker – Boris Johnson. The cricket ball has many nicknames and this year there was a new addition to the lexicon when the PM reached for a euphemism to explain why our game wouldn’t be permitted to return at a local level at the same time as gyms and pubs, introducing the “vector of disease”. It made as much sense as when he insisted afternoon tea was another factor in the decision when teams had already agreed to take the field without using clubrooms. The twist on this came months later when the Sussex Cricket League voted to jettison their meal break together. Sure enough, that vote was overturned just two weeks later. No complaints here.The Social Media Intervention – Monty Panesar. No pithy paragraph will be able to adequately capture the majesty of the former England spinner’s video output. From lockdown workouts lifting his couch and squatting with his dog, to Brexit vox pops to US presidential endorsements. To see is to believe.• This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.
The most eventful football matches ever played on Christmas Day:	“What has been the most eventful match played on Christmas Day,” asks @mrjacktanner.“I’d offer Bury 6-5 Manchester City in 1925,” answers Bryn Mills. “As was often the case in those days the reverse fixture was played on Boxing Day, with Bury winning 2-0 at Maine Road. Christmas Day matches were a Football League commonplace right up until the late 1950s, with a single late outlier of Blackpool 4-2 Blackburn on Christmas Day 1964. The most eventful English League Christmas Day seems to have been 25 December 1957, when Chelsea beat Portsmouth 7-4 at home in Division One and Swansea beat Bristol Rovers 6-4 at home in Division 2.”We should obviously mention the Christmas Truce match played on No Man’s Land which, if it actually happened, is about as eventful as festive football gets.If we stick with the theme of the often wild days of wartime football, we can find a Christmas Day scoreline that would look ludicrous after 12 sherries, never mind while stone cold sober: Norwich 18-0 Brighton.Yes, you read that right. On 25 December 1940, Albion boss Charlie Webb made the 175-mile trip to Norfolk on Christmas Eve with with just four players. His plan was to meet the rest of his team in Norwich on the day of the game but, with travel discouraged by the wartime government, no one else turned up. Instead of cancelling the match, however, it was decided that the 1,500 paying fans would get their football fix come hell or high water. So the rest of Brighton’s team was formed of youth players and randoms plucked from the crowd after stewards advertised the vacant positions in the Brighton team. The wearebrighton.com website listed the XI thus:1) A Bartram – pulled from the crowd. Conceded 18 goals.2) Roy Watts – right-back played six wartime games for Albion.3) F Pinchbeck – another random fan. Played left-back.4) Charlie Chase – played sporadically throughout the war.5) Jimmy Ithell – Norwich 18-0 Brighton wasn’t Ithell’s only appearance for the Seagulls. He also turned out in a 2-0 defeat away at Tottenham three seasons later.6) Derek Dye – a Norwich youth-team player. This was his only appearance for either club.7) Charlie Harman – considered one of the best young prospects on Brighton’s books, Harman made his wartime debut as a 16-year-old six months before the Norwich defeat.8) S Bird – the third man pulled from the crowd. Played inside right.9) WA Stacey – started up front after answering the stewards’ call for volunteers. Hardly touched the ball.10) Joe Wilson – the only senior Brighton player to make it to Carrow Road. Played 353 times for Albion and scored 49 goals.11) A Smith – the fifth and final player found from those in the crowd. Played outside left.Now, you might expect the Canaries to understand their rivals’ predicament and show a little charity at Christmas, but nope. Norwich were 10-0 up at half-time and added another eight in the second half. Four players scored three or more – with Fred Chadwick bagging six – while poor youngster Ithell slashed into his own net.In 2001 Harman, who was 16 at the time of the game, spoke about the “unforgettable” experience of playing in the match:It was quite funny really but Mr Webb wasn’t laughing when the other seven didn’t turn up … but instead of scrubbing the game, Mr Webb insisted it was played. Before the game stewards went round the ground appealing for players and listing the various vacant positions, goalkeeper, and so on. Eventually 11 players turned out, but we would have been better off sticking to us kids led by Joe Wilson. Quite a few Bolton players were guesting for Norwich during army service and one or two played for us. I don’t know who he was but the goalkeeper was hopeless. I remember afterwards Mr Webb saying how proud he was. We knew we didn’t have a chance. Come to think of it, we didn’t take it all that seriously, but I’ll never forget it.“Given that Peterborough have only won once on Boxing Day in 15 years, who are the most and least successful teams at Christmas?” tweeted xAnder50nx in December 2011.Davy Allen sent us a lovingly crafted spreadsheet on the subject and it turns out you really – really – don’t want to mess with Norwich City on Christmas Day. They’ve played on 25 December five times and won every time. Admittedly, those games all took place between 1925 and 1948, but it’s an impressive feat nonetheless. At the other end of the festive spectrum come Darlington. They’ve played 10 times on Christmas Day – including a humdinger of a 5-4 defeat against Accrington Stanley in 1951 – and won only once.“What is the coldest recorded temperature that a football match has been played in?” wondered Stephen Robbins in December 2010.We couldn’t find a definitive answer for this one but Rosenborg – who play in Trondheim, Norway – hosted Bayer Leverkusen in a 2010 Europa League tie. The temperature had plunged below -14C by the time the match kicked off. We’ll forgive players for wearing mittens on string for that one.Meanwhile, the former Morton striker Marko Rajamaki criticised the SFA for the rash of postponements during a cold snap in Scotland and said: “There’s a league club, RoPs, in Lapland, where it gets down to -30C. But they have access to a full-sized indoor training pitch so they can still work.”• Explore our previous Christmas specials in the Knowledge archive, including: which football teams appear in the Bible? and who were the first team to use the Christmas tree formation? And for thousands more questions and answers look through our archive.“Liverpool have conceded seven (against Villa) and scored seven (against Palace) in matches this season. Can any team from a top League ‘better’ this achievement?” asks Bob Bancroft.“Some sources on the internet claim that Grimsby and Hull had special dispensation from the league not to play on Christmas Day, citing the needs of the fishing industry as the reason,” writes Kári Tulinius. “What is the truth in all this?”“Portsmouth won 2-0 at Hull with only one shot on target and it didn’t come from Pompey (there were two own goals),” writes Eddy Reynolds. “Is this a record?”My mate Nathaniel asks what the highest number of comeback wins is in a season - especially if they can be broken down into home/away.“As a political act in La Plata, Buenos Aires province, governor Axel Kicillof announced that the city’s stadium is renamed ‘Diego Armando Maradona’,” reports Bruno Calquin. “So that’s the third stadium with the name of our legend, alongside Argentinos Juniors’ and Napoli’s now-renamed ‘San Paolo’. Is this the highest amount of stadiums in football with the same name?”East Germany's record defeat is only by 3 goals; they lost 4-1 on three occasions.Which teams have the lowest score for a record defeat?“Which Englishman has the worst record of defeats in international football?” asks Ross Eldridge. Let’s throw this wider: how about any international player?• Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.
Rooftop rallies, frisbee golf and alpacas: alternative clips of the year:	You want hard work? We’ll give you hard work. The Dutch headwind cycling championships in February.Frisbee golf: who knew? A magnificent hole in one by Kevin Jones from September.In May the Brazilian skateboarder Gui Khury became the first person to land a 1080-degree turn on a vertical ramp. Not bad for an 11-year-old. On the other side of the world, Isamu Yamamoto in Japan is more than worth watching too.And Katie Ledecky swam a length with a glass of milk on her head in August.Perhaps the rugby pass of the year as Teddy Iribaren of Racing 92 puts Teddy Thomas in to score against Munster in January.Ronnie O’Sullivan clip of the year. There were plenty to choose from, as ever.Some amazing bowls as Nick Brett finds the gap and puts it on a sixpence; in the IPL, Nicholas Pooran produced some stunning fielding at the IPL and Sarah Fuller made college football history.And some golfing spectaculars: here’s one-armed amateur golfer Laurent Hurtubise’s hole in one at the PGA American Express in January, Jon Rahm’s astonishing skim across the water before the Masters (they always go in in practice), and then there’s 84-year-old Mary Wakefield sinking a putt across the length of a basketball court.A canine goalline clearance spares a keeper’s blushes in Argentina in January. But that was eclipsed by the Carlton v Ilkley alpaca pitch invasion. A parrot decided to perch on Brazil defender Bruna Benties’ head in a training session in September, too.A player uses a spare ball to dispossess an opponent in North Macedonia in February as a match between Makedonija Gjorce Petrov and Akademija Pandev descends into farce. And for dive of the year, take a bow (and tumble) AFC Totton’s Stéphane Zubar.Footballers kept themselves busy. We had Trent Alexander-Arnold chipping into a garden ornament, Angel Gomes finding the top bin and Ben Chilwell’s tea break. And with getting hold of toilet rolls becoming a preoccupation, some players inevitably showed off their keepy-uppy skills with them.Hats off to Elisha Nochomovitz for running a marathon on his balcony, while this rally across the rooftops between 11-year-old Carola Pessina and Vittoria Oliveri, 13, in Italy caught the eye in April. On a similar theme badminton stars Lauren Smith and Marcus Ellis kept themselves, and us, entertained, in June. With nothing else going on outside, how about the thrills and spills of Marbula E?And for a defining image of our time, here’s the US’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci throwing the first pitch at MLB’s opening day.Robot fans at a Japanese baseball game in July. Be afraid.Go-karter Luca Corberi, and a dangerous one at that, in October.A shattering moment for Branislav Ivanovic as he drops the trophy after Zenit St Petersburg’s Russian Cup final win over FC Khimki – he ended the year at West Brom.A frightening MotoGP moment for Valentino Rossi as Franco Morbidelli’s bike bounces over him at the Austrian GP. Thankfully and remarkably, no one was hurt. And here’s an in-car view of the rallying escape of the year for Ott Tänak and Martin Järveoja.An Atlanta school basketball team manager makes the most of his big shot. And here’s the Harlem Globetrotters’ military family reunion surprise.1) RIP dressage wonderhorse Totilas. Here he is in his prime with the Dutch rider Edward Gal.2) More Maradona magic, setting up a World Cup final winner.3) The astonishing final three laps of the 1982 Monaco Grand Prix.4) Gérard Houllier’s first title, with PSG in 1986.Spotters badges: vsbain67, ronbarwick, whobroughtoranges, bf_silvertownDo subscribe, if you fancy.Do subscribe, if you fancy.• Thanks for all your posts BTL throughout the year. We’ll be back on 7 January
The Spin: six wishes for cricket in 2021:	Ahhh, midwinter Test matches. For cricket-lovers around the world keeping a sleepy eye on Australia’s showdown with India, there’s nothing quite like the warm feeling of waking up to an Aussie batting collapse. It can be rather ruined when swiftly followed by the icy feeling of waking up to an Indian batting catastrophe. But that makes it all the better when India bounce back to pull off a famous victory masterminded by a stand-in captain.The last week in December is the peak of the cricket year, even if the only tests involving England this time are of the medical variety. It’s also the moment to look ahead and work out what we would like to see in 2021. So here are The Spin’s wishes, some realistic, others merely hopeful – but then, as the Guardian likes to say, hope is power.Cricket can manage better without fans than many sports – it has had plenty of practice. But an empty ground is still a crying shame, and as the Premier League has shown, even a distanced crowd can drum up an atmosphere. This is one facet of the pandemic where the British government has erred on the side of caution. In hindsight, it would have been perfectly fine to build on the experiments of midsummer, rather than abruptly giving up on them. A couple of thousand people could have safely trickled in to watch each day of England’s matches at the Ageas Bowl and Old Trafford. Let’s hope the relevant minister, Oliver Dowden, noticed that the MCG in Melbourne has just lifted its attendance back up to 30,000, or about one-third capacity.There is plenty of time to iron out the details: England’s home summer is due to begin on 29 June, almost as late as last year, and the first Test is not until 4 August. There’s even time for Dowden to be replaced by someone who actually has a passion for culture and sport. It’s baffling that Boris Johnson has yet to hand the culture brief to Jesse Norman, the financial secretary to the Treasury, who a) writes books, b) plays the trumpet, c) supports Manchester United and d) loves cricket.If you asked a fan to name the world’s top-ranked Test team, they would almost certainly say Australia or India. The latest ICC rankings, issued on 14 December, have Australia top by a whisker. But it’s not India who are breathing down their necks – it’s New Zealand, the quiet achievers of international cricket. By the time their current series are over, any of the three could come out on top. If New Zealand win both their home Tests against Pakistan, it will take a 3-1 win by either Australia or India to keep them from the summit. Cinderella is at the ball: the only question is how long she is staying.It’s a great achievement to make a Test hundred for England, and in 143 years, only 171 men and 21 women have discovered what it feels like. The latest of them is Zak Crawley, aged 22, with that fabulous innings of 267 against Pakistan. As he gazes out from his flat at the St Lawrence Ground in Canterbury, there’s just one small cloud in the sky. Of the 170 Englishmen to make a Test hundred before him, 60 never added a second.The One Ton Club includes two players with their name on a stand at Lord’s (Plum Warner and Gubby Allen); several other England captains (Douglas Jardine, George Mann, JWHT Douglas, Tony Lewis); a sprinkling of commentators (Trevor Bailey, David Lloyd, Nick Knight); a man whose first Test hundred was even bigger than Crawley’s (Tip Foster, who made 287 in Sydney on his Test debut); a couple of cult figures (Gilbert Jessop, David Steele); three of Crawley’s recent teammates (Ollie Pope, Chris Woakes and Stuart Broad); another of his fellow tourists this winter (Ben Foakes); and his mentor, Rob Key, who stroked 221 against West Indies at Lord’s but never reached that second fine careless rapture. Crawley hasn’t had much practice making hundreds – the 267 was only his fifth in first-class cricket – but he has the talent and the temperament to stop his magnum opus turning into a millstone.Bowlers need landmarks too. Mark Wood waited nearly four years for his first England five-fer, added another a year later, and then hit the buffers. His problem hasn’t been bowling badly, it has been getting on the field. Since his blazing breakthrough in St Lucia, Wood has played only three Tests – two in South Africa that went swimmingly and one in Southampton that gave West Indies a measure of revenge. By the end of this year, he was even missing from the white-ball side, squeezed out by the Curran brothers. After spending far too long with the physio, Wood is now having to deal with a different kind of frustration, living in the bubble and carrying the drinks.The Spin is not just concerned because Wood is a great character and a magnificent sight when in full flow. Come next winter’s Ashes, England are going to need all the firepower they can get, assuming Steve Smith remembers how to reach double figures. Of England’s many talented seamers, Wood is the only one who gets dramatically better when he steps on a plane: his average in overseas Tests is under 21, while at home it’s nearly 45. On 11 January, he turns 31. Three days later, all being well, England face Sri Lanka in Galle, and with Jofra Archer resting, Wood’s is the first name we will be looking for on the team sheet.Cricket’s most moving moment in 2020 was when Michael Holding and Ebony Rainford-Brent bared their souls on Sky and talked about facing racism. Coming from Holding, who has been so self-contained as a commentator, it was like the moment when David Attenborough finally spoke out about the state of the climate – his dignity, and seniority, lent even greater weight to his dismay.Holding is writing a book called Why We Kneel, How We Rise. His agent is Charlotte Atyeo, who used to be at Bloomsbury working on Wisden, and his publisher is Ian Marshall of Simon & Schuster, the man behind the Playfair Cricket Annual. There have been several bestsellers about race, but none of them has homed in on sport. It would be great if Holding changed that.For Ireland’s cricketers, 2020 started promisingly, with nine white-ball games in 10 weeks. Touring West Indies in January, they bounced back from a 3-0 drubbing in the ODIs to draw the T20 series 1-1. As the thwack of leather on willow gave way to stadium gates slamming shut, they squeezed in three T20 games against Afghanistan in India – losing the first two and tying the last after winning the Super Over. When cricket resumed in July, they led the way by touring England. True to form, they lost the first two ODIs before winning the third in style – the first time they had ever beaten England on English soil.Their problem is that as the pandemic drags on, the bigger fish will bend over backwards to face each other and may well forget about the minnows. Ireland should be back in action next week, when they play the first of seven ODIs in UAE – four against their hosts, followed by three against Afghanistan. After that, their diary is as blank as yours or mine. A glance at the ICC’s timetable of Future Tours from 2018 suggests the pandemic has already cost Ireland five Tests, which is a high price to pay when you have played only three in your history.• This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.
Lewis Dunk header salvages point for Brighton against Wolves:	Ninety-five minutes of chaos gave way to a solitary image of despair. While friends and foes alike made their way back towards the dressing room, the Wolves substitute Owen Otasowie sat inconsolably in the corner of a net he should have bulged with the game’s final action. Otasowie, a 19-year-old midfielder who had come on two minutes from time, had headed Adama Traoré’s cross over the bar when completely unmarked and needed a member of the support staff to haul him to his feet before he departed the scene.“For sure he’s going to react and he will have a chance like this and do better,” Nuno Espírito Santo said, and the manager must hope the same applies to his team. Wolves threw this away when, leading 3-1 at half-time against a Brighton side whose season looked to be careering out of control, a modicum of the assuredness they have generally shown in recent years would have seen them through.While Otasowie could have bailed them out it was hardly his fault that João Moutinho, usually such an authoritative presence, needlessly fouled Neal Maupay 11 seconds after the restart for the penalty that halved the deficit. He could not be blamed, either, for the defending that allowed Lewis Dunk to thud home Brighton’s equaliser from a corner just minutes after Adam Webster had struck the bar from a near-identical situation.Dunk’s header gave Brighton what they deserved and meant that, for now at least, they could shrug off some unprepossessing statistics. They are winless in 13 home league matches, and in their last eight at any venue. Nobody has drawn more games and it means they remain plausible relegation candidates. But their performance after the break, and even in some phases of the first half, showed refreshing vigour and lifted a little of the pressure gathering around their manager, Graham Potter.“It was tough for us at half-time,” Potter said. “You’re looking for character and I thought we got it. The players were amazing: great spirit, personality and quality.” In fairness they had shown all three in taking a 13th-minute lead, Webster breaking the lines with an enterprising run before feeding Leandro Trossard for a cross that Aaron Connolly snicked past Rui Patrício. Connolly had not scored at the Amex since his first top-flight start nearly 15 months ago, but player and club soon looked doomed for further disappointment.Brighton self-destructed in the subsequent half-hour, although Nuno professed satisfaction at the way Wolves wrested control. Romain Saïss converted a fine, craning header after Nélson Semedo had latched on to his own miskick and delivered accurately. Then Dan Burn was helpless as Robert Sánchez parried a deflected Pedro Neto drive on to him and over the line; the full-back had conceded a cheap corner in the buildup to the own goal, though, and erred again when he hacked Traoré down as the interval loomed. Rúben Neves scored from the spot and matters appeared to have been settled.That was until Andi Zeqiri, who replaced the injured Connolly after the restart, won a header with his first touch and brought about Moutinho’s panicked intervention as Maupay entered the box. Maupay still had two defenders between him and the goal, so must have felt grateful when dispatching the resulting gift.“I’m not disappointed with João,” Nuno said. “I’m disappointed with me, with everybody.” Wolves’ defending after that was calamitous; Zeqiri should have buried the rebound after Webster’s brush with the woodwork but they were not so lucky when Dunk met Trossard’s set-piece. Nuno admitted his side, now without a clean sheet in 10 games, were “making mistakes that we shouldn’t make”. Eventually, it may cheer Otasowie that fluffed chances felt like the least of his manager’s concerns.
Frank Lampard pleads for patience over Kai Havertz's haphazard start:	Frank Lampard says Chelsea are still helping Kai Havertz adjust to the pace of the Premier League following the midfielder’s recovery from a severe case of Covid-19.A variety of factors have prevented Havertz, who has scored one league goal this season, from shining since his £62m move from Bayer Leverkusen in September. The German had little time to settle in England following a protracted transfer and although he has shown flashes of class at times, his progress stalled when he tested positive for coronavirus in November.It was a tough moment for a young talent who was yet to find his feet in a new country. Havertz, who has started on the bench in Chelsea’s past three games, was laid low by the disease and Lampard makes allowance when he assesses the 21-year-old’s performances. “Moving country and missing pre-season, Kai had eight days with us, five work days before he played,” Chelsea’s manager said before hosting Manchester City on Sunday. “That is just not beneficial for a player in any league, let alone when you are coming into the fastest, most physical league in the world. Just as Kai was just coming to terms with it he got Covid. He had Covid quite severely.“He definitely has had a bit of a fallout with that physically. It’s something we are trying to help him to deal with. The expectation around him – you have to put context into the story. Kai’s talent is undoubted. Giving him the time to adapt is crucial.”Lampard said some players have shown no ill-effects after recovering from the virus, revealing the Chelsea left-back Marcos Alonso made a swift recovery after testing positive. Havertz has not been as fortunate, which gives some context to his inconsistent form.Chelsea, who have lost three of their past five games, are ready to be patient after a sizeable investment. Conscious that Kevin De Bruyne and Mohamed Salah went on to flourish at City and Liverpool respectively after leaving Chelsea, Lampard is fully behind Havertz. He has offered similar backing to the German’s compatriot, Timo Werner.“We have seen players come here in the past, didn’t really adapt, went elsewhere and come back to the Premier League and absolutely lit it up to unbelievable levels,” Lampard said. “We need to give him that time, particularly because of the Covid situation. That is not a non-issue, it is an issue that is related beyond his illness. I am there to help him.”The relentless schedule has also made it difficult for Lampard to instil his ideas in training. But with the next fortnight free of midweek assignments, Lampard has a chance to plan. Chelsea’s next game, at home to Morecambe in the third round of the FA Cup next Sunday, is in doubt due to a Covid outbreak at the League Two club. If the tie is called off Chelsea will not play again until visiting Fulham on 15 January.“It does give us a real opportunity to get on the training ground because if I had it my way and we had a four-week pre-season, the physical work we would have done with the new players would have gone to a really good place [where] you’d hope to start the season,” Lampard said.“We missed it. Every individual missed it, so for the newer individuals coming into the club it’s even more critical. If we can get in two, three, four sessions over those two weeks then it’s going to be beneficial. Not just for Kai but for the whole squad.”Lampard has repeatedly played down any title talk. He is thinking long-term. “I do know from playing what it took to win a title,” he said. “I look round the teams that have squads full of title winners.“Everyone points towards our chequebook, I look around at the teams who have spent as much money, if not more over the last two or three windows.“We’ve just bought people into the team. They don’t just drop in and ‘OK, everything’s perfect’. I really believe in this team over the longer term, but I definitely felt there was a process and that’s why I talked it down.”
'Mauricio fits perfectly': PSG confirm Pochettino as new head coach:	Paris Saint-Germain have hired the former Tottenham manager Mauricio Pochettino as their new head coach. The Argentinian succeeds Thomas Tuchel, who was sacked by the Ligue 1 club last month. Pochettino had been out of the game since leaving Spurs in November 2019.The 48-year-old Pochettino, who made 95 appearances for PSG as a player between 2001 and 2003, has signed a contract until the summer of 2022. “I am really happy and honoured to become the new coach of Paris Saint-Germain,” he said.“I would like to thank the club’s management for the trust they have placed in me. As you know, this club has always held a special place in my heart. I have wonderful memories, especially of the unique atmosphere of the Parc des Princes.“I return to the club today with a lot of ambition and humility and am eager to work with some of the world’s most talented players. This team has fantastic potential and my staff and I will do everything we can to get the best for Paris Saint-Germain in all competitions.”Tuchel guided PSG to the Champions League final for the first time last season, but the German paid the price for a relatively modest start to the current campaign. After winning seven of the past eight Ligue 1 titles, PSG are third in the table, a point behind Lyon and Lille.“I am proud to see our former captain returning to Paris Saint-Germain, as the club has always remained his home,” the PSG chairman and chief executive, Nasser Al-Khelaifi, said.“The return of Mauricio fits perfectly with our ambitions and it will be another exciting chapter for the club and one I am positive the fans will enjoy. With the appointment of Mauricio Pochettino, Paris Saint-Germain is committed to continue to build and move the club forward over the coming years.” 
:	At the end of a dark year like no other, and the start of a new one that will complete a decade of his life at Liverpool, Jordan Henderson is in a mood to pause and reflect. The Liverpool captain has family and friends who work for the NHS on the Covid-19 frontline. Sometimes they have held the phones and tablets which offer the only way for people who are dying to say goodbye to those they love.His father, whom the NHS helped to save during a long battle against cancer, has been shielding and Henderson did not see much of him last year. This helps to explain why he started and drove the crisis fund that raised millions of pounds from Premier League footballers for the NHS.Having just returned home after a morning of training, amid the blurring end-of-year fixtures, Henderson is engaging company even when addressing the brutal impact of 2020. “I think it has,” he says when asked whether the year has changed him. “It certainly puts things into perspective. Not that I ever take stuff for granted but it reiterates what is important – family and health. That’s all that matters. You’ve got to enjoy life while you can and try not to get too down. But it’s been difficult for everyone because of the virus. Hopefully we can see the other side very soon but a lot of people are struggling, a lot of people have died, and it’s affected us all. All me and the other lads [his fellow club captains who worked on the fund] tried to do was help make a difference.”On the field, despite the absence of fans, Henderson led Liverpool to their first league title in 30 years. He epitomised the imperious self‑belief and hard-running zeal of the champions. His Player of the Year award, voted for by the country’s football writers, was followed by second place behind Lewis Hamilton in the BBC Sports Personality of the Year poll.The plaudits have replaced the criticism and doubts which once hounded Henderson. Yet he insists his hunger to improve remains undiluted. He points out that, as Liverpool play Southampton away on Monday night, the same fixture in April 2019 represented a turning point. Henderson rose from the bench and produced a commanding display as Liverpool recovered from conceding an early goal to win 3-1. Their captain, striving to establish himself as a much more attacking presence, proved he could play in the advanced midfield role he craved.Of course, moments of personal crisis seem more fascinating to those of us who did not live through them. But Henderson responds to questions about the adversity he overcame in a way which suggests his emotions are still vivid. In June 2011, when he joined Liverpool from Sunderland for £20m, he was one of the Fenway Group’s first major signings following their takeover. Fourteen months later, as hard as it is to imagine now when considering Henderson’s importance to the club, Liverpool wanted to sell him to Fulham in a swap deal with Clint Dempsey.“That was a difficult moment I remember very clearly,” Henderson says of a time which reduced him to tears. “We were preparing for a [Europa League qualifying] game against Hearts at Anfield. We met as normal in the [Hope Street] hotel and I got a knock on my door saying the manager wanted to speak to us. To be fair to Brendan Rodgers, it was really just a conversation. It was an opportunity [to leave for Fulham] I didn’t want and I didn’t like. I still felt I had an awful lot to give.“But I was in a very dark place at that time. It made us a lot stronger and a lot wiser later on and, without that, you never know what could have happened. So I really cherish them moments because you need setbacks, you need adversity. You get back up, and it makes you stronger because you want to prove people wrong. Ever since that day I had something in me. I needed to prove to the manager I would get in his team eventually. I’d do absolutely everything to be in his team, this football club, and I’d prove them wrong. In the end I did.”I needed to keep working, keep getting stronger in the gym, working around the clock, doing things other people weren’tHenderson explains that he and his wife, Rebecca, remained as close as ever during this tumultuous period but that “it was difficult because I didn’t like mixing family with football”. He says: “When I was coming home, back then, I wasn’t in a great mood a lot of the time. I was still very young and learning how to deal with situations like that. But I was so focused on what I needed to do. I needed to keep working, keep getting better, keep getting stronger in the gym, working around the clock, doing things other people weren’t doing, just to be given an opportunity. So, for me, all the focus was on what I love doing – playing football and being the best I can be. Rebecca has always been there for me but, yeah, it was a difficult period.”Steven Gerrard told me, when we worked on his autobiography, that Henderson’s mum even approached him to share her concern. “She was worried for her boy,” Gerrard said. “He was a little lost. The move was initially too big for him.” While he joked about feeling very old because Henderson once had a poster of him on his bedroom wall, Gerrard was convinced the club had found his successor. Stressing that Henderson was one of the Liverpool players “I cared about most”, Gerrard reassured his teammate’s anxious mother.He promised Liz Henderson he would look after her boy but, also, that he had been watching Jordan closely. “I know he’ll be fine,” Gerrard said before emphasising that Henderson would become “a vital player for the club”.Did Henderson share that conviction eight years ago? “I don’t think you ever know what’s going to happen. When I first signed I was very young and I knew it was going to be tough. But I always wanted to test myself and I knew, by going to Liverpool, I would become better. But it took a little time.”Even as a key presence in the team, when Liverpool came so close to winning the league in 2014, Henderson was tested. His father, Brian, had been diagnosed with throat cancer a few months earlier. “It was a shock,” Henderson recalls. “I didn’t see him for at least five months because he didn’t want to see us when he was having treatment. I kept my head down, kept playing, because I knew him watching and us winning could help. So that’s where my energy went and you’d be surprised how quick six months went. My dad was diagnosed towards the back end of January so, when I was playing, I was just so free and doing everything I could to lift him.”Few people knew what Henderson was facing then and he reveals that he spoke often to Steve Peters, the sports psychiatrist. “My dad was ill and when we were close to winning the league I spoke to Steve quite regularly. I also did when he was with England, so I had a good couple of years of talking to Steve. It made a big difference.“A lot of people deal with stuff like this and it made us grow up even quicker and I learnt a lot. In a way it made my dad stronger and I feel it changed him for the better. He enjoys living life even more now than he already did. If you get through that you can have a positive outlook but for other people, unfortunately, sometimes it’s not a happy ending.”On the night Henderson lifted the Champions League trophy in June 2019 he and his father shared a tearful embrace on the pitch which completed a profoundly moving celebration. Apart from his dad surviving cancer, Henderson finally felt accepted at the pinnacle of football. Yet just seven weeks earlier he had been a substitute against Southampton and still battling to move beyond the critics and doubters as he played more as a No 8 than a deeper-lying No 6.“That game was a little turning point,” Henderson says. “Even though I performed well before that, I felt that was the start of playing in a slightly different position. I could bring something different to the team and from that point I felt a lot more confident. I performed much better and more consistently.“When the manager [Jürgen Klopp] first came [in October 2015] it was difficult for me because I was injured. I kept getting niggles so it took a while to get the real me and my rhythm back. And then I began to play in a deeper role and that is thanks to Jürgen, because I don’t think many people would have seen how I could do that role. There were times when I wasn’t performing well. Then you would question if I was good enough. But I had confidence in the manager and kept working and I matured. I’m really grateful for having that opportunity because my all-round game has improved defensively and offensively.”Was Klopp easily convinced when Henderson asked to play in a more attacking position? “When we signed Fabinho, a natural defensive midfield player, I felt that was a good thing for me because I could play a little higher up. So when I had the conversation with the manager he was very open. But I don’t think he was going to play us there straightaway. Not long afterwards I was on the bench at that Southampton game before I came on as an attacker and managed to score. I’ve matured even more since then. At the end of last year I played more as an 8, but with certain injuries I’ve had this season I’ve played a little deeper again. I feel I can contribute to both positions.”Liverpool return to St Mary’s top of the table and remain favourites to retain the title. “The past few years we’ve proved how good we can be and now it’s about improving, working as hard as possible, wanting more and giving absolutely everything. We’re in a good position but the Premier League can change very quickly. But that hunger and desire will always be there for me and the team.”Against the pandemic’s grim backdrop of rising rates of infection and death, Henderson stresses that the work his cousin, and other friends, do in the NHS continues to occupy his thoughts. “You hear stories all the time of what they’re doing, what they’re going through, and it’s really tough. They just keep going on the frontline, but there will come a time where the effects may be felt further down the line. It’s important we plan for that now and help them as much as possible because some of the stuff they’ve been doing is incredible.“People were dying and their families weren’t allowed at the hospital. So you want to be there to hold the iPad or iPhone for them to say goodbye to their family. I found it really tough hearing those stories. People on the frontline see some horrendous sights and so the least we can do is try and support them and help them prepare for what may come when this all stops.”The pandemic has also meant that Henderson did not see much of his father in 2020. “He’s very high-risk and has to be careful. When the [first] lockdown eased a little I got a moment to see him and maybe once or twice after that. It’s not much but my dad’s in good spirits.”Henderson is the figurehead of a Dry January campaign jointeamzero.com created by the team behind Budweiser Zero, a non-alcoholic beer. “It’s a really good campaign which fits me well because I don’t really drink alcohol,” Henderson says. “In 2020 lots of people, especially during lockdown, turned to alcohol for comfort to try and keep their mind off things. I’ve heard people talk about how they were drinking too much. So let’s all try and complete Dry January and stay focused and healthy and make a good start to the new year.”The last nine and a half years at Liverpool “have flown by” for Henderson and he pauses again only when I ask whether, at the age of 30, he has begun to consider life without football. “I try not to do that. I hope I can play for a very long time, because the hunger, the desire and the love for the game is still there. I feel good physically and mentally. So I’m not thinking that far ahead. I’m just concentrating on doing the best I can over the next however many years for the club and for England and see where that takes me.”Jordan Henderson spoke on behalf of Budweiser Zero. Sign up to Team Zero to join Henderson and take on Dry January together, and for a chance to win tickets to an England home game at jointeamzero.com
Joe Launchbury hopes physicality can power Wasps and bring Lions chance:	In a manner entirely in keeping with his character, Joe Launchbury quietly re-established himself as a member of Eddie Jones’s England side during the autumn. He started all four Autumn Nations Cup matches to mark his longest run in the side for two and a half years and though he is too self-effacing to admit it, showed the kind of form that may finally earn a British & Irish Lions call-up at the third time of asking.He did not catch the eye with the kind of interventions of his second-row partner Maro Itoje but he was no less integral to England’s unbeaten autumn and for all that Jones has spoken of a team in transition, his most recent side featured only two changes from the 2019 World Cup final with Launchbury’s re-emergence one of few notable differences.His head coach at Wasps, Lee Blackett, believes Launchbury is “in the form of his career”, now 29 and long since established as the club’s captain. The British & Irish Lions will not want for second rows on their summer tour of South Africa but, according to Blackett, Launchbury “has to be in the reckoning”.Whether Warren Gatland agrees is another matter. Launchbury has been passed over twice before by the New Zealander, suffering from the perception that he is not hard enough around the edges. Gatland is pragmatic enough to change his mind but Launchbury acknowledges the reputation that precedes him has been a difficult one to shake. Ironically enough however, he believes Matt Proudfoot, the South African who masterminded the Springboks’ demolition job on England’s pack in the World Cup final – now one of Jones’s assistants and maybe one of Gatland’s too in summer – has played a key role this year.“I have worked really hard on my physicality,” says Launchbury. “In the last six months I have probably seen more of the work we do on the training ground come through on to the pitch. I have really enjoyed that role I have had.“It has always been a [perception] on how I conduct myself away from the pitch. Maybe my personality … I like to think I am cool and calm when playing. Maybe that has gone against me, but I would like to think anyone who has spent time working or playing with me, understands where I am on that level. Although I don’t show it in some of the off-the-ball stuff, maybe it is a bit more controlled.“Matt Proudfoot has come in with a fresh pair of eyes and views things slightly differently. If you look at the South African style of rugby, you see the front five forwards are very physical and confrontational. That’s the style of rugby they look to play and impose on the opposition. I have taken bits of his background of coaching and his style of play into my game and certainly I have enjoyed that. I would say Matt over the last few months has been a big influence in that regard.”Launchbury swerves the Lions question but is clearly aware that if it is to be third time lucky he will need to keep his place in the England side during the Six Nations. He will be missed by Wasps during the tournament – he always is when off on international duty – but goes with Blackett’s blessing. “This is my sixth season here and this is by far the best I’ve seen him play for us,” says Blackett. “It was exactly the same when he went to England this time around and I was really pleased with what I saw there. Hopefully he’s got a big summer there as well. He’s the best captain I’ve seen, as a player or coach.“The next level he’s gone to are the collisions on both sides of the ball. He’s always won gain line with the ball in his hands, but now he’s winning gain line by being really physical in defence. He’s so motivated and his passion for the club is infectious. It’s hard for me not to get emotional when talking about Joe. I think really highly of him and I’d love him to be there in the summer.”Launchbury returns to the Wasps side to face Exeter on Saturday in a repeat of last season’s Premiership final, having had his mandatory two-week break since England’s autumn campaign. He cut a forlorn figure at Twickenham after the narrow defeat by the Chiefs but Wasps, as demonstrated with an impressive away win at Sale last time out, are slowly rekindling the form that took them to the final.“It was very gutting and disappointing but that is what playing big finals does,” he says. “We know how hard we’d worked to get there and it was three years since we’d previously been there. With that you get to understand you’re not guaranteed to be back there again and getting to the Premiership final is a very hard thing to do. Certainly the drive and ambition here from a club point of view is for sure to get back to those situations.”
Steve Borthwick misses out on Bath reunion due to Covid self-isolation:	Steve Borthwick will watch Leicester’s match on Sunday against Bath, the club where he made his name as a second row, at home on television with the volume turned down as he isolates following a Covid-19 outbreak at Welford Road, seeking a cure for a malady that started long before 2020.“When we won in Bayonne last month, it was the first time Leicester had done so in France for seven years,” says Borthwick, who took over as head coach in July when the Tigers were one off the bottom of the Premiership but spared a relegation scrap because of Saracens’ disgrace.“That reflected the decline of the club. When I started, we had a lineout and scrum ranked 11th in the Premiership and our attack and defence statistics were poor. The first priority was to get the team fit because 12 times in the two years before I joined, Leicester were winning going in the final 20 minutes but lost. We have made some development, but we are nowhere where we need to be.”Borthwick’s efforts to get Leicester, who used to be a fixture in the Premiership final at Twickenham, back to where the best-supported club in England expects to be have been hampered by the pandemic. The Tigers have had to shut their training ground twice because of an outbreak of the virus and they go into the Bath game having trained together for two days and below strength.“It is frustrating, but there are a number of people in the world in a worse situation than us,” says Borthwick. “We need time on the training field to develop in the areas we need to, but it has not been the most straightforward time in which to develop.“We are fortunate to have Aled Walters on the coaching team: his technical knowledge is outstanding and he has the ability to get players to give more.”Leicester have finished in the bottom two in the past two seasons and were set to return there before the start of the latest round, with Worcester likely to be awarded four points following the cancellation of their match against Harlequins. The number of games being called off with no time to rearrange them has prompted some to question whether relegation should be suspended.“I only focus my attention over things I have an influence over and that question is not one of them,” says Borthwick. “Everyone is trying their hardest in challenging circumstances and we are managing the circumstances as well as we can. At a time like this you need to be adaptable. I make a number of plans so that you can pull the necessary one off the shelf.”Fixtures between Leicester and Bath were once the highlight of the club season, but the clubs fell some way behind Saracens and then Exeter in the Premiership and Europe.“We know we have a big challenge on Sunday,” says Borthwick. “Look at the squad Bath have developed and the money they have spent on it over the years. They have invested in their training ground and they have shown their spending power.“Bruce Craig [Bath’s owner] has high expectations for his team and they will be disappointed at the start to their season given the money he has put in.“I will watch the match on television, without the commentary because that is always my habit, and send instant messages to the coaches, but I will be back on the training ground from Tuesday.”
Manchester City to hold investigation after Benjamin Mendy hosts NYE party:	Benjamin Mendy will be the subject of an internal investigation by Manchester City with the club “disappointed” at the defender breaking of Covid-19 isolation rules. Mendy invited three people from outside his household to a New Year’s Eve party at the 26-year-old’s home.The Frenchman’s act could infuriate Pep Guardiola as the manager has constantly reiterated a message of safety and consideration regarding the virus.A City spokesperson said: “The club is aware of a New Year’s Eve Covid-19 breach involving Benjamin Mendy and the subsequent media reporting of it.“While it is understood that elements of this incident have been misinterpreted in the reports, and that the player has publicly apologised for his error, the club is disappointed to learn of the transgression and will be conducting an internal investigation.”As reported by The Sun, a spokesperson for Mendy said “Benjamin and his partner allowed a chef and two friends of his partner to attend his property for a dinner party on New Years Eve. Ben accepts that this is a breach of Covid-19 protocols and is sorry for his actions in this matter. Ben has had a Covid test and is liaising with Manchester City about this.”On Christmas Day the club announced that Gabriel Jesus and Kyle Walker had tested positive for the virus. City’s game at Everton on 28 December was then called off a few hours before kick-off due to an outbreak of Covid at the club, with City’s training ground being closed.Three more players were then also ruled out of Sunday’s trip to Chelsea due to positive tests though the club have not made public their identity. On Sunday, City announced that defender Eric García and one member of staff had tested positive for Covid-19. The club’s statement did not suggest the cases are related to the Mendy incident.Mendy was named on the bench for City’s match against Chelsea on Sunday.
Bournemouth condemn 'disgusting' racial abuse of Junior Stanislas:	The Bournemouth chief executive, Neill Blake, has condemned the racial abuse directed at Junior Stanislas following the away win at Stoke on Saturday, calling it “disgusting and completely intolerable”.Stanislas was subjected to racist slurs and insults about his family by an individual on Twitter after scoring the Cherries’ winning goal in the 1-0 Championship victory.Blake vowed to do all the club can in identifying the person concerned and wants the “strongest possible action” taken against them.“It is both disgusting and completely intolerable that anyone could be subjected to the racial abuse that Junior has received,” Blake said in a statement.“I am astounded that people believe writing and posting these comments is acceptable. We will be contacting Twitter and the Football Association for their help in identifying the individual concerned, and will pursue the strongest possible action against them.“We strongly believe that social media platforms need to take greater responsibility and accountability for the actions of their users and the content that is published on their platforms.“We would wholeheartedly support any movement towards ensuring that all social media accounts are verified through formal identification, and therefore make the users liable for their actions.“The club’s stance on any form of discrimination is unequivocal. It is completely unacceptable and must be called out and acted upon whenever and wherever it is found.“We are a club which celebrates equality, diversity and inclusion, as highlighted by our ongoing ‘Everyone Together’ campaign, which tackles prejudice and promotes understanding. We stand firmly with Junior and will continue to work tirelessly to educate and rid the game of all forms of discrimination.”
Lions tour of South Africa in doubt as talks held over new coronavirus variants:	The British & Irish Lions will decide by next month whether their tour to South Africa that starts in July will go ahead after new strains of coronavirus that have emerged there and in Britain add to the uncertainty over whether fans will be allowed to watch matches.The British government is currently advising anyone against travelling to South Africa, which last weekend became the first country in the continent to reach one million cases of Covid-19 and has banned the sale of alcohol as well as imposing a nationwide curfew.The view of the four home unions, and their hosts, is that a tour without supporters – at least 30,000 visiting fans are expected – would neither be desirable nor commercially viable. There is no timetable yet for a vaccination programme in South Africa.“We are making plans on the latest information available to us,” said the Lions managing director, Ben Calveley. “Given the uncertainty that continues to be caused by the pandemic in both South Africa as well as the UK and Ireland, we are very aware of the need to make a timely decision on the best way forward.”Not least so that we can provide clarity to supporters booked to travel to South Africa or those thinking of making the trip. The Lions’ board has had repeated meetings to discuss all scenarios available and is in constant dialogue. It will meet throughout January and into February, if required, to review all relevant information and data.”The Lions are due to play eight matches in South Africa, starting with the Stormers in Cape Town on 3 July and ending with the third Test against the World Cup holders in Johannesburg on 7 August. The Springboks have not played since defeating England in the World Cup final 14 months ago.“We will be providing an update in due course,” said Calveley. “We continue to be in discussion with various government departments in the UK, Ireland and South Africa to get as much information as possible on this fast-evolving, complex situation.”The former England outside-half Andy Goode said that if the Lions tour were called off, the Six Nations could be moved to fill the gap and at a time when supporters in the UK may be allowed back into grounds, but it would be bad timing for the broadcasters who have commitments to other sports, not least the Olympics in Tokyo.Pushing the Lions tour, which is a financial necessity for the South African Union, back to 2022 would be problematic with England set to tour Australia while Ireland are in New Zealand and Wales are due in South Africa 15 months out from the World Cup in France.
Hear Here podcast recommendations: sign up for unexpected audio pleasures:	Hear Here hunts out the best podcasts every week. Sign up and we’ll send you an email filled with shows you’re unlikely to see featured on the major podcatchers but that are instead hidden gems whose listeners are desperate for the rest of the world to tune in. See the latest edition of Hear Here ... here.No sign-up button? Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault. Please click here to reload the page on theguardian.com which should correct the problem.***More emails from our culture team:Sleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekFilm Today: get the day’s insider news and our latest reviewsBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sArt Weekly: the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitions***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Sign up to our Film Today email:	Every weekday we bring you the latest movie news, blogs, big name interviews, reviews and more.We’ll also point you towards Peter Bradshaw’s film of the week, and a host of quizzes, features and festival coverage.You can also also follow us on Twitter @guardianfilm or like us on Facebook. You need never miss a film story again.***Want more film? Try this:Guardian Documentaries: be the first to find out about our new documentary films, created by top international filmmakers and following unseen global storiesMore emails from our culture team:Sleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sArt Weekly: the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitionsHear Here: podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Art Weekly: sign up to start the weekend with a splash of colour:	Art Weekly is your one-stop shop for all your arty needs. Jonathan Jones handpicks the best ideas and things to see and delivers the week’s must-read news, so you won’t miss a thing. See the latest edition here.***More emails from our culture team:Film Today: get the day’s insider news and our latest reviewsSleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sHear Here: podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
The Guide: Staying In – sign up for our home entertainment tips:	Who needs to go out when there’s so much to do indoors? If you’re looking for inspiration, let The Guide – The Guardian’s Saturday arts and entertainment supplement – help you out. Every week, we’ll send you some hot picks, guaranteed to keep you entertained.Expect the best of everything available to watch, play, hear or read. You won’t have time to be bored.No sign-up button? Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault. Please click here to reload the page which should correct the problem.***More emails from our culture team:Hear Here: podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readersSleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekFilm Today: get the day’s insider news and our latest reviewsBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sArt Weekly: the art world low-down, along with in-depth articles***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	The pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies.But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable.Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the European Green Deal. And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport.Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt non-polluting modes of transport and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen.Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our “superblock” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the Eixample district, first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation.The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something Barcelona has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures.Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown.Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind.Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start.• Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	As European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and Hungary. The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights.The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has been derailed by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on upholding democratic values.This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in Poland and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems.The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by making it impossible for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists.As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company, has just bought Polska Press, a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country.It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major survey of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”.I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the European Union in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends.Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of polling finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country.At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in Europe was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”.These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki.EU leaders face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans.We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share.• Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	By now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government.Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent comparative study of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic.In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s alarmist appeals to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the hardest-hit province, Lombardy.Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans.By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”.The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error.Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave.So, did the pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition.It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern Europe, the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region.In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition.More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe.• Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	Ioannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water.But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across Europe, seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight.From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure.In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration.Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips.With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Belgium, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe.And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily.Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative.Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage.In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name.Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin.The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration.But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU.Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back.The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau.But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet.In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle.Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years.Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk.Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Rescue operation to save rock climber stranded on Blue Mountains cliff overnight:	A helicopter has been sent out to winch an injured man stranded on a cliff face for 17 hours after he fell while rock climbing in the Blue Mountains.Emergency services were called to Point Pilcher lookout, near Medlow Bath in the Blue Mountains, about 4pm on Sunday after reports a rock climber had fallen, said a New South Wales police spokeswoman.A rescue operation is underway at the moment to retrieve an injured rockclimber in the Blue Mountains.The man, believed to be aged in his 50s, suffered multiple fractures when he fell while climbing with friends yesterday.He is sheltering in a cave on the cliff face. pic.twitter.com/MRyT0YtB7wThe man, who was part of a three-person climbing group, is believed to be aged in his 50s and has suffered a fractured arm.He and one of his companions sheltered overnight in a cliff-face cave with rescue personnel after the operation to extract him was called off on Sunday evening due to poor light.A NSW police spokeswoman told Guardian Australia the rescue operation, which began after sunrise on Monday, was still under way at about 10am.A rescue helicopter was being flown out to the area on Monday morning, with the man expected to be lowered to the ground before being winched to safety.
NSW records seven cases and announces new restrictions – as it happened:	And with that comes the end of today’s blog. Here is what happened today: As always, if you are planning interstate travel anytime soon, and are confused by the constantly changing rules, please check out our summarised border restrictions and list of hotspots. Enjoy your Saturday night and thanks for reading!Queenslanders who have been in Victoria on or since 21 December have been advised by authorities to get tested immediately and quarantine at home until they get their results.The advice comes from the state’s chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, although there are still no changes to the state’s border restrictions. Victoria’s own assessment of the situation is that the risk of spread is right across the state, not just in Melbourne, which is why they have imposed restrictions across their entire state.This is very serious and we’re taking this action now, like we did with New South Wales. This will ensure we know of any positive cases really early and we can manage our response accordingly.Young said one close contact of a Victorian case had been identified in the Mackay region as well as a casual contact on the Gold Coast.Young advised Queenslanders in Victoria and NSW to consider coming home, and advised that both states were in a critical stage in their response to the outbreak. The Northern Territory has recorded seven new cases, all among overseas arrivals and all in quarantine. The new cases include five adults in their 20s and 30s, along with a baby, who arrived from India yesterday. All the cases involve Australians returning home on repatriation flights in the past few days.In very different news, an Australian pro surfer has been caught on camera rescuing a struggling swimmer. Mickey Wright charged into the surf at a beach in Hawaii and saved a beachgoer struggling with the current and the waves. He posted the footage to on Instagram with the simplest of captions: “Hold my beer.”You can read more on the story (and watching the dramatic rescue) here: Victoria has updated its exposure sites with added venues: UPDATE: new exposure sites have now been added. Have you visited any of these sites? What you need to do next will depend on the site you have visited. The full list of sites and the steps you need to take now is here: https://t.co/tkawOvIj9L pic.twitter.com/bXhiXBnUKNNSW Health has updated its advice for venues of concern. Anyone who has visited the following venue for any amount of time during the following periods should get tested immediately and self-isolate until further advice from NSW Health, regardless of result:Anyone who has visited the following venue for an hour or more during the following times should get tested immediately and self-isolate regardless of negative result:Anyone who visited the following venues at the listed times should monitor for symptoms and if they occur, get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received: Indonesia has granted a distribution permit for a new breathalyser test that can potentially detect Covid-19 in minutes. The test, called GeNose, was developed and trialed by the Gajah Mada University (UGM) in Yogyakarta, and works similarly to an alcohol breathalyser test. Patients would have to breathe into a tube, which would then be analysed for volatile organic compounds related to the coronavirus with an apparent accuracy rate of 93%.Each test is estimated to only cost between US$1.06 and US$1.77 (IDR15,000 to IDR25,000), with results appearing in as fast as two minutes.The development of the quicker, cheaper tests come at an opportune moment for Indonesia, with hopes that the tests will be available nationwide by the end of February and improve testing numbers in the country.A former Coalition government adviser has won a $190,000 bushfire agency contract without a full tender.In an exclusive story from my colleague Daniel Hurst, Richard Forbes, who was an adviser to the former deputy prime minister and Nationals leader Mark Vaile, is being paid to produce videos documenting the recovery of communities affected by the “black summer” bushfires.The services are to be provided over a five-month period that started in late November and will end in April, at a cost of $189,000.A contract notice posted on Christmas Eve said the deal was reached by limited tender because of “advantageous conditions arising only in the very short term, not routine procurements”.You can read the full story here: A new warning system is being implemented across Australia, in the hopes it will help save lives. AAP has the story: It’s hoped a new Australian Warning System will deliver more consistent safety messages and help save lives across the country.The system uses a set of icons to show incidents on websites and apps that are supported by calls to action.Emergency management minister David Littleproud says it delivers on the recommendations of the Royal Commission into National Natural Disaster Arrangements.The commission was established in response to the extreme bushfire season of 2019/20 in which the firefighting effort stretched across the country.“In the past Australians had been relying on different warning systems for different hazard types that varied across jurisdictions,” Mr Littleproud said.“The new warnings have come into effect for bushfires in all jurisdictions except for Western Australia, which will adopt it in the near future.“Warnings for other hazards such as floods, cyclones and heatwaves will be phased in over time.”The three warning levels are Advice (incident under way, no immediate danger), Watch and Act (conditions changing and heightened level of threat), and Emergency Warning (you may be in danger and need to take action immediately).Mr Littleproud commended the Australasian Fire and Emergency Services Authorities Council for the system’s development.Western Australia has recorded three new cases, but all of them are in hotel quarantine. Acting premier and health minister, Roger Cook, said he was pleased with testing numbers, which increased from 827 yesterday to 2,179, and pointed out the state had now gone 266 days without community transmission. 266 days is an extraordinary fact, but it is a fact we cannot take for granted. It is a testament to the professionalism and hard work of so many people on the frontline, day in, day out, keeping us all safe from Covid-19. They deserve our respect and support for what they do.An emergency bushfire warning has been issued to part of Red Gully in the shire of Gingin, north of Perth.The warning is for people north of Marri Heights Road, south of Dandaragan-West Road and east of Cowalla Road. The fire is considered a threat to lives and homes, with residents urged to leave now and find a safer place to stay. The bushfire is currently moving fast in a westerly direction and is out of control and unpredictable.The fire started near the intersection of Mogumber Road West, and Brand Highway in Red Gully, with a number of roads in the area closed.The ACT has again recorded no new cases today, with only one active case in the capital: ACT COVID-19 update (2 January 2021)▪️ Cases today: 0▪️ Active cases: 1▪️ Total cases: 118▪️ Recovered: 114▪️ Lives lost: 3▪️ Test results (past 24 hours): 195▪️ Negative tests: 137,936ℹ️ https://t.co/YGW9pOHG3e pic.twitter.com/QXdM2uubdUThe Australian Medical Association has issued another statement today, calling on the NSW government to reconsider its decision to allow crowds at the cricket. AMA president Dr Omar Khorshid said the match had the potential to “supercharge” the spread of the virus.This is a potential transmission site, as people queue at the ticket gates, at food and beverage stalls and use shared toilet facilities – on top of taking public transport from all parts of Sydney to gather in one central location.The decision to hold the test match with spectators is at odds with the rest of NSW’s appropriate response to the latest outbreak.Dr Korshid went on to welcome the government’s approach to limiting non-essential gatherings, and encouraging people to reduce their travel. In this context, the decision to allow this sporting event to go ahead with a large crowd suggests that this event is important enough to justify the risk to the health of NSW people and all Australians.Let’s put health first, and watch the Third Test on TV.Now for a slight break in the coronavirus news, I’d like to share with you a great yarn, on a hiker who spent lockdown in a hobbit home. Yes, that’s right, someone spent most of the this pandemic living like Bilbo Baggins. You can read up on the story, and see some of the incredible photography, at the link here: A severe thunderstorm warning has been issued for parts of Riverina and Lower Western Forecast districts: ⛈️Severe Thunderstorm Warning⚡for HEAVY RAINFALL and LARGE HAILSTONESFor people in parts of Riverina and Lower Western Forecast Districts. Please check the latest warnings: https://t.co/Ph8OcjaqsX pic.twitter.com/hT7mNqopAfPeople in Broken Hill have also posted videos of the sudden storm: Broken Hill hit by unpredicted hail storm! @ABCemergency @BOM_NSW pic.twitter.com/nZHiwDcLF7Nice and wet Broken Hill :) pic.twitter.com/0kaMWVxP5GThe State Emergency Service is advising people to move their cars to cover, keep clear of creeks and storm drains, and to not walk, bike or drive through flood waters. Tasmania has moved to close its borders to anyone who has visited nine sites in Victoria. Tasmanian health minister Sarah Courtney announced the closure, saying fears of a growing outbreak in Victoria sparked the border closure. We will not hesitate to take further action if we need to to keep Tasmanians safe.The new sites in Victoria include the Smile Buffalo Thai Restaurant, the Royal Brighton Yacht Club, the Sons of Mary Restaurant and the Village Century City.Users on twitter are reporting hour long queues to get tested in Victoria: Does .@VicGovDHHS think it's reasonable that I've been waiting 4.5 hours to get tested at Melbourne Showgrounds? So ridiculous. What a deterrence #COVID19VicCovid testing queue at the Showgrounds #COVID19Vic #COVID19 #covid19nsw #Melbourne pic.twitter.com/aBeyXVd4Jrpic.twitter.com/mnOzhD2deT5.5 hours at car testing waiting and we got there 1.5 hours before it opened...#COVID19Vic pic.twitter.com/JtYIfkkIngLong line, probably over 150 cars queuing now at Wodonga #COVID19Vic testing station. Dropped in some chocolates to say thanks to the under the pump health workers. They deserve our gratitude. Part of #strongerwodonga #dedication #recallfromleave pic.twitter.com/f4GSm0ZQGIIt comes after Victoria recorded 10 new locally acquired cases today, while the list of exposure sites continues to grow and now includes a number of regional Victorian towns.Have you been waiting along time to get tested? Shoot through an email at mostafa.rachwani@theguardian.com, or tweet me at @rachwani91, we want to hear your experiences.NSW opposition leader, Jodi McKay, has called on the government to stop crowds attending the cricket. McKay welcomed the decision to make face masks compulsory in some indoor venues, but questioned the logic behind allowing people to attend the cricket. The fact is 24,000 people going to the cricket should not put the rest of NSW at risk. We are in a situation where we have unknown clusters, we have transmission and an increasing number of cases and having 24,000 people at the cricket is not the way that you manage the risk.The decision to move down this path is the wrong decision and it is just going to cause trouble and I do not support the cricket proceeding with crowds.
How should I treat insect bites in Australia? Do home remedies work?:	It’s the holidays and we’re spending more time outdoors. This means we’re exposed to the more annoying and painful aspects of summer – insect bites and stings.There are plenty of products at the local pharmacy to treat these. Some treat the initial bite or sting, others the itchy aftermath.What about natural remedies? Few studies have actually examined them. But if they work for you, and don’t irritate already inflamed skin, there’s likely to be no harm in continuing.When insects bite and sting, they are either defending themselves or need something from us (like blood).Whatever the motivation, it can leave us with a painful or itchy reaction, sometimes a severe allergic reaction, or even a debilitating disease.While insects sometimes get a bad rap, there are relatively few that actually pose a serious threat to our health.Flies and mosquitoesMany types of flies, especially mosquitoes, bite. In most instances, they need blood for nutrition or the development of eggs. The method of “biting” can vary between the different types of flies. While mosquitoes inject a needle-like tube to suck our blood, others chew or rasp away at our skin.While researchers have studied what happens when mosquitoes bite, there is still much to learn about how to treat the bites.So, avoiding mosquito bites is especially important given that some can transmit pathogens that make us sick. We still have lots to learn about treating mosquito bites.Fleas, lice, mites and ticksThere are lots of other insects (such as bed bugs, fleas and lice) and other arthropods (such as mites and ticks) that bite.But it is difficult to determine which insect has bitten us based on the bite reaction alone. This is generally because different people react in different ways to the saliva injected as they start to suck our blood.Bees, wasps and antsThen there are stinging insects, such as bees, wasps and ants. These are typically just defending themselves.But, as well as being painful, the venom they inject when they sting can cause potentially severe allergic reactions.If you suffer potentially severe allergic reactions from bites or stings, immediately seek appropriate medical treatment. For many other people, it is the initial painful reaction and itchy aftermath that require attention.Despite how common insect bites can be, there is surprisingly little formal research into how best to treat them. Most of the research is focused on insect-borne diseases.Even for recommended treatments, there is little evidence they actually work. Instead, recommendations are based on expert opinion and clinical experience.Health authorities promote some general advice on treating insect bites and stings. This includes using pain relief medication (such as paracetamol or ibuprofen). They also advise applying a cold compress (such as a cold pack, ice or a damp cloth soaked in cold water) to the site of the sting or bite to help reduce the inflammation and to ease discomfort.There is also specific advice for dealing with stings and removing ticks.If you do nothing, the discomfort of the bite or sting will eventually fade after a few days. The body quickly recovers, just as it would for a cut or bruise.If you’re still in pain for more than a couple of days, or there are signs of an allergic reaction, seek medical assistance.Once the initial pain has started to fade, the itch starts. That’s because the body is reacting to the saliva injected when insects bite.For many people, this is incredibly frustrating and it is all too easy to get trapped in a cycle of itching and scratching.In some cases, medications, such as corticosteroid creams or antihistamines could help alleviate the itchiness. You can buy these from the pharmacy.Then there’s calamine lotion, a mainstay in many Australian homes used to treat the itchiness caused by insect bites. But there are few studies that demonstrate it works.If you’re looking for a home remedy to treat insect bites and the itchiness that comes with it, a quick internet search will keep you busy for days.Potential home remedies include: tea bags, banana, tea tree or other essential oils, a paste of baking soda, vinegar, aloe vera, oatmeal, honey and even onion.There is little evidence any of these work. But not many have actually been scientifically evaluated.Tea tree oil is one of the few. While it is said to help treat skin reactions, the oil itself can cause skin reactions if not used as directed.If a home remedy works for you, and it’s not causing additional irritation, there’s no harm in using it if you’re getting some relief.With so much uncertainty about how to treat insect bites and stings, perhaps it is best if we avoid exposure in the first place. There are plenty of insect repellents available at your local pharmacy or supermarket that do this safely and effectively.Cameron Webb is a clinical associate professor and principal hospital scientist at University of Sydney. Webb and the department of medical entomology, NSW Health pathology, have been engaged by a wide range of insect repellent and insecticide manufacturers to provide testing of products and provide expert advice on mosquito biology. Webb has also received funding from local, state and federal agencies to undertake research into mosquito-borne disease surveillance and management.This article originally appeared on the Conversation.
Newcastle v Leicester: Premier League – live!:	Leicester climb up to third, with their goals both expertly taken. Newcastle were short of quality and despite Andy Carroll’s goal could not find their way back into the game. They are back in 15th and a long relegation battle surely beckons for them. 90+4 min: Newcastle struggling to get the ball into that Leicester box. Instead, their opponents go down the other end with the ball to run down the clock. 90+3 min: Newcastle search for an equaliser. But Ndidi robs Murphy, and finds Vardy, who then takes the ball into the corner. Some patient play from the visitors until Barnes sees glory and drags a shot wide. 90+1 min: Four minutes added on. 90 min: Newcastle exert some late pressure. Shelvey gets to the line but his cross finds nobody willing to, yes, gamble. And Leicester can clear. 88 min: Harvey Barnes released by Vardy but Darlow comes across to close off the angle. Meanwhile, Schar looks to have a muscle problem and is limping away. Newcastle have made all their subs too. 87 min: A Newcastle free-kick is aimed at Carroll. Of course it’s aimed at Carroll. Eventually, he loops the ball into the box and Wilson looks to have a prime chance. But no, there’s an offside flag. 85 min: Leicester seek a third rather than sitting back. Albrighton falls to the floor and keeps heading the ball on the ground, and in the style of Phil Jones and John Terry, grubs along the turf with it. How strange. 83 min: It was ten years ago that Andy Carroll joined Liverpool for £35m on the night Chelsea signed Fernando Torres for £50m? It seems like yesterday, when Transfer Deadline Day was so much fun. Well well. Who else but Andy Carroll? The ball is whipped in from a free-kick and Big Andy volleys home. What a goal. What a turn up. 80 min: A check suggests Carroll rejoined Newcastle 18 month ago and is still yet to score. Blimey. He was great in his first spell at the club. 79 min: Steve Bruce has pushed the Andy Carroll button. The Sky commentator suggests it is more than ten years since his last Newcastle goal. Off goes Yedlin. A Leicester change: Maddison off, Söyüncü on. 76 min: Jamie Vardy crashes the woodwork but was again offside. That’s not the first time today. Has he finally slowed up? He used to have such pace he never needed to be offside. Whatever, he’s still a fine player. 74 min: Tielemans had looked off his game but that fine finish should do his confidence some good. Newcastle have fallen prey to two well-made and well-taken goals. Leicester’s extra quality has told. A lovely pass from Albrighton after Leicester press a Darlow goal-kick into a swift attack. It comes across to the Belgian who smashes home. A great goal, just like the first. 71 min: Harvey Barnes wins a corner, and Leicester take their time over it. Maddison takes, and there is a claim for handball against Yedlin. No dice from the ref and VAR. 68 min: Matty Longstaff drives on, and his cross is driven in, only to be cleared away. Nobody had ‘gambled’, to use that odd football parlance. What is being put at risk when someone makes a run to chase the ball? 67 min: A snapshot or a cross from Murphy? Difficult to tell. It drifts wide. 66 min: David Sweet has got in touch on Newcastle’s penalty claim, which the referee and VAR waved away. “It really annoys me when commentators said “oh he got the ball so no penalty”. In this case it looked to me as if Castagne did indeed ‘get’ the ball (i.e. touched the ball) but had Wilson not gone down he would still have been favourite to recover it. So even if the contact happened after the ball was kicked, it would still be a foul and therefore a penalty. Perhaps it wasn’t, but not because Castagne ‘got the ball’, but because the contact was not considered serious enough to fall inside the definition of foul tackle.”65 min: Newcastle make two changes: Jacob Murphy is on for Almiron, while Jonjo Shelvey comes on for Joelinton, who had disappeared after the early exchanges. 64 min: Albrighton down after a heavy landing after he climbs for the ball with Ritchie. That looked nasty and jarring as he hit the ground. The 2016 champion is made of stern stuff. 62 min: Maddison, in the mood, wallops a long-ranger at goal. Darlow is struggling but it flies wide. Then Barnes takes a potshot. Newcastle are much more open at the moment. 60 min: Almiron fouled by Tielemans as he attempted to counter. A yellow card is waved. Tielemans on four fouls, and the amnesty on five bookings is some time away. 58 min: Newcastle will have to push on, which may open up the game for those Leicester forwards, who have succeeded where Liverpool failed. 56 min: The goal came just as Newcastle were enjoying their best spell of the game. They instantly have a penalty claim but VAR rules that Castagne stopped Wilson fairly in the Leicester box. Barnes plays in Vardy, who cuts inside. He lays it back to Maddison who whacks it through a crowd of players and into the net. 54 min: Lovely ball from Schar, great cross from Ritchie but even better defending from Jonny Evans to stop Wilson getting on the end of it. 53 min: Newcastle corner taken by Ritchie, headed away by Ndidi and then Almiron lashes over. He’s not exactly the player you would want to be on the end of that type of chance. 51 min: Yedlin skids a cross in as Barnes is lax in closing him down, but Wilson fails to get on the end of it. 50 min: Almiron scampers away after a Maddison mistake. It takes Fofana to stop a through ball to a galloping Wilson. 48 min: Maddison and Albrighton are stopped just as they try to get Vardy away. Then a Castagne chip finds Vardy who slices the ball wide. It was a half-chance. 47 min: A long hoof from Schmeichel gets caught by the wind and comes back down. That’s the long ball gone as a weapon until the storm abates. 46 min: Off we go again, and with no subs made. The weather in Newcastle has taken a turn and the players will have to forge through conditions that remind of those from The Lighthouse. It’s tipped it down in London too. It’s been real. Neither team looks in particularly good nick, with Leicester’s array of attacking talent all seemingly on different wavelengths to each other. Newcastle’s attackers have been isolated too. Midfield has been a sludge of tackles and niggles. 45+3 min: Leicester corner, taken by Maddison, and Fofana on the edge of the six-yard box can only head over. That’s probably his team’s best chance of the half. 45 min: Schar is down, and looks to have a muscle problem. There will be four minutes added on to this top-level first of unrelenting entertainment. 44 min: Lovely skill from Barnes but he eventually runs into traffic before he can release Vardy. 43 min: Leicester corner, which comes out to Tielemans, who sees glory and ends up whacking the ball deep into the stands. His radar is definitely off-beam today. 41 min: Callum Wilson is again the out ball but he is again crowded out. Almiron falls to the floor, having looked to have taken a swipe off Ndidi. There’s a scratch on the Paraguayan’s face. How good a cuts man is the Newcastle physio? He seems to have done a decent job but Almiron leaves the field. 39 min: Leicester suddenly produce an attack. Castagne gets to the byline from a Maddison ball and his cross comes off the back of Barnes who had misjudged his run. 38 min: This is no classic, to say the least. That’s perhaps not surprising considering the workload these teams have been put through. 36 min: Vardy fails to control a through ball but applauds the invention. Both teams looking to the long ball to pick the lock. 
Housing struggles are painted as a rite of passage for young people. Why?:	Name: Melis LayikAge: 21Dreams of: Being a lawyer, an author and a grassroots organiserI sit in my new apartment encircled by cardboard boxes, looking at the remnants of tape and bubble wrap strewn across the carpet. I’ve moved house since I last wrote a few weeks ago. I have a table but no chairs. The box of miscellaneous oddities, teeming with craft projects, which I swear I’ll finish some day, is staring me down. It’s a mess, but it signifies a new start. As I look around my glorious heap of knick-knacks, drinking coffee from a cereal bowl, I feel a sense of comfort and ease that I haven’t had in my home for a while.One silver lining of Covid-19 has been the significant drop in rental prices in Melbourne. It’s meant that I can afford to live by myself for the first time, in a clean, comfortable and central apartment building. Still, it’s not cheap or easy. I still have no job after losing my three jobs this year, so rent takes all of my income from Youth Allowance. I receive money from my parents to cover other costs.It took a while to get here. I inspected a lot of depressing places in my price range. The majority of the properties I was shown were hotel rooms that had been converted into residential apartments due to the lack of tourists. Most of them were accompanied by kicked-in walls, bizarre smells and fixtures that were falling apart. Some had windows that directly faced concrete walls or worse, no windows at all. It’s remarkable what can be passed off as a living space. Living in a comfortable space shouldn’t be a luxury but what I was offered suggested it is.I needed to move out as soon as Melbourne’s lockdown lifted. Because during our lockdown, home became a place of discomfort, alienation and anxiety. When I took up the lease on my flat, I envisioned I would be out most of the time, busy with uni, work and friends. Little did I know that cramped box would end up feeling like a cage. When restrictions were tightened I began to feel suffocated. I ended up confining myself to my room for the six-month stretch, with headphones cemented to my ears. I felt isolated within my home. It was paralysing. I was desperate to get out.I tried to escape my lease earlier, but real estate agents don’t lend much weight to the problems of a 21-year-old renter. I spent weeks searching for a replacement to fulfil my lease obligations. The whole situation felt very disempowering.Precariousness is not a rare feeling for me when it comes to housing. I’ve lived in various cash-in-hand living situations where landlords have not fixed broken amenities and withheld my bond. My studies in property law have come in handy, and each time I have successfully applied to the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal and received my bond back. But most young people aren’t aware of their rights as tenants, or how to enforce them.It’s frustrating because housing struggles are marketed as problems that young people are supposed to experience. We’re “supposed” to live in shitty share houses and cramped dorms. It’s propagandised to us as a rite of passage. But why? Don’t we deserve a standard quality of living? We can’t reckon with real estate agents and landlords because the power balance is skewed from the beginning. Considering our lack of social and financial capital, I believe young people need special protections against this kind of exploitation, including the expansion of social housing.Right now, though, as I sit here, I feel consoled by the comfort of my new home. The hope that I longed for is blossoming. Last year was taxing and tumultuous, but I feel humbled by its stagnancy. I feel good about 2021. I hope that it brings us joy and connection.
Last year was dismal in many respects but it was a landmark for renewables in Australia:	In his speech to the Smart Energy Summit in mid-December 2019, New South Wales energy minister Matt Kean fired a shot that has reverberated all year.As Kean spoke, smoke from the bushfires enveloping Sydney permeated the hotel conference room such that a cone of illuminated particulates appeared to hang beneath every ceiling light.“This is not normal and doing nothing is not a solution” said Kean, breaking ranks with his federal counterparts. “We need to reduce our carbon emissions immediately”.Kean was pilloried by the Murdoch press, but stood firm. In July, he announced a plan to build transmission lines opening up two massive new renewable energy zones, and in November he legislated a plan to underwrite the $32bn of renewables and storage required to fill them.Kean’s ambitious moves, which prepare NSW for the coming wave of coal power station retirements, received almost no pushback from conservative media. Whimpers of protest from federal energy minister Angus Taylor barely registered. (To nobody’s surprise,  a recent poll of AFR readers voted Taylor “worst minister” of 2020.)Other Liberal states have stepped up too. Tasmania, already at 100% renewables, announced plans to double renewable generation. In 2019 South Australia announced a goal of 100% net renewable generation by 2030 and in 2020 announced a 500% renewables target by 2050.Labor-led governments haven’t sat still either. Victoria announced a “humongous” new battery for Geelong, a huge housing energy efficiency program and development of six renewable zones. Queensland committed to developing three new zones and appointed a minister for renewables and hydrogen.Refreshingly, Australia’s conservative media have largely bitten their collective tongues. It is now politically safe to pursue clean energy.Globally, the decarbonisation drumbeat has become impossible to ignore. The number of countries committing to net-zero emissions reached 121. The number of globally significant financial institutions announcing coal-exit policies almost doubled to 155. Oil companies conceded that oil’s best days are behind us. The International Energy Agency declared solar as “the new king” of electricity. US president-elect Joe Biden has made it clear that he’ll be aggressively pursuing climate action and will rejoin the Paris agreement on day one.Watch Morrison gradually reposition on climate in 2021, just as Howard did before the 2007 federal electionOur three biggest coal customers — Japan, China and South Korea — each committed to net-zero emissions. And with the pool of debt, equity and insurance providers shrinking, the long-term decline of our coal sector is now certain.Australia’s energy transition continues apace. In 2009 Kevin Rudd’s government extended the Howard era renewable energy target (RET) to a nominal “20% by 2020”. Worried that the RET would be too successful, Tony Abbott took an axe to the scheme in 2015, cutting about 40% of the remaining demand. Despite years of sustained attacks, and thanks to states, corporates and literally millions of households and their solar panels, we’ve blown past Rudd’s target. In 2020 more than 26% of energy in the national electricity market (NEM) was delivered by renewables.2020 marked the lowest coal use in the NEM this century and the lowest gas usage since 2006 — so much for the “gas led recovery”. It’s increasingly clear that multiple coal power stations will close this side of 2030.Graph not appearing? View hereIn 2020 the residential solar sector smashed all previous records, no doubt buoyed by housebound families turning their attention to their homes and yet another year of falling system costs.South Australia continued to power ahead with an average of 59% of demand met by wind and solar. In earlier years, renewable generation exceeded the state’s total demand for moments — in 2020 it did so for 10% of the year. In a marked turnaround, over the last half-year South Australia recorded the lowest wholesale energy prices in the country.Despite dire warnings from (inexpert) pundits, record heat and fire-related transmission outages, our grid performed exceptionally well over summer. A freak storm at the end of January knocked out a major power line between Victoria and SA. Thanks to new levels of preparation and conservatism in the wake of the 2016 blackout, this time SA didn’t skip a beat, and ran “islanded” from the NEM for 17 days straight.Sadly, Audrey Zibelman, CEO of Aemo, the electricity market operator and system planner, returned to the US. Zibelman leaves behind a transformed organisation, no longer struggling with the pace of change, but one approaching the transition with the rigour required to manage such a critical service.One of Zibelman’s crowning achievements at Aemo is the integrated system plan, one of the most detailed network planning processes globally. The ISP models multiple “least cost” development pathways for our national grid. The “step change” scenario, arguably the most plausible, has our grid at 96% renewable energy in 2042 — solving the energy trilemma of affordable, reliable and clean power.Two massive renewables projects were granted major project status. Between the 26GW Asian Renewable Energy Hub (which plans to produce cheap power for the Pilbara and massive quantities of green hydrogen for export) and the 10GW Sun Cable project (which aims to send power by undersea cable to Singapore) the projects would increase total electricity generation in Australia by more than 50%.Australia’s energy transition continues to play out between the states, business and householdsDespite our great progress in greening the electricity system, Australia is floundering in the transport sector. Preliminary 2020 sales numbers indicate flat growth in electric vehicle sales, in stark contrast to much of the rest of the world.While a growing number of countries are introducing future bans on new fossil-fuelled car sales and have provided subsidies on EVs for years, Australia has no federal electrification policies and disincentivises with high taxes on electric vehicles.Without federal electrification policies, states and territories are going their own way. At one end of the spectrum, the ACT is removing taxes and providing interest free loans for EVs. Victoria, on the other hand, is planning to impose a new tax on EVs. Given the mess, it’s no surprise that Volkswagen has chosen to pass over Australia for their new EV range.When Matt Kean prodded Scott Morrison to sharpen up his climate stance a year ago, the prime minister shot back dismissively that “most of the federal cabinet wouldn’t even know who Matt Kean was”.As we kick off 2021, every cabinet member has seen how Kean and his state counterparts have deftly transcended the party’s historical opposition to renewable energy and are instead embracing decarbonisation to popular acclaim. The emergence of centre-right advocacy group Coalition for Conservation and thinktank the Blueprint Institute have emboldened MPs acutely aware the party’s position is untenable.Credit where credit is due, the government dropped plans to apply Kyoto carbon credits against our Paris agreement commitments and re-committed to funding clean energy research and development, including for the nascent hydrogen industry. But after seven years in government, the federal government still has no credible emissions reduction plan, so it was no surprise that when UK prime minister Boris Johnson held the Climate Ambition Summit in December, Morrison was denied a speaking slot.For all his failings, Morrison knows how to read the room. His many “micro-pivots” indicate that he knows coal’s best days are behind us, that his advisors over-egged the promise of gas, that renewable energy is extremely popular and climate science denial a major turn-off.Watch Morrison gradually reposition on climate in 2021, just as Howard did before the 2007 federal election, and for the same reasons. The need for economic stimulus provides Morrison with the perfect opportunity to complete his slow pivot and the conservative media appear ready to give him the requisite leeway.In the meantime, Australia’s energy transition continues to play out between the states, business and households.Veteran environmentalist Bill McKibben makes the point that, on climate action, winning slowly is the same as losing. Are we winning fast enough? No, but we are accelerating.Are we accelerating fast enough? Maybe.
Concerns grow about outbreak in west as case numbers rise – as it happened:	We’ll leave it there for now. Thanks for reading today. Before I let you go, here are the headlines:With that, we’ll say goodbye for today. See you tomorrow.Labor’s health spokesperson, Chris Bowen, has renewed claims the Morrision government is acting too slowly to roll out Covid-19 vaccines, while insisting the opposition’s stance still hinges on approval from the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA).In December the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, called for a faster, larger rollout of the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine in Australia, saying if it was approved by the TGA in January the jabs should begin urgently.The recent toughening of state border restrictions to curb the spread of Covid-19 in the Australian community - and emergency rollouts of vaccines in the UK and US - have prompted some calls for the Australian government to act more quickly.For now, the government is sticking to March as the start date for the rollout in Australia, with Scott Morrison declaring last Friday that “public health is our number one priority on the vaccine” and “there will be no short cuts”. The prime minister argued that approval standards must be upheld to ensure public confidence in the vaccine – something that was crucial to ensuring the uptake was as high as possible.Speaking to reporters this afternoon, Bowen rejected the notion Labor’s position could undermine public confidence in the vaccine as “a complete furphy by the government to try and provide a distraction from their slow rollout”. “Labor has been crystal clear, and I say it again today: we support the independence of the TGA. We are not calling on the TGA to do anything more quickly than they otherwise feel inclined to do. We are not calling for an emergency authorisation. What we are saying is that as soon as the TGA has approved the Pfizer vaccine as being safe and effective, it should be rolled out. There is nothing there which undermines public confidence - it will only be rolled out when it has the tick of approval from the TGA, not a day before.”At the moment, Bowen said, Australians were relying on the Pfizer vaccine, but “that won’t be out [in Australia] until March and we only have 10 million doses”.An Australian ex-Muslim women’s rights activist faces “politically motivated” charges in Tanzania, including for a tweet allegedly critical of the country’s president, according to her supporters.The Australian government is providing consular assistance to Zara Kay, 28, the founder of Faithless Hijabi, a group set up two years ago to support women who are ostracised or face violence if they leave or question Islam.Kay tweeted on 28 December she was “going into the police station because someone reported me in for blasphemy” and a few days later told her supporters she was out on bail but “still quite traumatised from everything”.“Please don’t stop fighting for me,” she wrote. “They can try shaking me, but they won’t break me.”The Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said on Sunday it was “providing consular assistance to an Australian in Tanzania”. But a spokesperson said Dfat would not provide further comment “owing to our privacy obligations”.The case was first reported by the ABC on Sunday.The International Coalition of Ex-Muslims issued a statement saying Kay had been held in police custody for 32 hours from 28 December “without an initial clear indication of charges” and had her passport confiscated.It said she would be required to return to the police station in Dar es Salaam, the administrative capital, on Tuesday.Victoria has extended its state of emergency until 29 January.The Department of Health and Human Services said the decision was taken because the “remains a serious risk to public health”.It said in a statement: The Chief Health Officer has made the recommendation to the Minister for Health, who has consulted with the Minister for Police and Emergency Services and the Commissioner for Emergency Services, who have all approved the extension based the advice from the Chief Health Officer.The state of emergency was due to expire at midnight. It must now be reviewed every four weeks. According to Justice Connect, the state of emergency gives the chief health officer broad powers to impose the public health directions that have been in place during the pandemic. This includes detaining people, restricting movement, preventing entry to premises or providing any other directions considered reasonable to protect public health, slow the spread of infection, reduce the pressure on the health system and minimise the risks of Covid-19.MEDIA RELEASE: From 1am Monday 4 January, anyone who has been in Victoria on or since 21 December will be restricted from entering vulnerable facilities, including aged care facilities, hospitals, disability accommodation and correctional facilities.https://t.co/xd8p24VvdZSome more details on that cyclone warning from AAP.A severe weather warning has been issued for far north Queensland as a tropical cyclone is expected to develop in the Gulf of Carpentaria.A tropical low is expected to intensify becoming a tropical cyclone on Sunday, according to a warning issued by the Bureau of Meteorology.Meteorologist Matt Marshall said gale force winds, abnormally high tides and large waves, as well as heavy rainfall leading to flash flooding were expected from Mornington Island to Poormpuraaw.The system is forecast to move towards the east-southeast, stalling over the Cape York Peninsula before moving towards the north tropical coast.“The system’s going to move over to land and it’s going to weaken as it does so, but it’s going to hang around and bring some significantly heavy rainfall to the north tropical coast,” Marshall added.A severe weather warning has been also issued for heavy rainfall leading to flash flooding over the next few days from Cooktown to Ingham as well as inland parts of the Cape York Peninsula.The heavy rain is expected to continue on Monday and into Tuesday.“Isolated falls of a few hundred millimetres are possible on each day in coastal areas,” Marshall said.Severe thunderstorms are also expected across northern Queensland and the south-eastern interior on Sunday.The developing Tropical Low in the Gulf of Carpentaria is expected to reach category 1 cyclone intensity later today, making landfall tonight. After landfall the winds will weaken, but heavy rain will continue as the system moves over #FNQ. Warnings: https://t.co/85sUctvnDM pic.twitter.com/aLsjKknaX8Wearing a mask helps protect our community from the spread of COVID-19. It’s important masks are worn safely and correctly. Watch this video to learn how. Thank you for playing your part in helping stop of the spread of COVID-19. pic.twitter.com/HDXVNbI6fxYoung says she believes the fourth Test between Australia and India can go ahead at the Gabba. “I think the cricket match can go ahead with the proposal that Cricket Australia has put to us, and with the protocols that we have in place,” she says. “I’ve got no concern about the match going ahead, as we’ve been working through the details that [Cricket Australia] has put forward.” Young says Queensland Health has “almost completed” protocols that the teams will be required to adhere to. She says it will then be up to Cricket Australia to decide if it is happy with those rules.Young says that under the proposed plan there would be a “cricket hotel”. “No one can leave that hotel” other than to train or play, she says. Queensland’s chief health officer, Jeannette Young, says authorities will review restrictions in place for people from greater Sydney in about a week’s time. But she says things are starting to improve in NSW.On Victoria, she says there has also been “some reassuring information”. She says it’s “very good news” that all cases from the Thai restaurant in Black Rock are “all closely linked”.She says at this stage there is no need to extend the current border restrictions to Victoria. But things could change quickly. Anyone travelling in Victoria should keep a close eye on the situation and be prepared to come back to Queensland quickly.The ABC is reporting that an Australian human rights campaigner has been arrested and charged in Tanzania, the country of her birth.It says the supporters of Zara Kay say she was summoned to a police station in the city of Dar es Salaam on 28 December then held in custody for 32 hours.The broadcaster reports that Kay founded Faithless Hijabi, an organisation that supports women who have been ostracised or abused for leaving Islam.Queensland authorities are scheduled to provide a Covid-19 update in about 20 minutes.Police records provided to a parliamentary committee in South Australia show 99 breaches by private security guards working in the state’s medi-hotel system.The Labor opposition has branded that “unacceptable”.The State Opposition says 99 breaches by medi-hotel private security guards is “unacceptable”. There were:5x breaches resulting in instant dismissal a including a guard smelling of alcohol35x PPE Breaches30x using mobile phone on duty22x sleeping on duty@9NewsAdel pic.twitter.com/wcP6eZun31
Aden airport blasts kill 26 in attack 'directed at Yemen government':	At least 26 people have been killed and more than 60 injured after an attack on the airport in the Yemeni city of Aden that appeared to be targeted at a plane carrying members of the newly formed government.Three loud explosions and gunfire were heard on Wednesday afternoon as members of Yemen’s cabinet disembarked. Clouds of smoke billowed from the terminal building. Initial reports suggested the blasts had been caused by mortar shelling or missiles.Another explosion hit close to the city’s heavily fortified Mashiq Palace, where cabinet members were taken following the incident at the airport. There were no immediate reports of injuries or fatalities from the second blast site. Images from the airport shared on social media showed blood, rubble and broken glass strewn near the airport building and at least two bodies, one of them charred, on the ground. In another image a man was seen trying to help up another whose clothes were torn.The attack marks a grim start for Yemen’s new unity government sworn in last week in Saudi Arabia. The reshuffle was designed to mend the dangerous rift between the internationally recognised government led by the president, Abd Rabbu Mansour Hadi, and the separatist Southern Transitional Council (STC), the organisation currently in charge of Aden.Several civilians, journalists and government officials are believed to be among the dead. The International Committee of the Red Cross said three staff members had died in the attack. The total number of casualties is expected to rise. Damage to Aden’s airport could leave Yemen with only one fully functioning airport for 28 million people in the blockaded country.Naguib al-Awg, Yemen’s communication minister, who was on the government plane, told Associated Press he heard two explosions and suggested they were drone attacks.“It would have been a disaster if the plane was bombed,” he said, insisting the government had been the target of the attack as the plane was supposed to have landed earlier.All cabinet members, including the prime minister, Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed, and the Saudi ambassador, Mohammed Said al-Jaber, were transferred safely to the interim capital’s presidential palace, Saudi media reported.It was not immediately clear which of Yemen’s warring parties, among them al-Qaida, was responsible for the attack.Last year Houthi rebels fired missiles on a military parade in Aden, killing dozens of people in an attack that inflamed tensions between the government and the STC, who accused each other of failing to share intelligence.The Houthis were also responsible for a missile attack on an Aden hotel in 2015 targeting the then prime minister, Khaled Bahah, and members of his government. Since the rebel group took over the capital, Sana’a, in 2014, the Yemeni government has worked mainly in exile from Saudi Arabia, where the plane was flying in from on Wednesday.The information minister, Moammer al-Eryani, claimed in a post on Twitter that the Houthis were behind Wednesday’s attack, while in a televised address Saeed called it a “cowardly terrorist act” but refrained from blaming the rebels.“The attack … is part of the war being waged against the Yemeni state and our great people, and it will only increase our determination to … restore the state and stability,” he said, vowing that the government was in Aden to stay. A Houthi official, Muhammad al-Bukhaiti, denied responsibility in comments made to Al Jazeera television. Yemen has been embroiled in a bitter civil war for six years that pits the Iran-backed Houthis against a coalition of Arab nations led by Saudi Arabia and the UAE and supported by the UK and US. The conflict has killed an estimated 112,000 people and led to widespread hunger and outbreaks of disease, creating what the UN terms the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.The fighting took on a new dimension in 2017 after the formation of the STC, which is supported by the United Arab Emirates despite the objections of coalition partners in Riyadh. Battles between the government and the STC for control of south Yemen have plunged Aden in particular into unpredictable bouts of violence and complicated UN efforts in the overall peace process.The new power-sharing cabinet was announced in December after more than a year of Saudi-mediated negotiations.Martin Griffiths, the UN special envoy to Yemen, wished “the cabinet strength in facing the difficult tasks ahead”. He said: “This unacceptable act of violence is a tragic reminder of the importance of bringing Yemen urgently back on the path towards peace.” 
Year ends on low note as 787,000 more Americans file for unemployment:	Another 787,000 Americans filed for unemployment benefits in the week before Christmas, the last snapshot of 2020’s appalling jobs market before the New Year.Unemployment claims have been rising again in recent weeks to their highest levels since the autumn as surging coronavirus rates have slowed hiring and led to more layoffs. At current levels the weekly claims figures are almost four times their pre-pandemic average.The latest weekly figure from the Department of Labor was 19,000 lower than the previous week’s 803,000 claims but the average number of claims over the last four weeks is now 836,750, more than the population of the city of Seattle.The national unemployment rate started the year at 3.6% in January and hit a record high of 14.7% in April as the coronavirus shut down much of the US economy. The unemployment rate has since declined dramatically, it was 6.7% in November, but the recovery has been uneven with women and black, Hispanic and young people still experiencing high levels of unemployment. The numbers of long-term unemployed are rising.The recent increases in weekly unemployment claims signal more trouble ahead.According to the Economic Policy Institute, 25.7 million workers in the US remain officially unemployed, otherwise out of work due to the pandemic, or have experienced a reduction in work hours or pay.After months of wrangling Congress has finally brokered a deal to extend unemployment assistance to the millions laid off during the pandemic. The $900bn Covid-19 relief bill will give those receiving unemployment benefits an extra $300 a week and extends two pandemic-specific programs used by about 14 million people. But the delay in the agreement means many across the country face delays in payments and more hardship.Fernando Comas of Secaucus, New Jersey, worked as a video engineer in the entertainment industry before the pandemic and has been furloughed since March until at least 2021.Six weeks ago, his benefits were exhausted. He has been unable to receive answers from his state unemployment agency to try to resolve the issue.“I have a family to feed, a mortgage to pay, a car payment, and I’m a single father of two small girls who rely on me to provide for them,” said Comas, who cannot afford to find other work because his family’s health coverage is still being covered by his employer. “I’m going to lose everything, probably going to be evicted and will start to go to the food banks for food for my family.”
Janet Yellen has made at least $7m from speaking fees, records show:	The incoming US Treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, has been paid at least $7m (£5.1m) for speaking engagements at government-regulated banks, consultancies and hedge funds over the past two years, according to newly disclosed documents.The former Federal Reserve chair disclosed a list of more than 50 paid speaking events for financial firms that included $67,500 from Goldman Sachs, $54,000 from an event at Barclays and $292,500 from a single speech for hedge fund Citadel.The documents were submitted to the US Office for Government Ethics as part of Yellen’s efforts to secure the top role at the US Treasury. While she has already been chosen for the post by the president-elect, Joe Biden, she still has to secure formal approval from the US Senate.The filings showed Yellen also earned $112,500 from a single speaking engagement with UBS, $225,000 from a speech for PwC and $270,000 from an event with the London-headquartered bank Standard Chartered.It is common for high-profile government officials such as Yellen to take paid speaking roles after retirement. Ben Bernanke, who served as chair of the US Federal Reserve before Yellen, reportedly earned about $250,000 for a single speech after leaving the central bank, where he earned $199,700 a year.However, Yellen – who earned just over $200,000 a year when she headed the US Fed between 2014 and 2018 – said she would get official permission before taking part in decisions involving any companies that had paid fees to her once she was formally appointed to the Treasury.Yellen also promised to step down from the Australian investment firm Magellan Financial Group, from which she has earned $125,000 as a consultant and about $225,000 in speaking fees. She pledged to give up assets in 13 firms, including the telecoms giant AT&T, pharmaceuticals firm Pfizer and chemicals firm Dupont to avoid any conflict of interest.Similar filings from the current Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs executive and Hollywood film financier, before his appointment in 2017 did not reveal any significant speaking fees.However, Mnuchin promised to divest at least $94m worth of investments in 43 firms once he was appointed to Donald Trump’s cabinet. He was later criticised for failing to properly disclose he owned nearly $100m worth of real estate and held a directorship with offshore business vehicle based in the Cayman Islands, a tax haven.
NYSE to delist three Chinese telecom firms, citing 'military links':	The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) has said it will delist three Chinese telecommunications firms because of their alleged links to China’s military.China Telecom, China Mobile and China Unicom Hong Kong will be suspended from trading in early January, while delisting proceedings are initiated, according to a statement released by the stock exchange.The NYSE said that it had decided that the companies were “no longer suitable for listing” and was taking action to comply with an executive order signed by Donald Trump in November.The order prohibits transactions in securities “designed to provide investment exposure to such securities, of any Communist Chinese military company” by any person in the US.It is designed to prevent US investors from buying or selling shares in companies that feature on a US government blacklist. The White House has designated these firms as having links to China’s military, a move that has been condemned by Beijing.The companies to be delisted have the right to request a review of the NYSE’s decision.All three firms are listed in the US and Hong Kong, and mostly earn their revenue by providing voice and data services in China. They all have little presence in the US.Several other Chinese firms have already been removed from smaller US indices following the executive order.The order is considered to be a fresh attempt by the Trump administration to put pressure on China over what it views as Beijing’s unfair trade practices.Tensions between the world’s two largest economies have escalated in the past year over a broad range of issues including economics, geopolitics, China’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic and human rights.The White House has been seeking for several months to remove any reliance on China in the US telecommunications industry.In April, the Trump administration recommended that US regulators block China Telecom from operating in the US, warning that the China-backed company was creating national security and law enforcement risks for Washington.The US has voiced concerns that China Telecom could be vulnerable to exploitation, influence and control by the Chinese government.The US government has previously placed severe restrictions on telecoms giant Huawei, and accused it of stealing trade secrets. In addition, Washington successfully put pressure on Britain to block Huawei from its 5G network.Telecoms firms are not the only ones in the US government’s sights.In a separate executive order signed in December, Trump also threatened to remove Chinese companies from US stock indices unless they comply with US auditing standards.
The 'black swan' Covid catastrophe shows us just how fragile our world is:	There are three characteristics of a “black swan” event: rarity, extreme impact and retrospective predictability. With the benefit of hindsight it is always easy to spot the warning signs of a looming catastrophe, but few see them at the time.The financial crisis of 2008 was an example of a black swan, and Covid-19 is an even better one. Around this time of the year, economists tend to make predictions of what the next 12 months have in store. Some like to think outside the box and come up with whacky forecasts of unlikely events that will perhaps come to pass.Suffice it to say not one crystal-ball gazer a year ago foresaw that by December 2020 Christmas would be banned by government edict, pubs shuttered and Premier League football matches played in grounds devoid of spectators. Nobody said 2020 was going to be a plague year that would lead to more than 1.8 million deaths worldwide and bring about the biggest annual contraction of the UK economy since the Great Frost of 1709.The collective failure to anticipate a variant of the coronavirus first detected in China in late 2019 suggests we should all be careful about making bold statements about what will happen next. Perhaps, as the financial markets are signalling, the mass vaccination programmes now under way will allow life to return to something like normal by the middle of this year. It is possible 2020 will be recorded in the history books as a one-off, an aberration that signified nothing. It is worth remembering how little changed – despite all the confident predictions that there would be a political shift to the left – as a result of the near-implosion of the global banking system in 2008.There are reasons for thinking 2020 will be different and could eventually be seen as one of those years – like 1789 and 1914 – that prove pivotal. One is that the pandemic has hastened the technological change that was already happening, because social distancing and lockdowns have meant we do so many more things from home via a computer screen or a mobile phone. People have surfed the net more; they have kept in touch with their friends remotely; they have shopped online. The result is that the digital transformation of economies has been accelerated. Companies that went into the crisis powerful enough already – Google, Amazon, Facebook – have seen their market dominance strengthened. Working from home has been terrible for the commercial property sector, but great for Zoom.For years, there has been talk of how biotechnology would form a crucial part of a fourth industrial revolution. Its response to the pandemic has proved this is not just hype. It has been staggering how quickly vaccines were developed and produced. Genome sequencing has made it possible to identify mutations of the coronavirus.Running alongside accelerated technological change has been a shift towards bigger states, which have spent a lot more, borrowed a lot more and bossed people around a lot more. Before the crisis erupted, Rishi Sunak expected to borrow about £60bn in the current financial year. He will be lucky if the figure turns out to be less than £400bn. In reality, the chancellor – along with other finance ministers – has had no choice. Governments have taken deliberate decisions to close down large chunks of the economy and so have been obliged to take unprecedented action to prevent mass unemployment and widespread destitution. Sunak talks a lot about how he has a moral duty to balance the budget but is an unconvincing iron chancellor.Some governments have had better crises than others. Ironically, the country that gave the world Covid-19 – China – is poised to be the only major economy to register positive growth this year. Neighbouring countries – Taiwan, South Korea and Vietnam – were all better prepared for the pandemic than Europe or the US. Recent decades have seen a shift in the global balance of power from west to east, and that trend has continued. The US emerges from 2020 relatively weaker, China relatively stronger. Donald Trump’s hawkish line towards Beijing is unlikely to soften much when Joe Biden arrives at the White House this month.The story of globalisation over the past three decades has been of developed countries outsourcing production to places where wage costs were lower. Relying on China for PPE and other medical equipment looked a lot less clever as the crisis erupted. There is now a recognition that there is a price to be paid for long and complex supply chains, as there is for an economic model that pays too little heed to sustainability. In the past, deep recessions have tended to push green issues down the political pecking order, but this time it has been different. Quite rightly, the thinking has been that if 2008 was a financial emergency and 2020 has been a medical emergency, then next time – and the assumption is that there will be a next time – it could be a climate emergency.Understandably, there is a yearning for life to return to normal and when the fight against Covid-19 is finally over people are going to enjoy doing all the things that lockdowns and social distancing currently prevent or restrict. It will be boom time for the high street; it will be hard to get a restaurant booking; low-cost airlines will be running at full capacity. In the short-term it will look like business as usual.But Covid-19 has forced us to rethink the way we work, how we shop, the role of government, how the economy works at a national and global level. Above all, it has shown us how fragile everything is.
'What about justice?': Chagos Islanders pin their hopes on Biden:	When Laurenza Piron was forced from her home in the Chagos Islands in 1970, she was sent on a boat to the Seychelles. Her parents and siblings were sent to Mauritius. It was two decades before they located one another again, and even then none of them could afford a reunion. So Piron, now 76, never saw her family again.“I wanted to go, but I didn’t have the money,” says Piron. “Compensation should have been paid. If it had, there wouldn’t be such hardship.”Piron was among 1,500 people made to leave the Chagos Islands, on the Indian Ocean archipelago, by the US and British militaries. The UK, which owned the land, had leased the largest island, Diego Garcia, to the US to build a military base.Last year, the international court of justice in The Hague ruled that the continued British occupation of the islands was illegal.In the 1970s, the UK gave the Mauritian government £4.65m to distribute to the Chagossians in compensation, but no money was paid to people sent to the Seychelles.Those exiled are hoping that will change as they file a new petition through the US Foreign Claims Act, which awards compensation for noncombatants’ injury, death or property damage by US military personnel overseas.“Based on the [2019] UN ruling there is an illegal occupation of the Chagos Islands,” says Jonathan Levy, a US-based lawyer representing the Chagossians in the petition. “We’re saying to the government: you owe damages to the Chagossian people for operating a military base on their property.”In October, the US Department of the Air Force rebuffed a first attempt, stating: “It has been determined that payment of the claims is not in the interests of the US government.” However, the legal team is planning a new legal action after president-elect Joe Biden takes office in January.“The incoming Biden administration seeks to change US foreign policy, and the Chagos archipelago is a good place to begin by recognising the claims of the Chagossians to their property and land and by paying a small restitution, given the immense value the rent-free use of Diego Garcia has provided the United States for the past five decades,” says Levy.Travel brochures depict the Seychelles as an island paradise, an oasis of golden beaches and crystal clear waters. But for Chagossians, it has been a place of discrimination, poverty and homelessness. When Piron first came to the Seychelles with her husband and three children, they slept on the ground beneath a coconut tree.“To go to school with no shoes, it would take an hour to walk there,” says Laurenza’s son, Jean-Joseph, 55, who was five years old when he arrived on the island. “On the way, we would pick fruits from the trees and that would be our breakfast because we had no money to eat. Concentrating in lessons was impossible on an empty stomach,” he explains, through tears.Diego Garcia is made home to a French colony using slave labour on plantationsMauritius and the Chagos Islands are ceded to Britain at the end of the Napoleonic Wars in the Treaty of ParisBefore independence is granted to Mauritius, the UK separates the Chagos archipelago from Mauritius, creating British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT).Britain allows the US to use the largest island, Diego Garcia, as a military base in exchange for a discount on the purchase of Polaris missiles.Forced expulsion of around 1,500 Chagossians begin as access to food supplies is restricted. Most are moved to Mauritius or the Seychelles.Chagossian refugees in Mauritius were paid compensation, and more offers followed contingent on them signing agreements not to return to their homes.British passports are granted to some Chagossians. Many move from Mauritius to Crawley. A UK government feasibility study into resettlement concludes it would be expensive and difficult. A Marine Protected Area is established around the Chagos Islands. Documents published by Wikileaks show a UK diplomat saying that “establishing a marine park would, in effect, put paid to resettlement claims of the archipelago’s former residents”.International Court of Justice rules that the agreement to separate the Chagos Islands from Mauritius in 1965 prior to decolonisation was unlawful.  The United Nations general assembly overwhelmingly backs a motion condemning Britain’s occupation of the islands. The vote, which left the UK diplomatically isolated, set a six-month deadline for the UK to withdraw from the archipelago and for it to be reunified with neighbouring Mauritius.Many Chagossians in the Seychelles were taunted by the locals, told to go back to where they came from. They were called anara, which meant uncivilised, dirty and unvaccinated.The family have always struggled to make ends meet. Piron’s husband found work as a fisherman, and eventually the family was able to build a small homestead in the forest, not far from the coconut trees they had slept under.“We never lacked food on the [Chagos] islands. If we needed fish, we would go get some from the ocean,” says Piron, but she adds: “Life is hard here, very hard. I struggle.”The military chased my family with guns. They didn't want to leave the island. It's a sad storyGeorgette Gendron, 67, from Diego Garcia, came to the Seychelles aged 12, with her parents and five siblings. With nowhere to go, the entire family lived in a cramped single room in the basement of a relative’s house.“There was no house, no food, nothing. Can you imagine being told to just go, with no place, with all those kids. We were just like refugees,” says Gendron. “My mama was very miserable. She had health problems. There was a time when papa didn’t have work.”Cyril Bertrand, 72, happened to be in the Seychelles for medical treatment when the Chagos Islands were closed. His family – seven siblings and his father – were sent to Mauritius.“The military chased my family with guns. They didn’t want to leave the island. It’s a sad story,” he says.Bertrand settled in the Seychelles, got married, found a job, and was among the few who could afford to visit his family in Mauritius. Many Chagossians aren’t so fortunate, he says.Many of the first generation of the exiled population are elderly, poor and coming to terms with the prospect of never seeing their homeland again. “Most of them die here in Seychelles,” says Bertrand. “They never get to Mauritius. Even though they have family there.”In 2016, the British government unveiled a £40m support package for community projects for Chagossians living in the UK, Mauritius and Seychelles, to be paid over a decade. So far less than 2% of this fund has been distributed.The Chagossians interviewed said they had not benefited from the money.“Compensation would mean we could have had a better life here,” says Gendron. “The wrongs should be corrected. What about justice?”Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Mitch McConnell and Nancy Pelosi homes vandalised in Covid protests:	The Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, decried what he called a “radical tantrum” on Saturday after his home in Kentucky was vandalised with messages apparently protesting against his refusal to increase Covid aid payments from $600 to $2,000.The attack followed a similar one on the home of Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic House speaker, in San Francisco.Democrats under Pelosi supported the move to increase payments but McConnell blocked it, despite its origin in a demand from Donald Trump.According to local media reports, on Saturday morning the majority leader’s home in Louisville was spray-painted with slogans including “Weres [sic] my money?” and “Mitch kills the poor”.Police reported minor damage. It was not immediately known if McConnell and his wife, the transportation secretary, Elaine Chao, were home at the time.In California, Pelosi’s home was graced by a pig’s head, red paint and messages including “cancel rent” and “We want everything”.In a statement on Saturday, McConnell said: “I’ve spent my career fighting for the first amendment [which protects free speech] and defending peaceful protest. I appreciate every Kentuckian who has engaged in the democratic process whether they agree with me or not.“This is different. Vandalism and the politics of fear have no place in our society. My wife and I have never been intimidated by this toxic playbook. We just hope our neighbours in Louisville aren’t too inconvenienced by this radical tantrum.”The state Republican party demanded Democrats denounce the vandalism. In a tweet, Democratic governor Andy Beshear called the vandalism “unacceptable”.“While the first amendment protects our freedom of speech,” he wrote, “vandalism is reprehensible and never acceptable for any reason.”Protesters both against McConnell and for Trump in his attempts to hold on to power – which McConnell has opposed – gathered outside the majority leader’s home.“We all know that Trump supporters and what everyone wants to call Black Lives Matter has their differences,” one protester said, in footage broadcast on social media.“But collectively we are here because Mitch is a bitch and he owes the American people money … we are here together to protest because the government, the system, has been ripping us all off in many different ways.”
In the ‘land of storytelling’, Netflix and Amazon Prime reshape India’s creative landscape:	This year’s Emmy awards, one of the biggest nights in global television, was particularly historic for India. It was the second year in a row that several Indian television shows were nominated, and the first time an Indian series won. Delhi Crime, an eight-part Netflix drama exploring a brutal rape case in 2012, took home the award for the best international series.Indeed, all the Indian nominations were for shows created by Netflix or Amazon Prime. Over the past two years, streaming has radically shifted India’s domestic creative landscape – and created a new global audience for Indian series and films. According to Amazon Prime, 20% of viewers of their original Indian content are now from outside India.“India is a land of storytellers but for a very long time, because of the formulaic nature of cinema and television, there was not representation of all kinds of stories,” said Aparna Purohit, head of original content at Amazon Prime India. “Streaming has democratised that. Stories that were not picked up earlier, subjects that were ignored or avoided, now there is a space for them.”The two biggest streaming platforms, Netflix and Amazon Prime, arrived in India four years ago but it is only over the past two years that momentum has begun to build.But as the platforms began to flourish, they have faced a growing backlash from hardline, rightwing groups in India, which have accused Netflix and Amazon of creating content that “hurts the fabric of Indian society”. While the platforms were previously free from the censorship that controls all film and television in India, enabling new, bolder programming, the government declared in November that all streaming platforms would be brought under regulation.In a country of more than 1.3 billion people, half of whom are under the age of 25, Amazon and Netflix have made huge investments in harnessing lucrative potential. According to senior executives, India is now witnessing the biggest growth of any global streaming market.In 2019-20, Netflix invested $400m (£293m) in creating original programmes and released more than 30 pieces of original Indian content. Amazon Prime now has customers in more than 4,300 towns and cities across India and has about 50 shows in varying stages of development. As well as shows in Hindi and English, both platforms are creating original content in regional languages including Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam.“This year has been an incredible year for us in India because we are one of the fastest growing markets in all of global Netflix,” said Monika Shergill, vice-president of content at Netflix India. “We’ve got a huge new member base in India who we have found to be hungry for different stories and formats.”Several Indian-made shows had made it into the Netflix Top 10 in countries around the world, with the reality show Fabulous Lives of Bollywood Wives and the children’s animation Mighty Little Bheem cited as recent global successes, said Shergill.Although India has its thriving Bollywood and regional film industries and a culture of long-running television serials, there was no industry tradition of the immersive longform storytelling that streaming services are known for. Much of Netflix and Amazon’s early investment went into building up a new pool of talent.“We had to build it, brick by brick,” said Purohit of Amazon Prime. “We invested very heavily in development, taking a long time to green-light projects. We started organising writers’ workshops where we would bring in new writers and veteran show-runners and creators. Just trial and error, working and learning along the way.” At the beginning, Bollywood’s big names were reluctant to collaborate, but now they were knocking on Amazon Prime’s door.There have also been logistical challenges: 96% of Indian homes have a single TV, which is rarely a smart TV with internet access. But with the second-highest mobile phone ownership in the world and widespread access to cheap mobile data, most of India now watches video via phone. Netflix says its subscribers in India watch more on mobile than anywhere else in the world.Growth has been helped by low subscriptions starting at 129 rupees (£1.30) a month for Amazon Prime and 199 rupees a month for Netflix, though with average monthly household incomes at 32,800 rupees (£328), it remains unaffordable for millions.But the threat of future regulation hangs heavy. As government censorship keeps an increasingly tight rein on the cultural sphere, Amazon and Netflix have become a breeding ground for more subversive and groundbreaking shows such as Leila, Sacred Games and Paatal Lok, which have addressed sex, sexual violence, homophobia and caste inequalities, critiqued rightwing Hindu nationalism and depicted the persecution of Muslims. A new gritty political drama Tandav, described as India’s equivalent to House of Cards, will debut on Amazon Prime this month.“This kind of programming could not be done in the past,” said Gaurav Gandhi, Director and Country GM of Amazon Prime Video India. “The world of streaming allows new freedom for the creators.”The backlash against certain shows has been visceral, setting off online hate campaigns against stars and creators. Sacred Games, the big Netflix break-out series, was threatened with a court case for a line where the former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi is called fattu, translated as pussy.Netflix, Amazon and 16 other streaming platforms in India have put together a code of self-regulation which they hope to persuade the government to adopt, rather than being forced to comply with the same censorship rules as Bollywood.Shibasish Sarkar, group chief executive officer of Reliance Entertainment, one of the biggest production houses in India whose credits include Sacred Games, said: “In three years, the cultural side of India had achieved on streaming platforms what it would have taken 30 years to achieve in the traditional film and TV industries. “Writers and makers have enjoyed [being] free to communicate with the audience [without] restrictions or regulators or censors. A structure of self-regulation and self-discipline is what we should be aiming for. Otherwise we will lose the mojo.”
'It's as if we've learned nothing': alarm over Amazon road project:	Brazilian activists have voiced alarm over their government’s plans to bulldoze a 94-mile highway through a biodiverse corner of the Amazon along the border with Peru that is home to at least three indigenous communities.The planned road is an extension of the BR-364, a 2,700-mile highway that links São Paulo with the Amazon state of Acre, and would connect the town of Cruzeiro do Sul with the Peruvian border town of Pucallpa.Backers of the “transoceanic” project, who include Brazil’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, argue it will boost the economy of this remote region by creating a transport hub through which agricultural products can be shipped to Pacific ports in Peru and on to China.“This project won’t destroy the forest, it will bring sustainable development to the region by heating up commercial and cultural relations [with Peru],” said Mara Rocha, a centre-right congresswoman from Acre who supports the idea.Rocha said the project was critical to a region that felt “forgotten and invisible to the rest of the country”. Opponents, however, fear it could have catastrophic consequences for Brazil’s environment, which is already reeling under Bolsonaro as the rate of Amazon deforestation soars to its highest level in more than a decade.A report in the Estado de São Paulo newspaper said an 80-mile (130km) stretch of pristine forest would need to be felled to build the road, which would cut through the centre of the protected Serra do Divisor national park. Experts call the park one of the Amazon’s most biodiverse regions, hosting at least 130 species of mammal and more than 400 species of bird. Brazilian lawmakers are considering plans to water down its protections in an apparent attempt to accelerate the road’s construction.Luís Puwe Puyanawa, a local indigenous leader who opposes the project, said: “The truth is that nobody in Acre needs this transoceanic route – there’s already a road linking us to Peru. What we need is to leave the forest standing.”Miguel Scarcello, the head of SOS Amazônia, an environmental group based in the state capital, Rio Branco, described the project as “irresponsible” and a throwback to Brazil’s military dictatorship when roads where bulldozed through the Amazon in an attempt to populate and develop the region.“It’s such an old-fashioned, backwards vision … that pays absolutely no attention to conservation. It will cut through an untouched area of forest and affect the headwaters of really important tributaries of the Juruá River,” Scarcello said.He described how during the 1964-85 dictatorship such roads “decimated” indigenous communities and inflicted “immense destruction” on the rainforest, as loggers used them to access previously inaccessible areas. “We’re not in the 1960s any more,” Scarcello said. “It’s as if we’ve learned nothing from the effects that this could cause and how much destruction could be caused.”He added: “They say it will bring development but, as always, it will be development for half a dozen people,” and he warned of a “carnival of land grabbing” that would accompany the planned road.If the project is approved, three indigenous communities near the road will reportedly be affected: Nukini, Jaminawa and Poyanawa. Scarcello said it was possible the national park was also home to isolated tribes with whom contact had not been made.Puyanawa, 41, said he feared his community would be worst hit. “The road is expected to pass within about a kilometre of our lands. One of my biggest concerns is that this stretch is home to some of the most important water sources of the Amazon basin. The Alto Juruá provides all the waters that flow into the Rio Solimões and then Rio Negro, until they reach the sea,” he said. “All of these rivers could be really affected and this could cause the disappearance of important headwaters in the Amazon. With that, many species could disappear.”Puyanawa said plans for such a route had been touted by politicians for decades but appeared to have accelerated since Bolsonaro took office in January 2019. “Nobody has wanted it as much as Bolsonaro,” he said.Bolsonaro has overseen a highly controversial dismantling of Brazil’s environmental protection system, causing Amazon deforestation to skyrocket, critics say. Last month government figures showed Amazon destruction had surged to a 12-year high, with an area seven times larger than Greater London lost between August 2019 and July 2020.That increase has been blamed on the feeling of impunity that Bolsonaro’s presidency has brought illegal loggers, cattle ranchers and miners seeking to cash in. “They feel completely at ease,” said Carlos Rittl, a Brazilian environmentalist who works at the Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies in Germany. “We are being governed by people whose motto for the environment is: destruction.”The BR-364 extension, which Bolsonaro has publicly backed as a means to give Brazil “a passage to the Pacific”, is not the only Amazon road project worrying environmentalists and climate campaigners.Last week his administration said it would begin repaving the BR-319, a decaying dictatorship-era highway that cuts north to south through the Amazon from Manaus to Porto Velho. “A historic day for the north!” Bolsonaro wrote on Facebook, announcing the news.But in a recent essay, Prof Philip Fearnside, an ecologist at Brazil’s National Institute for Amazonian Research, said reviving the BR-319, which has been abandoned since late 1980s, “would give deforesters access to about half of what remains of the country’s Amazon forest” and was “certainly among the most consequential decisions facing Brazil today”.
Argentina legalises abortion in landmark moment for women's rights:	Argentina has become the largest Latin American country to legalise abortion after its senate approved the historic law change by 38 votes in favour to 29 against, with one abstention.Elated pro-choice campaigners who had been keeping vigil outside Buenos Aires’s neoclassical congressional palace erupted in celebration as the result was announced at just after 4am on Wednesday.Women screamed with delight, sweeping their friends into tight hugs and jumping in ecstasy. Many wept tears of joy. Victory music kicked in and green smoke filled the air. A triumphant message flashed up on a big screen above the joyful crowd: “We did it!” it said. “ES LEY!” (IT’S LAW!).“I’m very emotional,” said 25-year-old Melany Marcati, who was among the celebrators. “There are no words to describe what your body feels after fighting for something for so long. I cried a lot, which I wasn’t expecting.”The campaigner Ingrid Beck said: “The struggle for women’s rights is always arduous, and this time we even had to contend with a pandemic, so I am overjoyed with this result.”The bill, which legalises terminations in the first 14 weeks of pregnancy, was approved by Argentina’s lower house earlier this month after being put to congress by the country’s leftwing president, Alberto Fernández.“Safe, legal and free abortion is now law … Today we are a better society,” Fernández celebrated on Twitter after the result was confirmed.Fernández has previously said that more than 3,000 women had died as a result of unsafe, underground abortions in Argentina since the return of democracy in 1983.The landmark decision means Argentina becomes only the third South American country to permit elective abortions, alongside Uruguay, which decriminalised the practice in 2012, and Guyana, where it has been legal since 1995.Cuba legalised the practice in 1965 while Mexico City and the Mexican state of Oaxaca also allow terminations.Giselle Carino, an Argentinian feminist activist, said she believed the achievement in the home country of Pope Francis would reverberate across a region that is home to powerful Catholic and evangelical churches and some of the harshest abortion laws in the world.In most countries, such as Brazil, abortions are only permitted in extremely limited circumstances such as rape or risk to the mother’s life, while in some, such as the Dominican Republic and El Salvador, they are banned altogether.“I feel incredibly proud of what we’ve been able to achieve. This is a historic moment for the country, without a doubt,” said Carino, head of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, Western Hemisphere Region.“It shows how, in spite of all the obstacles, change and progress are possible. Argentinian women and what’s happening right now will have an enormous impact on the region and the world,” Carino added, pointing to parallel struggles in Brazil, Chile and Colombia.Colombian activists recently petitioned the constitutional court to remove abortion from the country’s criminal code while campaigners in Chile hope a new constitution might lead to expanded women’s rights.In the region’s most populous nation, Brazil, activists are waiting for the supreme court to rule on a 2018 legal challenge that would decriminalise abortion in the first weeks of pregnancy.Mariela Belski, Amnesty International’s executive director in Argentina, called the result “an inspiration to the Americas”.“Argentina has sent a strong message of hope to our entire continent: that we can change course against the criminalisation of abortion and against clandestine abortions, which pose serious risks to the health and lives of millions of people.”Wednesday’s victory is the result of five years of mass protest marches by Argentina’s grassroots women’s movement, which began as a Twitter campaign against gender violence that used the hashtag #NiUnaMenos (“Not one less” – meaning no more women lost to gender violence).The first spontaneous march came on 3 June 2015, in reaction to the murder of 14-year-old Chiara Páez, who was found buried underneath her boyfriend’s house after being beaten to death and a few months pregnant.“Aren’t we going to raise our voices? THEY ARE KILLING US,” the radio journalist Marcela Ojeda tweeted at the time. After that call to arms, a group of female journalists began tweeting under the #NiUnaMenos hashtag, resulting in the first of many marches that brought tens of thousands of women to gather at the congressional square in Buenos Aires.The following year, Argentinian feminists held a mass strike in response to the rape, murder and impalement of 16-year-old Lucía Pérez in the coastal city of Mar del Plata. It was after the 2015 #NiUnaMenos march that pro-choice campaigners realised the fight against “femicide” could also encompass demands for access to legal abortion.They adopted a green scarf – worn as a bandana, head-scarf, or around the wrist – as a symbol of their movement, a trend that quickly spread to other Latin American countries, where green has come to symbolise the broader fight for women’s rights.That green scarf was an allusion to the Mothers of Plaza de Mayo activists who wore white headscarves as they confronted Argentina’s vicious 1976-83 dictatorship over the disappearance of their children.Pro-choice campaigners initially saw their hopes of change dashed in August 2018 when the senate, under pressure from the Catholic church, rejected a similar bill.Fernández’s election the following year brought fresh hope, as he promised to back the push for change. “The criminalisation of abortion has achieved nothing,” he said in November after putting the legislation to congress.Speaking outside congress on Wednesday, 46-year-old Julieta Cabrera said: “Until the last moment I didn’t want to believe it, not until the last vote was in, because last time, we got our hopes up.” She said she had come out because “abortion is something I’ve experienced firsthand. My generation and many others have been through it.”Opponents of the law, who had gathered nearby by a giant model foetus that is their trademark, dispersed quickly after the result emerged, with one man occasionally shouting the word “Murderers!” towards the pro-choice side.Karina Marolla, a 49-year-old opponent of the law, said: “What was voted for today is the death penalty for the most innocent. Today in Argentina there’s no law giving the death penalty to rapists or murderers. So we’re feeling sad, to put it lightly.”Carino said the leftward political shift that brought Fernández to power had undoubtedly boosted the pro-choice campaign after the previous year’s setback. Among those who helped Fernández win office were many young women who took part in the #NiUnaMenos protests and were voting for the first time.Carino said the real credit lay with Argentina’s indefatigable women “who never stopped occupying the streets and the social networks – not even against the backdrop of the pandemic – and kept up their struggle, without haste but without rest”.“If anything made the difference, it was this.”
From the editor of Guardian US: the stories we'll tell in 2021:	It would be comforting to think that 2021 will offer a break from some of the challenges of 2020. There is an understandable yearning for some relief, some light, or at least a brief pause so that we can find a new equilibrium, whatever that may look like.News, unfortunately, never takes a time out, and so we at Guardian US are preparing to go again and devote time and resources to the stories we think need telling in the coming year. We hope you’ll consider making a year-end gift to support our reporting in 2021.I want to thank you for joining us on our journey in 2020 as we negotiated, alongside you, one of the most difficult, and often dispiriting, years in recent memory. At least the rollout of multiple vaccines offers some hope – leaving aside, momentarily, issues with vaccine hesitancy and logistical challenges – that the worst of the pandemic may recede towards the middle part of the year.But what then? When America finally dusts itself down and picks itself up, what sort of shape will the country be in? Not great, I fear. The country is likely to see a Covid K-shaped “recovery”: those at the top end will do better than previously, and those at the bottom end will do worse. In short, a widening of already stark levels of inequality which often – make that always – affect communities of color first, and worst.And so, not really a “recovery” at all.Unless you’re Jeff Bezos, who saw his wealth rise by $48bn just between March and June. During that time, more than 40 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits. Two recent reports by Citigroup and Moody’s highlight the damage that America’s racial wealth gap continues to inflict on the country.The racial wealth gap is just one of the stories we’ll be looking to highlight in 2021. Unfortunately, there is no shortage of issues that demand attention. In one of our final news meetings before the holidays, we were joined by Catherine Coleman Flowers, an author and environmental campaigner who has just published Waste – a story of the millions of Americans who live without basic sanitation. In 2020.Let’s be clear, when we talk about “basic sanitation”, we’re talking about people living with raw sewage outside their homes – and sometimes inside. The book’s subtitle is “One Woman’s Fight Against America’s Dirty Secret”. In 2021, Guardian US will join that fight. It is unconscionable that in one of the world’s wealthiest countries millions endure these conditions. It is little reported, and that has to change.These are just two on a too-long list of issues that Guardian US will want to better highlight in 2021, but there are more. “Forever chemicals” were the subject of this year’s impactful film Dark Waters, which highlighted the effect of these poisons on the environment and our bodies. More recently campaigners have referred to these as akin to an “Exxon Valdez of the bloodstream”.The lawyer whose story formed the basis of that film recently wrote this for the Guardian:Imagine that a small group of people coordinated the intentional manufacture and release of a lethal poison – and imagine they knew this poison had special properties that meant, once released into the world, it would be inevitable that it would make its way into the blood of virtually every person on the planet, even babies in their mother’s womb, and stay there, like a ticking time bomb.And yet few people are properly aware of the extent and impact of “forever chemicals”. That really ought to change.The list of stories and issues that we feel we need to better highlight goes on and on. But the most important part of our efforts in 2021 will be you. It is no understatement to say that nothing we achieve could be done without your support. If you’re among those readers whose contributions powered our journalism in 2020, please know how grateful we are. And it’s not too late to support our journalism in 2021; if you’d like to give a year-end gift, you can do so here.But we are not only grateful for your financial support – but for the passion and engagement you show with these issues on a daily basis. That is what gives us the energy to keep going.And keep going we will.
What difference will Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine make in UK?:	The Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine is central to the government’s plans for ending social distancing in the UK and returning to some sort of normality. It has invested in seven different vaccines, but the biggest order is for 100m doses of the AstraZeneca jab, most of which will be manufactured in the UK. While the prime minister was jubilant that the UK was first in the world to approve the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine, he is now able to claim a British triumph. More to the point is the ease of use of the AstraZeneca vaccine. Unlike Pfizer’s, it does not have to be kept in the long term at -70C. Pfizer’s vaccine can be stored in a fridge for five days, but AstraZeneca’s can be kept for months at fridge temperature, which is 2-8C and will be easy to take to care homes to administer to residents, the first priority group for vaccination.That depends on a few things, such as where you are in the priority list set out by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI), how many people can be recruited to carry out vaccination and how fast the vaccinating teams can work.The first priority group is care home residents and the staff who look after them and second is the over-80s and NHS staff. Then it goes by decreasing age: the over-75s, over-70s and over-65s. Next are people of any age with underlying health conditions that put them at greater risk, then the over-60s, over-55s and over-50s.This list makes up more than 25 million people. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, aspires to 2 million people a week being vaccinated, but that’s a big step up from the numbers so far. Even with the AstraZeneca vaccine being easier to deploy and local pharmacists and people with medical training who are not nurses joining vaccination teams, it will be a push. But if all went incredibly smoothly, most people in the first phase could theoretically have had their first shot by April.The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), which granted temporary emergency approval of the vaccines, has said in its authorisation that the second dose of Pfizer’s jab should be given at least three weeks after the first, and the AstraZeneca vaccine at least four weeks after. That is in line with what was done in the clinical trials. But the JCVI has gone further in the interest of getting some protection for as many people as possible, saying the second dose can be delayed up to 12 weeks after the first for both vaccines.There is evidence from Oxford/AstraZeneca’s trials of greater efficacy among people who were given the second shot later – of 70% up to 12 weeks after the first. The JCVI says there is also evidence that is not in the public domain. Pfizer/BioNTech, however, have said in a statement that there is no evidence for the efficacy of a single shot of their vaccine beyond three weeks.It seems clear that the JCVI recommendation is a piece of public health pragmatism. The more people who have some immunity, the less illness there is likely to be.No. It’s possible you may still get 70% protection beyond 12 weeks with the AstraZeneca vaccine – but the booster was always intended to be needed to lengthen the time that protection lasts.That may depend on the arrival of batches of vaccine. Hopefully by the time most people need a second shot, there will be a smooth delivery system in place and no issues around supply. But at the moment, the stocks of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine are running short, especially in Europe where it is the only licensed vaccine. BioNTech has warned of a gap in deliveries because it cannot keep up with demand. Some regions of Germany, where the company is based, are having to pause their vaccination programmes until they get more stocks.A trial is planned in the UK to assess whether people could be given one dose of the Pfizer jab and one of AstraZeneca’s – in whatever order. Scientists would say that you should run a trial and not do it without the evidence. However, the Green Book, which is the NHS handbook for staff on how to use vaccinations, has already been updated to say that if none of the first vaccine a person was given is available, they could be given a dose of the other. Although “every effort should be made to determine which vaccine the individual received and to complete with the same vaccine”. It says: “For individuals who started the schedule and who attend for vaccination at a site where the same vaccine is not available, or if the first product received is unknown, it is reasonable to offer one dose of the locally available product to complete the schedule.”
The government's U-turns on education in England under Covid:	The announcement that all London primary schools will remain closed next week is the latest in a string of government U-turns on education since the pandemic began.Under the government’s initial plan, schools in the City of London and Kingston were due to reopen but those in 22 other London boroughs would have remained closed.Ministers changed course after the leaders of nine London authorities wrote to the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, asking for their primary schools to remain closed to all except vulnerable children and those whose parents were key workers.Several local authorities had been preparing legal challenges to keep their primary schools closed.Here are some of the government’s other U-turns on education:The policy that children should not be required to wear face coverings in school was reversed days before classrooms were due to reopen, when the Department for Education announced that staff and students in year 7 and above should wear face in corridors and communal areas in schools in areas with coronavirus restrictions.Williamson had previously insisted that the Covid-secure measures adopted in schools meant that wearing face coverings would not be necessary. The move came after pressure from teachers around the country who urged their use, and following Scotland’s announcement that secondary school pupils should wear masks in communal areas.The government was forced to act after A-level grades were downgraded through a controversial algorithm developed by the Office of Qualifications and Examinations Regulation, leading to almost 40% of grades awarded being worse than expected by pupils, parents and teachers. Williamson had previously defended the system as robust and said there would be “no U-turn, no change” to the system.Following a campaign launched by Marcus Rashford, the government reversed its decision not to extend the children’s food voucher scheme into the summer holidays. The move came 24 hours after No 10 had rejected the footballer’s plea for the £15-a-week vouchers to continue to be paid over the summer. The cabinet minister Grant Shapps said on 16 June that free school meals were not normally extended to cover the summer period, but No 10 backtracked a few hours later and said it would extend the programme.Williamson set out plans in May for all primary school children in England to be back in class for at least four weeks before the summer holiday. On 9 June, however, he admitted that a full opening of primaries would not be possible because the requirement for 2-metre physical distancing would make it too difficult.
Can Kamala Harris as vice-president be both loyal deputy and heir apparent?:	American vice-presidents occupy what can be one of the most powerful positions in all of the federal US government and yet it can also be one of the least powerful. Vice-President-elect Kamala Harris is going to soon find out where her tenure will land.Harris is in a unique position among the near 50 vice-presidents in American history. She enters the office with the strong possibility that the incoming president, Joe Biden, won’t run for re-election, thus teeing her up as a future occupant of the Oval Office far more than normal.That has triggered intense speculation on how Harris will approach her job over the next four years as she treads a fine line between being Biden’s loyal deputy but also his heir apparent.Thus far the division of labor between Biden and Harris has only been described in broad terms. Incoming administration officials expect Harris not to have a separate policy portfolio and the issues Biden focuses on will be the ones she focuses on.Biden and Harris have said the Biden administration will follow the example of the Obama administration when Biden was President Barack Obama’s go-to man for greasing the wheels of Congress. Even before he nominated Harris, Biden described his own vice-presidential relationship with Obama as a model for the way he would work with his own deputy.Yet Biden and Harris bring remarkably different experiences and assets to the role. While Biden helped offset criticism that Obama was too young and inexperienced, Harris has helped ease concern about Biden’s age and excite legions of Democrats who were disappointed to see a white man lead the ticket.Harris, the daughter of immigrants from Jamaica and India, will be the first woman and first woman of color to serve as vice-president.“She comes into office with real star quality and that goes a long way because she’s got sway with various constituencies,” said Roy Neel, who served as chief of staff to Vice-President Al Gore during Bill Clinton’s presidency. “She ran for president. She’s smart and able and she’s got relationships in the Senate – not as deep as Biden. They have an opportunity to be a helluva team.”Harris has been active in the weeks since Biden won the election. She headlined a rally for the Democratic candidates in the upcoming Georgia runoff elections that will decide control of the US Senate. The vice-president-elect has had a major role in Biden’s cabinet selections as well.That’s not by accident. Biden has promised that Harris will be the “last person in the room” when making important decisions, a request he made of Obama when agreeing to serve as his vice-president.“There’s not a single decision I’ve made yet about personnel or about how to proceed that I haven’t discussed it with Kamala first,” Biden said in a joint interview with Harris on CNN.Joel Goldstein, vice-presidential historian at St Louis University and author of The White House Vice Presidency: The Path to Significance, Mondale to Biden, said Harris was uniquely positioned to have a “consequential” vice-presidency, not only because of the historic nature of her ascension, but because the magnitude of crises facing the next administration cannot be handled by the president alone.There is also another dimension that sets Harris apart: her boss knows perhaps better than anyone else the potential – and the pitfalls – of the job.“She’s going to be vice-president to a vice-president,” Goldstein said. “She’s working for a president who has been in her job and has seen the world from her position. He understands the frustrations and the challenges and he also understands the possibilities. Most vice-presidents don’t have that advantage.”President Jimmy Carter and his vice-president, Walter Mondale, helped set a precedent for the modern vice-presidency, envisioning the role as a chief adviser and top lieutenant who could take on assignments at the highest level of government, Goldstein said. Future administrations adopted that model, including Obama and Biden.In interviews, Harris has said that she hopes to be Biden’s Biden, pushing and challenging him in private while remaining a loyal No 2 in public. Asked in a recent interview on ABC how she will define success in the role, Harris replied: “Joe Biden’s success.”Harris has been given a “full voice” in shaping the next administration, interviewing candidates for cabinet positions and providing input at every step of the decision-making process, according to a transition official who spoke on the condition of anonymity.In the past few weeks since the election, Harris has joined Biden at public events in Wilmington, and for private meetings with Democratic leaders and lawmakers. They speak by phone nearly every day, the official said.Harris’s portfolio has yet to be defined, in part because the administration’s immediate focus will be to confront the public health and economic tolls of the coronavirus pandemic. Harris has said she wants to be a “full partner”, suggesting that she would prefer to be involved in all aspects of the governing process as opposed to championing a specific issue or initiative.It’s unlikely that Harris will reprise Biden’s role of congressional whisperer during the Obama years. Harris spent only a few years in the Senate while Biden’s ties, including to the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, go back decades. However, if Democrats win both seats in Georgia, she may find herself summoned frequently to Capitol Hill where she would serve as the tie-breaking vote in an evenly divided Senate.Looming over her vice-presidency is the possibility that Biden, currently 78, may not run for re-election in 2024. Biden’s candidacy has been partially predicated on the prospect of him being a transitional president, acting as a bridge to a new generation of Democratic leaders. Harris is one of at least two potential 2024 contenders in Biden’s cabinet, along with Pete Buttigieg, who Biden nominated to run the Department of Transportation. Both ran against Biden for president, eventually dropping out and throwing their support behind him.It is far from unusual for a vice-president to harbor presidential ambitions. In fact, that’s part of the reason many accept a job that one former officeholder colorfully described as “not worth a bucket of warm piss”. Biden himself ran twice before Obama chose him as his vice-president and there was speculation in 2016 that he intended to run.“For all vice-presidents, presidential ambitions and the perception that you’re presidentially ambitious becomes a source of tension with the president’s inner circle,” Goldstein said. Successfully navigating this reality, he added, requires an understanding by both the vice-president and the president that “their political destinies are closely tied”.Typically vice-presidents spend the first four years in office proving their loyalty and securing their place on the re-election ticket. Intrigue around their future ambitions is usually fodder for a second term. But Biden’s age and his promise to be a transitional figure has led to speculation that he may not run again in four years, effectively elevating Harris to heir apparent.During a press conference on Tuesday Biden was asked if he would file to run for re-election early, avoiding the perception of being a president quickly on his way out. But Biden said only, “Watch me, watch me.”The moves by Harris and people entering her orbit will get close attention for any sort of indication about her 2024 plans. But right now signs suggest that is a low priority for the next vice-president.Her staff for the vice-presidency are not past political advisers or veterans of her previous campaigns, which is something a vice-president with an eye on 2024 would probably include. Symone Sanders, a former senior adviser on the Biden campaign, will serve as senior adviser and chief spokeswoman for Harris – and potentially a bridge between the newly formed Harris team and the long-serving insiders and allies who make up Bidenworld.“I think 2024 is probably looming larger for other people than it is for her right now and what she wants to do and what she has to do is do the job that she was hired to do,” said Leah Daughtry, a veteran Democratic strategist. “That’s to be a good vice-president and a good partner for the incoming president.”
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious.Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms.Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the NSW Health website.Anyone who attended the BWS store at Berala for any amount of time on the following dates and at the listed times is considered a close contact, and must immediately get tested and self-isolate for 14 days from the last date of exposure, regardless of whether a negative result is received:Berala: BWS, 15-16 Woodburn Road, Berala, Tuesday 22 December 12.41pm – 9.15pm; Wednesday 23 December 1.40pm – 9.15pm; Thursday 24 December 12.40pm – 9.17pm; Saturday 26 December 9.55am – 7.15pm; Sunday 27 December 12.39pm – 8.15pm; Monday 28 December 9.30am – 7.15pm; Tuesday 29 December 1.41pm – 9.15pm; Wednesday 30 December 12.45pm – 9.15pm; Thursday 31 December 8.30am – 3pmAnyone who attended BWS and/or Woolworths in the Berala shopping centre on the date and during the time period listed below should get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received:Berala: BWS, Sunday 20 December, 12.30pm – 2pmBerala: Woolworths, Sunday 20 December, 12.30pm – 2pmAnyone who attended the following venue for more than an hour is considered a close contact and should get tested immediately and self-isolate for 14 days, regardless of the result:Shellharbour: Coffee Club – Stockland Shellharbour, 211 Lake Entrance Road, Shellharbour, Sunday 27 December, 11.30am – 12.45pmAnyone who visited any of the following venues at the times listed must get tested immediately and isolate until a negative result is received:Wareemba: Trovatino Café, Thursday 24 December, 3.10pm – 4.10pmAnyone who visited any of the following venues at the listed times should monitor for symptoms and if they occur get tested immediately and self-isolate until you receive a negative result:Haberfield: Australian Motor Traders, Tuesday 29 December, 4.30pm – 5pmWollongong: The Swallowed Anchor, Saturday 19 December, all dayAnyone who travelled on the following transport services during the time and date indicated should monitor for symptoms and if symptoms occur, get tested and self-isolate until you receive a negative result:Buses724: Wednesday 30 December, Departing Blacktown Station, Stand F 12:02pm and arriving Walters Road before Holbeche Road 12:14pm400: Wednesday 30 December, Departing Sydney Airport Terminal 1, International 6:07am and arriving Westfield Eastgardens, Bunnerong Road 6:18am400: Friday 1 January, Departing Mascot Station, Coward St, Stand A 6:19am and arriving Westfield Eastgardens, Bunnerong Rd, Stand A 6:28am420: Friday 1 January, Departing Westfield Eastgardens, Lower Level, Stand B 10:46am and arriving Mascot Station, Coward St, Stand B 11:00amTrainsT1 Western Line: Wednesday 30 December,Departing Strathfield 11:33am and arriving Blacktown 11:58amT1 Western Line, Wednesday 30 December, Departing Blacktown 6:43pm and arriving Strathfield 7:24pmT9 Northern Line: Wednesday 30 December, Departing Burwood 9:29pm and arriving Mortdale 10:16pmT8 Airport & South Line: Wednesday 30 December, Departing Macquarie Fields 5:08am and arriving Mascot 5:51amT8 Airport & South Line: Wednesday 30 December, Departing Mascot 2pm and arriving Macquarie Fields 2:47pmT8 Airport & South Line: Friday 1 January, Departing Macquarie Fields 5:22am and arriving Mascot 6:17amT8 Airport & South Line: Friday 1 January, Departing Mascot 11:03am and arriving Macquarie Fields 11:47amRailMascot to Macquarie Fields: Friday 1 January, 11.03am – 11.47amAll previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below.People who have attended the following venues are considered close contacts and should get tested immediately and isolate for 14 days after they were last there, even if they receive a negative result:People who have visited the following venues are considered casual contacts and should get tested immediately and self-isolate until they receive a negative result:People who have visited the following venues should monitor for symptoms and get tested immediately and isolate if they appear.Please see specific health advice for each transport route in the table below.If you live in or have visited the following suburbs in the past two weeks, get tested even if you have mild COVID-19 symptoms such as a runny nose or scratchy throat.Northern Beaches Local Government AreaPenrith Local Government AreaSydney CBD: People who have spent time in the north eastern part of the Sydney CBD over the last two weeks, including the Australia Square, MLC Centre and Chifley Square, should be alert for symptoms and isolate immediately and get tested should even the mildest of symptoms develop, then isolate until a negative result is received.Learn more about the restrictions for Greater Sydney (including the Blue Mountains), the Central Coast and Wollongong.Find your local government area (LGA)
South African game reserves forced to cull animals as Covid halts tourism:	Impala run through the thorn bush, ibis fly above the lake and lightning forks over the horizon as a storm rolls in from the Drakensberg mountains.The visitors driven across the 10,000 or more hectares of the Nambiti game reserve in South Africa’s KwaZulu-Natal province see what they think is an unchanged, and unchanging natural landscape.Njabulo Hodla, the assistant manager of the reserve, sees something else: thickening undergrowth that someone must cut back, tracks which need clearing, fences to repair and animals that will have to be culled eventually, each another victim of Covid. “It’s tough, really tough. I’ve never seen a season like it,” said the 31-year-old, who has worked at Nambiti since 2008.Across the continent Covid has hit South Africa the hardest with more than a million confirmed cases and 29,000 deaths according to official figures. As elsewhere in Africa, the pandemic has wreaked massive economic damage, with thousands of businesses failing and tens of millions unable to earn a living. The economy shed 2.2m jobs in the second quarter of 2020.The huge tourist industry – which employs around one in every 20 workers and provides just under 3% of GDP – has been devastated.Once the December holiday season meant tens of thousands of foreign visitors spending hundreds, even thousands, of dollars every day. Now, with the rate of new infections in the country soaring as authorities struggle to check a second wave, no one expects the tourists to come back soon.South Africa’s 500 or so private game reserves are often in more remote and impoverished parts of the country. They spend considerable amounts each month to feed and care for the animals. Many have been forced to close permanently, lay off staff and sell, or even shoot, animals. Other have survived – just.“Reserves like ours went from quite a nice income supporting 300 jobs and a massive conservation project to literally nothing. We fell off a wall,” said Clarke Smith, chairman of Nambiti. “We are still feeling the pain … and the impact on the region is very marked.”Nambiti is a community-owned project, unlike many, so a substantial proportion of profits and an annual lease are paid to local villages. This year, these revenues are much reduced and, with many employees of the reserve still on reduced hours or at home, the coming months will be very difficult.“Instead of an end-of-year bonus, people are taking home only half a salary, or nothing,” said Hodla, who grew up in one of the nearby villages. “The communities round here are just on the line. The reserve plays a major role. Everyone knows someone who works here.”Many fear that if the crisis continues for many more months, hundreds of thousands of hectares across South Africa that have been converted to more lucrative game reserves in recent decades will revert to cattle or cereal farming – with a massive loss of habitat for endangered animals and other species.But if the business of wildlife conservation has been hit badly, so too has that of safeguarding other parts of the country’s heritage.Like many parts of rural South Africa, the north of KwaZulu province suffered from acute unemployment, massive health problems including TB and HIV, and deep poverty even before the pandemic. Industries have been gutted in recent decades, with many mines and factories closing.In some places, such losses have been partially compensated by what has been a booming trade in battlefield tourism. Tens of thousands of British visitors have come to walk the sites where British troops fought Zulus in the bloody war of 1879 that consolidated the imperial hold on southern Africa.The battlefields of Isandlwana and Rorke’s Drift are the main attraction for British tourists usually old enough to be fans of the 1964 film Zulu that dramatised the story of the catastrophic British defeat and last-ditch stand at the sites.This winter – or summer in the southern hemisphere – both battlefields are “empty”, the memorials, graves and museums deserted.“There is no work. We are just sitting there. The situation is so bad. There is a drought and no crops in our fields, and a sack of mealie [maize flour] costs twice as much as it did back in the spring,” said Dalton Ngobese, a local guide, who has not worked since March.With the tourists gone, so too are the hawkers who sold ethnic craft, snacks and water. A portion of the entrance fee to the battlefield site goes to schools, so this source of revenue too has dried up.The accommodation lodges were shut for much of the summer, and have only recently reopened, welcoming far fewer guests. The lodges provide jobs and also fund support programmes for local students, charitable foundations, orphanages and other projects.“If we are suffering, the entire community takes a knock,” said Shane Evans, manager of the Isandlwana Lodge, which hosted groups touring the battlefield.In the village of Isandlwana, there is resignation. With so few jobs locally, men have traditionally travelled to Johannesburg, six hours’ drive north, to work in mines or, more recently, hotels. But both industries are suffering too and most of Isandlwana’s residents who had jobs have lost them.Government aid has been patchy, and a huge burden for a country still battling the legacies of the racist, repressive apartheid regime. The ruling African National Congress, in power since 1994, is accused of incompetence and corruption, but also has to deal with a flagging economy, tens of millions of people in poverty and massive debts. A job support programme has been guaranteed until the end of the year, but money is slow to come through.One consequence in the villages around Isandlwana is that crime is rising, with cattle theft and burglary getting worse, said Ngobese. A recent drought has meant local communities around the battlefields have been unable to plant the crops that traditionally supplement incomes and diet.Nellie Buthelezi’s husband was among those laid off by the local government in swingeing job cuts earlier this year, while the lodge where she works has been shut since March. The 41-year-old mother of four has lived in Isandlwana all her life and cannot remember times ever being as bad.“Food is expensive, and it goes so fast. We’ve got no money for rent,” she told the Observer. “We just hope to God for a better new year.”
'Peak hype': why the driverless car revolution has stalled:	By 2021, according to various Silicon Valley luminaries, bandwagoning politicians and leading cab firms in recent years, self-driving cars would have long been crossing the US, started filing along Britain’s motorways and be all set to provide robotaxis in London.1 January has not, however, brought a driverless revolution. Indeed in the last weeks of 2020 Uber, one of the biggest players and supposed beneficiaries, decided to park its plans for self-driving taxis, selling off its autonomous division to Aurora in a deal worth about $4bn (£3bn) – roughly half what it was valued at in 2019.The decision did not, Uber’s chief executive protested, mean the company no longer believed in self-driving vehicles. “Few technologies hold as much promise to improve people’s lives with safe, accessible, and environmentally friendly transportation,” Dara Khosrowshahi said. But more people might now take that promise with a pinch of salt.Prof Nick Reed, a transport consultant who ran UK self-driving trials, says: “The perspectives have changed since 2015, when it was probably peak hype. Reality is setting in about the challenges and complexity.”Automated driving, says Reed, could still happen in the next five years on highways with clearly marked lanes, limited to motorised vehicles all going in the same direction. Widespread use in cities remains some way further out, he says: “But the benefits are still there.”The most touted benefit is safety, with human error blamed for more than 90% of road accidents. Proponents also say autonomous cars would be more efficient and reduce congestion.Looking back, Reed says “the technology worked … people had the sense, it does the right thing most of the time, we are 90% of the way there. But it is that last bit which is the toughest. Being able reliably to do the right thing every single time, whether it’s raining, snowing, fog, is a bigger challenge than anticipated.”Waymo, the Google spin-off that has led the field, could be a case in point: having quickly wowed the world with footage of self-driving cars, the subsequent steps appear small.In October last year it announced the public could hail fully driverless taxis; yet only a fraction of journeys will not have a safety driver in the car – and the range remains limited to the sunny suburbs of Phoenix, Arizona, whose every centimetre has been mapped by Waymo computers.Elsewhere, robotaxis have stalled. Like Uber, the cab firm Addison Lee had staked out bold ambitions, signing up with the UK autonomy pioneer Oxbotica in 2018 to get robotaxis into London by 2021.That deal was quietly dropped in March last year, under new ownership. Addison Lee’s chief executive, Liam Griffin, said: “Driverless cars are best left to the OEMs [manufacturers], and don’t form part of our current plans.”The launch of an autonomous taxi service by Ford has also been postponed at least a year to 2022 because of the pandemic.“Globally, Covid-19 has delayed trials and launches of connected and automated vehicles,” says Mike Hawes, the chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders.Regulatory changes could still allow developments such as Automated Lane Keeping Systems being rolled out in 2021 across everyday cars.“ALKS is the first version of automated driving technology which could prevent some 47,000 serious accidents over the next decade, while creating up to 420,000 new jobs,” Hawes said.The system could let the car take control on UK motorways thisyear – although insurers are trying to talk the government out of giving the go-ahead.Alexandra Smyth, who leads on autonomous systems at the Royal Academy of Engineering, said: “There’s lots of progress and interesting developments with regulations and codes of practice – all important components that sit alongside the technology itself. But realistically there are still going to be errors and things that don’t perform as we hoped. Public trust will be one of the major hurdles.”Fears were stoked after Uber’s self-driving car killed a pedestrian in Arizona in 2018. And despite Elon Musk’s continuing bold claims for Tesla, and reports that Apple is still secretly pushing to develop a personal autonomous vehicle by 2024, the law is unlikely to permit drivers to relinquish the wheel soon.According to Christian Wolmar, the author of Driverless Cars: On a Road to Nowhere?, problems such as social acceptance, cybersecurity and cost have never been addressed.He says: “People do not want to replace the car outside the front door with an app it’s just not a viable concept. I think more and more people are sceptical of the model that we’ll all be in robocars soon. Instead, the industry is now talking about specific uses.”If Oxbotica’s Paul Newman, one of the Oxford University professors pioneering Britain’s autonomous industry, has any doubts over the long term, he is not showing it – although he says the level of autonomy where “occasionally there might be a remote assist” is a far more achievable ambition than a world where the machines can entirely get on with it.Oxbotica is running a fleet of autonomous Ford Mondeos on public roads in a trial in Oxford – but the technological progress, he says, is not about robotaxis: “It’s purely about the software, it’s agnostic about the vehicles.”The driverless car world, he says, is “a great moonshot”: cars are a huge market but also the hardest to transform, long after autonomous mining or rail or shuttle services are in place.Newman compares the progress with mobiles phones, recalling the first he saw, wielded by Danny Glover in the 1987 film Lethal Weapon, which was the size of a small suitcase.“Is a future of driverless cars coming? Assuredly as mobile phones. This is the normal cycle that technology goes through. We’re still moving along that graph,” he said.“We’ve gone through the flashy stage, when we’ve said it’s six months away … Now we’ve got engineers saying this is properly hard.”
Generation Z and the Covid pandemic: 'I’m 100% more politicised':	Two months ago, the Guardian interviewed a group of young people from across the UK about their experiences of the coronavirus pandemic and their feelings about how their lives had been affected. Here those young people reflect on an extraordinary year and share their hopes and fears for the future.The son of a care support worker and a Congolese-Rwandan refugee, Dylan Kawende is from north-west London and is studying at St Edmund’s College, Cambridge“I’ve just finished my first term at Cambridge and have really enjoyed it, despite all the restrictions.“I’ve found constitutional law particularly fascinating because it’s so relevant to what we’re going through at the moment in this country. I’ve realised there wasn’t sufficient scrutiny of the government’s use of Covid powers, for example. They didn’t have the power to tell people to stay at home in March – and that’s just one instance of how they’ve abused the law to mishandle the pandemic.“The government has abused its position and its coercive powers, which were never intended to empower it to act as it has done. I’ve realised that this is a pattern with this government: they suspended parliament for five weeks back in August over Brexit. That was unlawful, too.Photograph: David Levene“Covid has also exposed a lot of injustices and inequalities, from the way the NHS is run to economic injustices. It’s made me very invested in being able to advocate on behalf of those who have been victimised by the government and its routine lack of sensitivity to the intricacies of individuals who suffer the most when it comes to health crises.“The pandemic has also made me much more aware of the erosion of people’s basic, human rights that can take place if we’re not vigilant. It took a law degree for me to realise that the government had acted illegally when ordering people to stay at home in March and that lack of awareness is worrying: if the government thinks it can order us to do whatever it wants because we’re not aware of our rights, it’s a slippery slope.Artwork: Dylan Kawende“Covid has politicised the young indirectly as well as directly. Because we’ve all had to stay at home, we’ve been less distracted. I’m sure that’s why the Black Lives Matter message were heard by so many. This is a good thing. It’s an opportunity for us all to observe and appreciate the state of the world.“I have a huge family and usually we all come together in one household over Christmas. But I don’t mind the change this year because my first priority now is to have long, introspective conversations with my family about how they’re feeling about the situation we’re all in. We have just assumed we’re all just getting on OK but that’s not an assumption I want to make.“The vaccine is a source of hope and optimism for me but the number of conspiracy theories going round about it is alarming. It speaks to the mistrust that people have in the government and the proliferation of misinformation over social media.“The consequences of this are dire: if enough people mistrust the government and don’t observe what they have to say – in circumstances where they’re saying it legitimately – it impacts on society at large.“Covid has created more pockets where that paranoia can flourish.”Photograph: Christopher ThomondAadam Patel lives in Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, with his parents, Musa and Zubeda, and his brother and two sisters“I managed to get myself a real, graduate-level job, at an international law firm in November. I count myself as hugely fortunate: loads of my graduate friends haven’t been as lucky. It’s really devastating for them to spend all these years studying and then face constant rejections.“I also feel really sorry for my younger brother and sister because they’re just stuck at home, studying. The government isn’t doing anything like enough to protect them from the harm that’s doing: they’re missing out on all the experiences that make you into a rounded adult, not just the really important social experiences but also the ones that make you employable: it’s the little jobs that I had at 17 that developed my skills and work ethic – the things that your first employers want to see.Photograph: Aadam Patel“My brother and sister aren’t getting any of that and their opportunities in life will be affected as a result. But this government has not done anywhere near enough to deal with it. Provisions have been made for other generations during this pandemic: lockdown was because of the older generation, after all. But it’s our generation that’s going to have to pay for the pandemic for the rest of our lives through taxes, a shrunken economy and fewer life chances.“One of the positives of the pandemic has been spending so much time with my family this year. I’m usually constantly on the go but spending so much at home and in the local community has almost felt like a throwback to being young again. It’s been refreshing and good for the soul.“It’s given me time to get to know myself too. I’ve got a deeper idea of what I am, my goals and aspirations over the last nine months. I now have a much better idea of where I want to be when there’s a fresh start in summer 2021.“Another thing I’ve realised is the value of human touch and human meetings. My community is at the heart of one of the worst-hit areas in the country for Covid and it’s hard on us. We’re such a close-knit community: we genuinely have an open-door policy. But we’ve not given up; we’ve really fought for each other. If someone tests positive, food and supplies are dropped on their doorsteps.“I’m 100% more politicised by Covid. It’s criminal how some politicians have taken advantage of the pandemic: the corrupt contracts for PPE, for example. How can that happen in a democracy? We’re taught that the UK is honest and trustworthy but it’s corrupt. It’s the only word for it.“I’m angry but I’m also disappointed because the impact of their incompetence and corruption will be felt in the short-term by constant anger towards government and in the long term by an absolute erosion in trust in government.“We grew up being told and believing that Britain was one of the most powerful countries in the world but, after this, I don’t think we are and I don’t think anyone else does either, at home or internationally. The word is embarrassing. That sums it up. It’s sad and disappointing – and embarrassing.”Photograph: Richard SakerHolly Ronicle lives with her younger brother, Noah, between the homes of her father, James, and mother, Emma, in York“School hasn’t been too bad this term because I still get to play with my friends. But my best friend is in a different bubble to me, so we have to socially distance ourselves from her in the playground. We walk around and talk instead of playing, making sure we’re the right distance away from each other. Six months ago, we would be touching and jumping around on her but now we can’t go anywhere near her now.“There are other friends in different bubbles who I’ve lost contact with because we can’t play together and they’re not part of my class friendship group. That’s sad but I’ve got closer to the other children in my class instead, which is nice.“The world feels lonelier to me because I don’t see as many people around as we used to and can’t go anywhere. But, then again, I have got used to it. Empty streets just seem normal.Artwork by Holly Ronicle“Covid has changed me in a way that I deal with my worries better now. I used to be quite worried sometimes but lockdown has taught me not to worry. I’m not really sure how it’s taught me that. I think I have grown up a bit.“I’m not sure the vaccine will help as much as people say. Everyone thought the pandemic would be over by Christmas and they were wrong, so they could be wrong again. I have become more unsure about what people in authority say.“I have seen the world in a different way since Covid. I have realised how many people there really are in the world. I don’t know how that makes me feel but I think it’s an important thing to have realised.”Photograph: Murdo MacLeodNairn McDonald lives in North Ayrshire with his mother, Lindsay, and two younger brothers“It’s been such a difficult year; there’s just been bad news after bad news. It’s been overwhelming but then there was the news of a vaccine. I watched the first woman getting the vaccine and I cried with relief. I know, now, that there’s an end in sight. This nightmare is finally coming to an end.“The thought that I’ll be able to hug my grandfather and take him out for a drive is really emotional. I haven’t touched him or seen him properly for nine months.Gus McDonald, 81. Photograph: Nairn McDonald“I have a lot of anger towards the mistakes by this government during the pandemic. The whole thing could have been handled better, especially what happened in care homes and the way the government put people’s lives at risk because of profit and the economy. I look at other countries and see them almost back to normality while our politicians are just bumbling along.“I worry that we have to trust them with the vaccine rollout: I don’t have a lot of faith in them. At the same time, I have an overwhelming sense that we need a last pull together to get the vaccine rolled out. Once that’s done, then we can have the postmortem.“The loosening of the five days at Christmas terrified me: all it takes is for one of my grandfathers’ carers to catch it and it will kill him. It could be indirectly – one of the carer’s daughter’s friends could have it and pass it on.“And it’s not just my grandfather, of course: there’s a care home near us that hadn’t had a single case of Covid. Then someone hugged their granny and she caught Covid and died – then five other people at the care home died too. I’m dreading all the bad news that January will bring.“Christmas has always been very big in our family. It didn’t feel happy or joyous at all this year. We didn’t spend Christmas with grandfather because the risks are too great. He will spend Christmas on his own. We did a doorstep visit in the morning and dropped some food off. If I’m honest, I’ve struggled with Christmas this year. It’s bringing me down. But I’m trying to stay positive and think about next Christmas, when we’ll have an extra-special celebration.“Jobwise things are not good. I’ve been applying for a charity job but the job market is saturated: so many charities have had to close or reduce their staff that I don’t stand a chance competing for the same jobs.“I’m keeping myself as busy as much as I can but as far as paid work goes, I don’t know when it’s going to even be a possibility. Without paid work I’m not contributing to society and it’s difficult to put into words the sense of worthlessness that creates.”Photograph: Christopher ThomondBethan has eight siblings and moves between the homes of her mother, Serena, and her father, Dylan, in Llanarmon-yn-lâl, north Wales“I’ve just started my new job and I’m really happy about it. I’m a charity support assistant, mainly caring for the elderly when they come out of hospital. I can’t be furloughed and there’s a constant need for our services as time goes on, so I’m confident that I’ve got secure employment, which is an amazing feeling.“The PPE requirements are really strong. We’re entirely covered up and have to santise constantly – at least five times during each visit, including sanitising the visor.“We’re not tested unless we have symptoms but I think that’s right: it would be a waste of money to test us constantly when we’re using PPE so much. I feel like everyone is a risk at this point but it’s being able to minimise that risk as much as possible. These people would be at risk in normal times too: even a common cold could be fatal for them.“It sounds odd but I’m looking after all these people but I’ve got no idea what tier we’re in at the moment. It’s so complicated and changes so often, that I’ve given up keeping an eye on it. I just do what I’m told at work behave in a way that I think is sensible outside it.“The vaccine issue is a source of anxiety for me but also a source of hope. They’ve already found it’s no good for people with allergies and I’ve got asthma, so they might go on to discover it’s not good for me either.“We don’t know the impact of the vaccine 10 years from now and I’m only 19. I don’t want to find I’ve taken something that was developed too quickly and does something terrible to me in my 20s. I want the vaccine but I also want to wait as long as possible before I have it.”“I am bored with the pandemic now. I’m moving in with my boyfriend in January and I want to be able to start everything fresh. I want the pandemic to be over. I want to move on.”Photograph: Martin GodwinOliwia Charowska lives with her younger brother, Marcel, and her parents, Joanna and Adrian, in Bromley, south-east London“My childhood years are coming to an end at a time when I can’t enjoy them. I don’t leave the house without thinking, ‘Do I have my mask, my gloves, my hand sanitiser?’ When I meet up with friends, I’m always thinking ‘Am I far enough apart from them?’ I can’t just live in the moment. I’ve had to grow up quickly. I have realised the world is more complicated than I was told.“It makes me feel that our last bit of childhood is being squandered. My friends and I are missing out on creating the memories our ancestors did at this stage of their lives. We can’t be spontaneous, independent and adventurous, and because of that, we’re missing experiences and life lessons.“In November, my entire family had Covid. I was tested on the 20 November but was negative. I got symptoms a week later but the NHS wouldn’t give me another test. Then I went in for a routine operation on 9 December (that was later cancelled because of the pandemic) and was tested beforehand. That test came back positive. I was confused: I had my symptoms 11 days before that but apparently Covid stays in your system for 90 days.“Dad and I reported the positive result to the NHS Covid-19 centre helpline and the school contacted the Department for Education to ask for advice. And then the calls began coming. Over two days, mum and I received about 30 phone calls from different public services – and the crazy thing was that they all told us different things.“One so-called expert rang to say that because of when I had my symptom, I didn’t have to self-isolate at all. Then someone else said had to isolate until 12 December – and someone else said I had to isolate until 14 December.Artwork: Oliwia Charowska“Everyone who calls tells me something different and it’s really confusing because surely they’re all using the same guidance, so should be giving me the same advice?“During a crisis, we need clarity. Matt Hancock keeps using the word ‘robust’ but what’s robust about a £22bn system that gives completely inconsistent advice? The responsibility lies with the government: they drew up the guidelines and they created the systems. There have been too many U-turns.“A lot of the nation has lost its trust and faith in the government because of the confusing messages and lack of clarity. There are too many unanswered questions.“My generation is becoming much more involved in politics. We’re beginning to ask ourselves if they really know what they’re talking about. A lot of people have realised that they can’t depend on anything they’re being told.“I’ve taken up a fourth A-level in politics because of what I’ve experienced during the pandemic. It’s amazing sitting in a room with other Gen Z kids; we’re young, enthusiastic and full of ideas about how to change the world. We bounce ideas off each other about how we should be doing things differently. We’re optimistic, enthusiastic and inspired.“If there’s one positive thing to come out of the pandemic, it is that people have changed. There has been a huge awakening for us. It’s a tsunami. This pandemic has shown us that government makes mistakes and doesn’t know the answers. My generation have realised that we live in this one world together and we have to create the changes that we want to see for ourselves.”Photograph: Sarah LeeAryan Nair lives with his parents, Rakesh and Swetha, and younger brother in south London“I’m in India at the moment and it’s so wonderful that I can hardly believe it’s true. I haven’t seen my grandparents for two years: we were going to see them in the summer but then there was the pandemic.“It’s different here: little kids have to wear masks – which is bad because it’s really hot and hard to breathe in them – but no one really socially distances. We call my mum the Sanitiser Lady because she won’t let us touch anything and is always making us sanitise our hands.“When we first arrived at my grandparents, she told me we had to shower before hugging our grandparents but my grandparents said they couldn’t wait and hugged us without waiting. Everyone was jumping around. We were so excited.“It was a bit tense at the airport because my parents had to take tests, then we had to wear shields in the airport and there were empty seats between us in the aeroplane. It felt odd that we couldn’t see the air stewards: they were so covered up you could barely recognise them.“If there were a magic volcano that could blast off Covid viruses, wouldn’t that be great?” Artwork: Aryan Nair“It feels like I’ve been in a little room for years and am now on a big farm. My grandparents’ house isn’t a farm at all but I just feel freer here; there’s more space and they don’t have as many rules. The whole Covid thing feels a long way away, apart from the masks.“We don’t celebrate Christmas but we had to have Diwali at home, which was sad. We had a party, with disco lights and just my family. We watched friends’ parties online but I missed going to their houses. I preferred it last year because it was more fun and the food was yummy.”Photograph: Linda NylindJack Payne is from Sea Mills in Bristol, where he lived with his mother, Tracey, and brother and sister. He now lives in a student hall in Clerkenwell, London“It has been a strange first term at university: it wasn’t the traditional freshers experience – most societies had their events online and offline, everyone wears their masks all the time but I think, because of all the changes and confusions, a lot of students break the rules, even though they’re heavily enforced by the wardens.“Students are quite confused about the rule changes and have pretty much given up. Lots just rely on their own common sense instead. The feeling is that the government hasn’t been being objective because the rules have changed too often. The rules, to be honest, have become a bit of a joke among students.“Having said that, the second lockdown changed the atmosphere on campus completely: no one hung around after the face-to-face tutorials – which we do sitting far away from each other and wearing masks, which makes debating with each other really hard – the library was empty and so was the rest of the campus. I feel a great disconnect between myself and the campus.“It’s interesting to think about what university will be like in the future. I can see lectures moving online forever but it’ll be a great shame: the experience of university is much more than a series of online lectures. It’s about face-to-face contact with lecturers, about building academic contacts and making friends. This isn’t the experience I’m getting. I’m just sat at a computer screen all day, every day. There’s a great feeling of loneliness.“I had my two Covid tests before I left to go back home for Christmas. Now I’m at home, I still can’t see my grandfather and uncle, because they’re shielding. Christmas without them was sad but I’m just telling myself that this year is an exception and next year things will be back to normal.”Photograph: Martin GodwinSanjana Parashar lives with her parents, Prasanjit and Shally, in Beckenham, Greater London, and one younger sister“I don’t think it was the best decision of the government to let everyone come together for Christmas. I don’t get the feeling that they’re listening to the scientists, who are saying that it will make everything worse and lead to another lockdown.“I understand that the government is trying to keep us safe but it’s not working. The numbers show that. I understand that they’re trying to keep the economy up but it should not be their main focus: the UK is a strong economy and will arise again, so the government should focus on the people.Artwork: Sanjana Parashar“We usually spend Christmas with friends and travel beforehand – last year we went to Malta. Neither of those things happened this year and I’m not used to spending all winter at home. It’s not what I call fun.“I’m worried about my family in India. Lots of them have had Covid and although they’re all OK, I still worry. If Dad has to go over to help, he’ll have to stay in a hotel to quarantine and that’s expensive.“I’m also concerned about my GCSEs. What if they keep changing things, and the teachers don’t know the best way to teach it? If they make the exams easier though, then that’s OK with me.“My relationship with my six-year-old sister has changed during the pandemic. We’re closer because we’ve spent so much time together but we fight too. It’s kind of sad but we’ve developed an argumentative relationship, which we didn’t have before. It really irritates my mum.”
Squatters issue death threats to archaeologist who discovered oldest city in the Americas:	Illegal squatters have invaded the ruins of the oldest city in the Americas, and made death threats against Ruth Shady, the celebrated Peruvian archaeologist who discovered the 5,000 year-old civilization.The threats came via telephone calls and messages to various workers at the archeological site at the height of Peru’s Covid-19 pandemic. They followed reports to the police and prosecutors about the invasions of the ancient ruins of Caral.“They called the site’s lawyer and said if he continued to protect me they would kill him, along with me, and bury us five metres below the ground,” said Shady, 73.“Then they killed our dog as a warning. They poisoned her, as if to say, look at what will happen to you,” she said.It is not the first time Shady has been threatened or attacked. In 2003, she was shot in the chest during an assault on the 626-hectare (1,546-acre) archaeological complex which was declared a Unesco world heritage site in 2009.After nine invasions of the sacred city during the pandemic period, Shady and her team repeatedly asked the authorities to intervene.“There is a feeling that there is no authority dedicated to the protection and defence of our heritage. It’s a huge worry,” she said.In July, squatters using a heavy digger knocked down adobe walls and tore up the ground destroying ancient ceramics, tombs containing mummies, textiles and household remains, before police and the site’s staff were able to stop them.As a result of Shady’s pleas, a police car now patrols the archeological site day and night but nothing has been done to punish or evict the land invaders.The squatters are believed to belong to a single extended family, and claim the land was given to them in the 1970s during Peru’s controversial agrarian land reform which was pushed through by a leftist military dictatorship.Shady denies the claim: “They do not have a single land title. The owner of the land is the Peruvian state.”A planned eviction of one of the squatters was thwarted in December when a local prosecutor and official failed to give the order to proceed despite having the support of police officers, Shady said.Land prices in the area have risen from around $5,000 per hectare to as much as $50,000 per hectare, as outsiders rush to buy land around the prestigious archaeological site which is surrounded by a 56 sq mile buffer zone.Shady, who was named on the BBC’s 100 Women list  last year, first visited Caral in 1978. But it was not until 1994 that she discovered the ancient city and began to properly excavate the site, which is situated on a dry desert terrace overlooking the Supe river valley nearly 200 km (124 miles) north of Lima.What she uncovered was the “oldest centre of civilization in the Americas” which Unesco describes as “exceptionally well-preserved” with a complex architectural design with “monumental stone and earthen platform mounts and sunken circular courts”. Organic material found at the site has been carbon-dated back to 2627 BCEShady and her team continue to investigate and excavate a dozen former settlements, half of the 24 situated in the Supe valley which form part of the Caral-Supe civilization. Their findings have revealed musical instruments such as flutes made of animal and bird bones and evidence of the cultivation of multi-coloured cotton used in textiles.“We can’t allow archeological sites to continue being invaded and destroyed because it is an unwritten history and we recover that history through our investigation,” said Shady. “If we can’t do that it is like burning a book which no one will ever read.”“I hope we can continue to investigate and continue to recover our history because it has such an interesting message,” she added. “It was a very, very peaceful society. We have not found even a single walled settlement.”“There is message there that we, human beings, should live in harmony between ourselves and nature,” Shady concluded. “We are living through this pandemic, in part, due to our mistreatment of nature.”
Covid live news: Starmer calls for immediate new England restrictions; UK records more than 50,000 new cases again:	Here’s my colleague Simon Murphy’s story on Starmer’s intervention:The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, has urged Boris Johnson to bring in new national Covid restrictions in England within the next 24 hours, rather than hint that he will do so soon.Starmer told reporters: “The virus is clearly out of control. And there’s no good the prime minister hinting that further restrictions are coming into place in a week, or two or three.“That delay has been the source of so many problems. So, I say bring in those restrictions now, national restrictions, within the next 24 hours. That has to be the first step towards controlling the virus.”On schools, Starmer said: “It is inevitable more schools are going to have to close. And the Government needs a plan on children’s learning but also for working parents.”He went on: “The more important thing in a way is that national restrictions need to come in the next 24 hours. Let’s not have the prime minister saying ‘I’m going to do it, but not yet’, that’s the problem he has made so many times.“Nationwide lockdown - the prime minister has hinted that that’s going to happen but he’s delaying again. And we can’t afford that again.”Cyprus has discovered 12 cases of the new coronavirus variant in people who recently travelled from Britain, Reuters reported the health ministry as saying on Sunday.The new highly transmissible variant – first found in the UK – is now spreading around the world. Of 19 positive tests for Covid-19 recorded on individuals who travelled to Cyprus from Britain between 6-20 December 6, 12 were for the new variant.In Switzerland, the canton of Geneva said cases of the new variant had been detected in the area. “A few cases of the variant identified in the United Kingdom of the new coronavirus were identified in Geneva recently,” a press release said. “It is very likely that there is community circulation of this strain in our canton. This means that the transmission of this new strain is active in Geneva and that, today, it is not just about imported cases.”Thanks to reader Jaya John for pointing out the Swiss news.Lancashire council has said that it will not push for a blanket closure of all primary schools in the county but said that the ultimate decisions on closures would rest with the schools themselves.Councillor Phillippa Williamson, the Conservative cabinet member for children, young people and schools, said: “Clearly the best place for children is in school, not just for their education but for their social, mental and physical wellbeing.“Having looked at the infection rates in Lancashire and following advice from our public health experts, we are not advocating a blanket closure of primary schools across Lancashire at this time.“The ultimate decision on whether to open remains with each individual school. Each of those schools knows their own circumstances best, and we will support them to help make the right decision for their pupils and staff.”In Liverpool, parents are being advised that schools in the city scheduled to reopen this coming week will do so, unless they are notified.In a joint statement, cabinet member for education, Cllr Barbara Murray, and director of children and young people services Steve Reddy said: “With less than 24 hours to go, we are not asking schools and parents to change their plans.“As a tier 3 area which has a lower infection rate than others, the schools that are scheduled to reopen this week should do so, including primary and special schools as well as secondary schools for vulnerable and key worker children.“No parent will be fined if they keep their child away tomorrow for safety reasons.“Where headteachers alongside their staff decide that they cannot safely reopen, they will have our full support. The council will continue work with and support schools if this happens.”There have been 54,990 new cases of coronavirus in the last 24 hours and 454 more deaths within 28 days of a positive test.The latest figures bring the total number of deaths within 28 days of a positive result above 75,000. Other figures which include all cases where Covid-19 is mentioned on a death certificate give a total of over 91,000.The figures do not include results from Scotland which were not reported today.While the number of new cases is slightly down on yesterday’s record high, it compares with 30,501 cases reported last Sunday. The number of deaths is slightly up on the 445 reported yesterday and significantly up on the 317 deaths recorded a week ago. The total number of deaths is 75,024.High street chains Tesco and Boots have offered to help with the distribution of Covid-19 vaccines.It is believed Tesco has offered its distribution arm to help with the rollout of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine while Boots is opening three Covid-19 vaccination sites, in Halifax, Huddersfield and Gloucester.The supermarket giant’s subsidiary Best Food Logistics, food delivery and supply chain specialists, has offered its support, which could include the use of its refrigerated lorries and warehouses to move the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, which can be stored in a fridge.Covid-19 restrictions, which have shut down many pubs and restaurants, may have opened up some capacity that could be diverted to the vaccine programme.Boots, the high street chemist, said its three vaccination sites, set up with the local clinical commissioning groups, are to open to patients this month and more could be on the way.A spokesman told PA: “Boots has extensive knowledge and experience of mass vaccination (having completed over a million flu vaccinations last year, for example) and we have developed a model for Covid-19 vaccination that is aligned with our exceptional safety, clinical and operational standards.“We stand ready to do much more and our national network of pharmacy expertise is prepped to support the NHS and the Government to accelerate the rollout of the vaccine.”Boris Johnson, the prime minister, told the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show that there would be 530,000 doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine at about 540 GP vaccination sites and about 101 hospital sites on Monday, “on top of the million or so that have already been vaccinated”.Kuwait’s civil aviation authority has suspended direct commercial flights to and from the UK, according to a tweet published a few minutes ago.The post said that the decision was “based on the instructions of the health authorities in the state of Kuwait”. The suspension of flights will begin at 1am Wednesday UK time and run until further notice.الطيران المدني : تعليق الرحلات التجارية المباشرة في مطار الكويت الدولي من والى المملكة المتحدة اعتباراً من يوم الأربعاء الموافق 6 يناير 2021. pic.twitter.com/mwgtwAmPoxA further 386 people who tested positive for coronavirus have died in hospital in England, bringing the total number of confirmed deaths reported in hospitals to 51,437, NHS England said on Sunday.Patients were aged between 30 and 107. All except 18, aged between 59 and 95, had known underlying health conditions.The deaths were between 6 December 2020 and 2 January 2021. There were seven other deaths reported with no positive Covid-19 test result.University College London, the UK’s largest campus, has told its students to avoid returning until the end of February at the earliest because of the rapid spread of the new Covid-19 variant in the capital.My colleague Richard Adams reports that the move puts UCL at odds with the guidelines issued by the Department for Education last week, which called for most students to stay away from campuses in England until 25 January.Read the full story here:Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa has approved the import of 2 million doses of the Covid-19 vaccine developed by AstraZeneca and the University of Oxford, although the jab is not yet approved for use in the country.Anvisa said late on Saturday it had approved the importation request from federal government-affiliated biomedical center Fiocruz on Thursday, Reuters reported.Importing the doses prior to approval will enable vaccination to begin as soon as Anvisa okays its use, the regulator said. Brazil has yet to approve any vaccine.Fiocruz will apply for emergency use of the vaccine by Wednesday, its president, Nísia Trindade, said last week.Brazil has recorded the second-deadliest outbreak of Covid-19 after only the US. South America’s largest country has the third highest tally of coronavirus cases, with the health ministry registering more than 7.7m, after the US and India.The plan for schools to return in Wales will be kept “under consideration” following concerns about the new strain of coronavirus, first minister Mark Drakeford has said.Drakeford’s remarks echoed those of Boris Johnson earlier on Sunday, when he said that whether to close more schools would be kept “under constant review”.Drakeford said a “phased and flexible return” had been agreed with local authorities that would allow schools to choose their reopening date based on the Covid situation in their area.But he said the Welsh government would “keep this under consideration”, while its technical advisory group would look at all available evidence early next week.Two teaching unions have called for face-to-face teaching, set to resume for most schools between 11-18 January, to be delayed until the impact of the Covid-19 variant is assessed.Drakeford told BBC Radio Wales: “Of course we will continue to make decisions in the light of the best knowledge, research and information that’s available to us at the time.“But as a government, we will not lose sight of the fact that we have a generation of young people here in Wales whose lives have been so badly disrupted in 2020, whose education needs to be put back on track.“And it is their needs we will continue to have at the forefront of our minds as we organise with our colleagues a safe return to school.”India has granted emergency approval to both the Oxford/AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine and the domestically developed Covaxin, signalling the start one of the largest Covid-19 immunisation drives in the world.You can read Hannah Ellis-Petersen’s full story on that development (see earlier post) here:Schools in Cumbria, one of England’s most northern counties, have been told not to reopen tomorrow for the spring term.Colin Cox, the director of public health for Cumbria, said he had written to the Department for Education formally requesting that Cumbrian primary schools are added to the contingency framework of schools not expected to open tomorrow.He said rates in the north of the county, particularly in Carlisle and Eden, were “very high” and that rates in Barrow, Copeland and Allerdale were doubling every four to five days.“We don’t have the capacity in the NHS to respond easily to further increases in rates. So while primary children may not themselves be at high risk, we have to reduce opportunities for transmission wherever possible to protect the wider community,” said Cox on Twitter.Following extensive discussions over the last 48 hours, the CCC Exec Director (People) and I have this morning jointly written to DfE formally requesting that Cumbrian primary schools are added to the Contingency Framework of schools not expected to open tomorrow.
Keir Starmer calls for immediate lockdown in England as Covid cases soar:	The Labour leader, Keir Starmer, has urged Boris Johnson to avoid delay by imposing new nationwide restrictions in England within the next 24 hours to tackle the “out of control” virus.After the prime minister earlier on Sunday raised the prospect of tougher Covid-19 restrictions amid concerns over pressure on the NHS, Starmer intervened to argue action must be taken immediately and that it was no good hinting at curbs to come in future.“The virus is clearly out of control,” Starmer said on Sunday. “And there’s no good the prime minister hinting that further restrictions are coming into place in a week, or two or three.“That delay has been the source of so many problems. So, I say bring in those restrictions now, national restrictions, within the next 24 hours.“That has to be the first step to controlling the virus.”More to follow ...
Britons living in Spain barred from Madrid flight in post-Brexit travel row:	British residents flying home to Spain have been prevented from boarding a joint BA-Iberia flight to Madrid because the airline claimed their pre-Brexit residency papers were no longer valid, while others were deported back to Britain from Barcelona for the same reason.Max Duncan said the Iberia desk had refused to recognise his green card as proof of residence despite assurances by the British and Spanish governments that both the old foreign national identification (NIE) document and the new foreign ID card (TIE) remained valid.Duncan said he and seven other residents of Spain had not been allowed to board the 10.55am flight to Madrid. The Spanish wife of one of the Britons was also part of the group.Brit residents of Spain distressed as can't fly home from @HeathrowAirport under #covid19 restrictions as @Iberia_en said their green residence certificate not valid post-#Brexit even tho Spain's @inclusiongob and @FCDOGovUK say it is. Need clarity https://t.co/dLWW0pMBFO pic.twitter.com/ZXAwmRHIAVMadrid had announced last year that in the light of Brexit, UK nationals resident in Spain would be given a photo ID to replace the residency papers carried by EU nationals although the green card would remain valid proof of residency.It then restricted passenger travel from the UK on 22 December until 19 January after the discovery of the new coronavirus variant in southern England, with exceptions for Spanish nationals and those legally resident in Spain.The British embassy in Madrid reiterated in a tweet on Saturday night that the green card was valid.“This should not be happening, the Spanish authorities have reconfirmed again this evening that the green residency document will be valid for travel to return to Spain as stated in our travel advice,” it said.Patricia Moody and her husband, who were flying home to Almería via Madrid, were also turned away.“We had tickets with Iberia but someone said BA were accepting the green card so we bought tickets with them, so we spent a total of £1,500. BA boarded one of our suitcases then said we couldn’t board after all.”Moody and her husband, who urgently needs medication, are waiting to hear from the British embassy in Madrid. Meanwhile, their PCR tests, which cost £249, are no longer valid for travel.It was not just the Madrid flight that was affected. On Saturday, Carlos Torres, who has dual UK-Portuguese nationality, narrowly escaped being deported when he arrived at Barcelona airport.“Yesterday I was on flight BA474 from London Heathrow and landed in Barcelona at 13:20,” Torres wrote on Facebook.“Everyone had their NIE, negative PCR test result and HR code [Spanish travel health] which all had been already checked prior to boarding at Heathrow. The police then start checking all the NIEs and calling people to verify their status. It quickly escalated to the police telling everyone they must board the plane and fly back to London.“I kept telling them that I’m a European Union national and that they have to let me through. All the Brits were forced back on the flight (me included). Finally, the penny dropped and the senior police officer let me through at the last minute.”Tens of thousands of Britons have registered to be issued with the new card but many are waiting to receive their ID as the system is overloaded.There are about 300,000 British residents in Spain, although the number may be much higher as many live outside the Spanish system.BA said in a statement: “In these difficult and unprecedented times with dynamic travel restrictions, we are doing everything we can to help and support our customers.”
India’s approval of Covid vaccines triggers mass immunisation drive:	India has granted emergency approval to both the Oxford/AstraZeneca coronavirus vaccine and the domestically developed Covaxin, signalling the start of one of the largest Covid-19 immunisation drives in the world.At a press conference on Sunday, the drugs controller general of India said the decision to approve both the Oxford vaccine and Covaxin, which is produced by the Indian company Bharat Biotech and was part-funded by the government, had come after “careful examination” of the data.It makes India the second country to approve emergency use of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, known as Covishield in India, after the UK gave it the green light on Wednesday.The approval comes at a crucial time. India, a country of more than 1.3 billion people, has registered more than 10.3m cases of Covid-19, the second highest in the world, and 149,000 deaths. On Sunday, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, called the approval “a decisive turning point”.India plans to vaccinate 300 million people in its first stage of vaccinations, with priority given to 30 million frontline healthcare workers, police and members of the armed forces. The vaccine will then be given to those above the age of 50 and people suffering from co-morbidity illnesses. The vaccine will be given free of charge.However, the approval of Covaxin was met with some concern as the vaccine is still undergoing phase 3 clinical trials and the full results of the vaccine’s efficacy have not been published.All India Drug Action Network, a public health group, said it was “baffled” by the decision to approve a vaccine still in trials. The government had previously promised that Covaxin, which was produced in conjunction with a government-run body, the Indian Council of Medical Research, would be ready for distribution by August 2020.The senior opposition leader Shashi Tharoor tweeted his concerns about Covaxin. “The Covaxin has not yet had phase 3 trials. Approval was premature and could be dangerous,” he wrote.VG Somani, the drugs controller general of India, sought to allay any fears. He said on Sunday: “We’ll never approve anything if there is the slightest of safety concern. The vaccines are 110% safe.”Significantly, both Covishield and Covaxin will both be produced in India, a country that is already one of the largest pharmaceutical producers in the world and produces about 60% of the world’s vaccines.The Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine will be made by the Serum Institute of India, which has already stockpiled 40m doses before approval. The company has pledged to produce 300m doses by July, and made repeated assurances that 50% of the vaccines it produces will be reserved for India.Adar Poonawalla, the CEO of the Serum Institute, on Sunday said it will not allow the export of the vaccine for several months, meaning poorer countries may have to wait before beginning their vaccination programmes. With rich nations reserving most of the vaccines that will be made this year, Serum Institute — the world’s largest vaccine manufacturer — is likely to make most of the inoculations for developing countries.Happy new year, everyone! All the risks @SerumInstIndia took with stockpiling the vaccine, have finally paid off. COVISHIELD, India's first COVID-19 vaccine is approved, safe, effective and ready to roll-out in the coming weeks. pic.twitter.com/TcKh4bZIKKHowever, India faces huge challenges in distributing the vaccine across the vast country. Healthcare is uneven, lacking resources and power, and access is often difficult in rural areas. The government has begun training about 20,000 health workers to administer the vaccine and last week conducted trial runs in four states, using placebo vaccines administered by trained professionals.Covishield and Covaxin only need to be stored at temperatures of 2-8C, far more manageable than the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines that have been rolled out in Europe and the US.However, there are concerns that India’s cold chain – the refrigerated resources that enable the vaccine to be safely transported and stored – is not yet up to capacity to cope with vaccines for 1.3 billion people. The government has brought in the aviation and transport ministries to draw up plans for how the vaccine can be delivered across the country.The government said it intended to draw on its highly successful polio eradication programme and infant immunisation programme, which inoculates about 27 million children annually.
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a British Empire Medal (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response.Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in Vanuatu – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions.“Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.”The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people.“Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good.“My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.”With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure.“These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world.“It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.”In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands was hit by a cyclone that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages.“The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.”To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions.“Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
Wuhan one year on: normality returns, but pain over handling of Covid outbreak endures:	Jianghan Road in Wuhan throngs with shoppers and strollers bundled up against the late December freeze. Bells ring out on the hour from the landmark Hankou Customs House where the road terminates near the wide banks of the Yangtze River.Restaurants along the city’s main pedestrian thoroughfare are packed, even on an icy weekday night, and resound with loud conversation.The bustle, bright lights and din of the street appear to show a city back to some normality one year on from 31 December 2019, the day that health authorities in the city reported an unknown pneumonia outbreak to World Health Organization (WHO) colleagues in Beijing.But under the surface a struggle continues between residents of the city that was the first to feel the pain of the coronavirus pandemic and authorities over how to remember the initial response to the crisis.“In the coming days I think people will have a bit of fear,” said 22-year old Zhou Xiangning, a Wuhan resident who caught the virus in mid-January. “Not a fear of the virus returning, but fear from the memories of that time,” he said over a steaming bamboo tray of soup filled thin-skinned dumplings.Wuhan and its roughly 11 million residents were abruptly locked down on 23 January after weeks of being told that the virus was controllable, preventable and not contagious. The aim was to limit greater spread of the disease that has since become known as Covid-19, and that has spread around the world and killed almost 2 million people.In Wuhan, many people are still guarded about what they can and cannot say about what happened a year ago and the lessons they learned.In April, after 76 days, Wuhan emerged from lockdown. Aided by thousands of local volunteers who delivered and distributed scarce PPE and food supplies and drove ill people to hospitals; by doctors and nurses working until collapse or until the virus overtook them; by workers who built temporary hospitals in a matter of days to relieve inundated facilities, Wuhan made it through.The memory the Chinese Communist party wants people to keep, though, is of the larger national effort to control the outbreak. The inrush of medical staff and People’s Liberation Army soldiers from provinces across China and the emergency response from the central government after 23 January get key billing.A three-month exhibition showcasing China’s coronavirus response, nearing its end in Wuhan, captures all this and more. It paints a China triumphant over the virus, with inconvenient narratives left out.But there is no mention of Dr Li Wenliang, the ophthalmologist hailed as a whistleblower after being reprimanded by police for warning colleagues about a “Sars-like illness” on 30 December last year, and who later died from Covid. Anything gaining traction on Chinese social media not supporting the correct collective memory is swiftly censored.What still irks some Wuhan residents is the downplaying of the seriousness of the virus in the weeks before the lockdown, when people such as Li were trying to sound the warning.One of those was Zhang Hai, who lost his 76-year old father on 1 February. Zhang believes the death could have been prevented if it was known the virus was contagious in mid-January, before he decided to return to Wuhan from Shenzhen after his father broke a leg.“I won’t rest until [Wuhan officials] are held accountable,” Zhang said. He has drafted a letter to the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, calling for local officials to be held accountable for the period from 31 December to the 23 January lockdown, but his efforts, along with those of several other families, to sue the local government have so far come to nothing.“They want to sell a story that they effectively controlled the virus here, but they also try to wipe out the cause,” Zhang said. “The cause is concealing and covering up the information early on, but they seem to only focus on the results afterwards. That does nothing to wipe the pain out of the hearts of those who lost family members.”Han, still grieving from the loss of her father to the virus in February, does not want her full name used out of fear of retribution by authorities. She also wants the mistakes from that period exposed with a proper investigation.Her father became infected a few days before the lockdown but was not given a test for Covid, so he was not counted in the death toll. Han said authorities could have done more to warn residents.Zhang and Han said they hoped the forthcoming investigation by the WHO into the virus outbreak would also take into account the actions by the local government during the first three weeks of January 2020.WHO officials have said the investigation, which will commence after the team arrives in January 2021 and undergoes a 14-day quarantine, will focus strictly on determining possible zoonotic sources of the virus.The starting point for the WHO team is expected to be the South China Seafood Market, where a large quantity of virus samples were detected after it was closed and sanitised on 1 January 2020.There appears to be little to look at now. Wet snow mixed with a biting wind swirls around the shuttered market. A 8ft-high wall covered in placid scenes of misty mountain tops blocks any view inside the now soundless building.Han hopes that one day the world will know what happened at the start of the outbreak. “Before the pandemic I had faith in the government, but after this it feels like telling the truth is so difficult,” she said. “I hope more people can speak up and tell the truth without fearing someone will come after them.”
Uganda's 'street uncles' transform young lives in the slum - a photo essay:	It was as a child in 1983 that Mark Owori first began using drugs. He started by supplying them to his sister, Lucky, who was a soldier in Uganda’s bush war. Eventually he also became both involved in the war and an addict.This was under the rule of Ugandan independence leader Milton Obote and during a conflict in which Owori says that everyone had a role – from spying to looking for food. His was to keep soldiers supplied with drugs.Even now, he says, he doesn’t regret it and he considers his contribution was important to Uganda’s liberation from British colonial rule. But today he is using this experience as a child soldier to ensure that other children don’t go through the same.Today Owori is 48 and still a drug user, but he is also part of a small group of men known as the “street uncles”, who rehabilitate addicts in Kisenyi, a slum in the capital, Kampala, that is infamous for high levels of drug use among its estimated population of almost 24,000 people.“People look at the drugs and not the person or the humanity that they have,” he says. “We look at the talent we have and not the drugs we take.”Kisenyi slum, which is infamous for its high levels of drug useOwori, or “Uncle Mark”, as he is known, says his own experience in rehab inspired him in 2001 to open a centre in Kisenyi where street children and adults with addiction problems could find other avenues of self-expression beyond using the cheap and toxic drugs available in the slum.The other street uncles helping to rehabilitate drug users are Musa Ssebagala, 36, Matua Francis, 31, Sam Mugadi, 20, and 25-year-old Kyikabi David. They advocate against the criminalisation of drug users and encourage responsible use among adults.Hasifa Nakibuli, a 17-year-old who uses cannabis and “jet fuel” [aviation fuel], is one of the estimated 500 children and adults who either live at the centre or visit regularly. For her, limiting her drug use to just two substances is progress.Homeless children in Kisenyi wait for clothes to be distributed“Even though I want to use many [drugs], I have decided ‘no’ because I know that they are going to take me back,” says Nakibuli. “And now I want to go forwards, not back.”She says she started using drugs when she was 13, and although she arrived in Kisenyi just over a year ago from her family home in Masaka, a town about two and a half hours from Kampala, she has already been picked up by the police.“They open our rooms and check, and if they find the drugs, they take you,” she says. She was later released, but the experience convinced her that she did not want to be arrested again. “I cannot take drugs if I see a policeman. I run away. If I am not smoking, I can stand and we talk because I am not a criminal.”Musa Ssebagala and helpers prepare lunch for street childrenAn estimated 5-10% of Uganda’s population regularly abuse alcohol and drugs. One study of 12-24-year-olds in northern and central Uganda showed that 70% of people had abused these substances and more than a third used them regularly.Hand-rolled marijuana cigarettes sell for around 500 Ugandan shillings (around 10p) each; jet fuel can also be bought for as little as 500 Ugandan shillings.In 2014, Uganda’s parliament passed a Narcotics bill to punish drug trafficking with life imprisonment and impose a minimum fine of $4,000 (£3,097) or a two-year jail term for the possession of drugs.A child packages homemade marijuana icigarettes inside a kiosk in KisenyiBut not everyone sees Uganda’s bill and the draconian drug laws of many southern African countries as helping to address the problem.“Criminalisation is a total farce,” says Chris Jay, the founder of the South African chapter of the National Organisation for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (Norml), which advocates for the right of adults to use cannabis. “I think countries need to look at the bigger picture and look at models that are tried and tested for decades, such as in the Netherlands and Portugal, and legalise all drugs.”Since 2008 Norml has organised pro-cannabis marches in South Africa, and it supports the Dagga party, which was instrumental in the 2018 legalisation of cannabis in South Africa, a law Jay believes still falls short in addressing the problem.“The judgment had actually nothing to do with cannabis. It had more to do with privacy. That’s what it was about. It was about an adult smoking a joint in the privacy of their home,” Jay says. “It wasn’t effectively legalising or decriminalising cannabis itself. People are still getting arrested every day. It’s a huge, huge problem.”Jet fuel, shown in the bottle in the left-hand picture, is a cheap and readily available drug in KisenyiUganda legalised marijuana for medical use in 2019, becoming one of seven countries in Africa to have done so.Nigeria has the harshest drug laws in West Africa, with the penalty for drug trafficking attracting a sentence of anything from two years to life imprisonment. Drug possession carries a 15 to 25-year sentence in the country.Adeolu Adebiyi, a Nigerian and member of the West African chapter of the Global Commission on Drug Policy, says drug use or misuse should be treated within the framework of public health.“Using a criminal justice system to respond to the drug use challenge is actually a misnomer,” he says. “I once did a story on some young people who have been locked up in prisons for drug use offences and after they had been released ... 99.9% of them were still actively using drugs. So the prison did not reform them.”A 2016 study of a prison in north-central Nigeria found that 57.7% of inmates reported using more than two drugs while incarcerated and in Uganda, a study by the UN office on drugs and crime (UNODC) cited 65% of inmates as reporting drug abuse inside the prison.The street uncles want to help encourage those with addiction problems to find other avenues of self-expression beyond cheap and toxic drugsThe Global Commission for Drug Policy includes the former presidents of Nigeria and South Africa, Olusegun Obasanjo and Kgalema Motlanthe, who recently co-authored a piece for the Africa Report saying that as leaders they had failed in the war on drugs, a viewpoint that Adebiyi understands.“Many African countries suffered from the influence of the US war on drugs, which [we] copied directly, ignorantly and not so ignorantly,” he says. “Ignorantly in the sense that the idea that we need to be tough on drugs somehow sits with our conservative norms within the African setting.”Dorah Namulondo, 20, says Owori and the other street uncles helped her save enough money to start a business selling alcohol and cigarettes, though she doesn’t use either of them. “You as a person choose whether to keep using drugs or not,” she says.But of course addiction is much more complex, says Nene Okereke, a pharmacist based in Bayelsa, southern Nigeria.Homeless children in KisenyiAccording to Okereke, psychoactive substances like cocaine and marijuana can hijack what is known as the brain’s reward circuit. “With constant use of these drugs over time, the body responds to other cues associated with these drugs,” she says.“It progresses from being a choice to something that is beyond one’s control, whether or not I want to use it,” she says. “The brain sends out signals because it remembers the reward it got and then the body begins to seek it intensely.On the streets of Kisenyi there are many drug users who feel they have the situation under control. Ssebagala, a street uncle and former addict, is among them.“I have been exposed to different drugs, so I know what to take and what I can’t,” he says. “Cannabis is the drug I take, and I know how to control it. It’s like [taking] a herb to make me feel stable and confident.”Left to right: Sam Mugadi, Musa Ssebagala, Mark Owori, Matua Francis and David KyikabiIn 2016, Ssebagala, who is married and has four children, spent four months in prison for drug-related offences. It was the same year he joined the street uncles. “I don’t want the kids to go through what I went through then, that’s why I am so into this project,” he says.Like Ssebagala, 33-year old Saraine Swaliki, who teaches the children music, dance and drama at the centre, believes he has his drug use under control. He says cannabis inspires his music. Swaliki, like the other street uncles, believes drug use should not be criminalised and that it should be viewed separately from actual crimes. “Some people hide under the disguise of drugs to do bad things. If you are a thief, you are a thief, regardless of taking cannabis or not.”Musa Ssebagala serves lunch to children living on the streets of Kisenyi
Gender conversion 'therapy' made me suicidal. I fear for other young Nigerians:	When I was nine, my parents took me to a traditional healer. He used a razor to make three incisions on the insteps of my feet, my wrists, my elbows, my forehead and on the back of my neck. As blood started to flow, the healer rubbed a concoction of herbs into the incisions and gave me a potion to drink. He took alligator pepper and rubbed it on various parts of my body. There was a rooster, into which he cast the “demon” inside me. The rooster was slaughtered and thrown into the river, supposedly taking my sexuality with it.In boarding school, I met a boy who I would say was my first love. We talked about everything and liked to take long walks. But he struggled. I watched him struggle to accept his sexuality. He felt there was something wrong with him but I didn’t know how to help him. For me it was different. It wasn’t just about sexuality; it was also about gender. I was born male but I have never felt like a man.When I was 22, in university, I met a transgender woman. She was a lot more open, more cosmopolitan, more upfront about what she wanted. I’d never met anyone like her. We had a sisterhood –– fun, graceful, pure. It was as if the scales fell from my eyes.What part of me has been lost in the effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form?My family was not happy about our friendship. They said I was bringing shame to the family. They took me to a Catholic priest to cast away the stubborn spirit that made me different. The priest told me that God had intended a great path for me, but some negative force had diverted me from it. He made me believe I could change. For a year, I fasted, I went to mass and took communion. I recited all the prayers as though my life depended on it. And it felt as if it did, you see, with the way everyone treated me.But I was all right. I always was. The main issue with conversion therapy is that victims don’t talk about it. It tends to make something that is so wrong look right. The worst part is when they are able to convince you that change can happen, that there is indeed something wrong with you, that you are a mistake of nature, an anomaly. It messes you up. The encounter with the healer was many years ago, but the memory is still harrowing. What part of me has been lost in an effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form? I’m 43 now. Still gay, still a trans woman. Still looking over my shoulder fearing that someone might want to hurt me. I’m much more scared than the average person. And I’m not the only one. Exposure to gender identity conversion efforts can have severe adverse effects on mental health. There are thousands of young people in Nigeria being subjected to these dangerous practices in a bid to “cure” them.There are no structures in Nigeria to deal with these psychological scars. That’s why we need our community. We need to have conversations about safety and security, especially with regard to familial relationships and dating. We need to openly talk about the devastating impact of conversion therapy. I have contemplated suicide several times. I attempted it once; relieved that it failed. I’ve noticed that when people have a personal experience –– they find out their partner or friend or child is LGBTQ+ –– they become less aggressive. I think my mother always knew, even as she went through the motions of trying to convert me. At some point she realised it wasn’t something she could struggle against. My father never accepted my reality, even until he died. He didn’t know how to deal with it. People need to realise that the world is not black and white; it’s in colour. Many people, like my friend in university, left for other countries where they thought they could live freely. But nowhere is safe. Brazil, Ecuador, Taiwan, Malta and Germany are the only countries in the world that have banned conversion therapy. Nigeria is a hostile place. The Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act makes our existences illegal. I have not been able to undergo surgery here because there’s no access to medical care to support transitioning. I know that if I look after myself, I will be fine. I’m concerned about the younger ones. The Commonwealth Equality Network is working towards decriminalisation of homosexuality in Commonwealth countries. I look forward to freedom. It may not be in my time. But we must keep fighting. Just so future generations will not live through the same things I have lived through.• The author, from Nigeria, wished to remain anonymous to protect her safetyIn the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Global Dispatch: sign up for a different world view:	Discover our pick of breaking stories and hard-hitting features, uncovered by our correspondents across Africa, Asia, South and Central America and beyond.We bring you the voices and opinions of people living under extraordinary circumstances along with expert analysis of the key issues from the most authoritative voices: the developing world in words, pictures, podcast and video. See the latest edition here.***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Rotten river: life on one of the world’s most polluted waterways – photo essay:	The smell is the first thing that hits you on the banks of the Citarum River in West Java, Indonesia. The odour is dense: rubbish rotting in hot sun mixed in with an acrid tone of chemical waste.Some 9 million people live in close contact with the river, where levels of faecal coliform bacteria are more than 5,000 times mandatory limits, according to the findings of the Asian Development Bank in 2013.Lead levels are more than 1,000 times the US Environmental Protection Agency drinking water standard and levels of other heavy metals such as aluminium, iron and manganese are above the international average.Those living along the river have nowhere to dispose of rubbish, so they either burn it or throw it into the river.Iim Halimah, 47, has three children. Her husband, Jajang Suherman, died of tuberculosis four years ago, aged 46, after years of dermatitis – a common condition along the Citarum. Halimah suffers from chronic bronchitis, a condition worsened by the pollution and malnutrition. She says the doctor has told her for years not to use the river water, but she has no alternative.There are more than 2,000 companies in the area – mostly textile factories built near the river because they need large quantities of water. In recent years they have discharged enormous amounts of chemical waste directly into the river.The village of Sukamaju on the Citarum River. Factories belch out smoke in the distanceMountains of river sediment are piled on the banks of the Citarum. Thousands live on these wastelands. Unemployed young people, families displaced by the frequent floods, or so-called ‘scavengers’, the very poor waste collectors who survive by selling recyclable rubbish.In the industrial area of Majalya, a textile factory discharges waste directly into the river, while children play among the toxic rubbishMany people suffer from dermatitis, contact rashes, intestinal problems; but also from delays in child development, renal failure, chronic bronchitis and a significant incidence of tumours.The luckiest river dwellers access wastewater from the local industries, who draw water directly from aquifers up to 150m deep and, after partially purifying it, make it available to the neighbouring villages.But most have to rely on contaminated water directly from the Citarum, to wash themselves and their clothes, and for drinking and cooking.People and their animals also ingest contaminants through their food, mostly rice, which is irrigated with water from factories and villages or from the Citarum and its tributaries.People living along the Citarum have to wash and cook with contaminated water. The water from the well can range from yellow to black in colour, and the farmers irrigate their fields with water foaming with detergentsDespite the filth, fishing is still widely practised along the river. The catch, contaminated with heavy metals and microplastics, is sold and eaten as much in areas adjacent to the river as on the tables of Jakarta. The number of fish species in the Citarum has decreased by 60% since 2008.The Indonesian government, after pressure from international organisations such as Greenpeace about the state of the river, has established a seven-year cleaning programme for the Citarum, with the goal of making its water drinkable by 2025.The fishermen have to build floating fences and fish among the rubbishThe programme is also supported by the International Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank, which in 2009 committed $500m (£387m) to finance the river’s rehabilitation. The cleaning operation consists of combating soil erosion and agricultural runoff by reforesting surrounding mountains; extracting the toxic sediment from the river with large excavators; prohibiting factories from discharging wastewater until after filtration and purification, and setting up environmental education projects.An environmental activist patrols a canal in the industrial area looking for hidden discharges into the riverAccording to local activists, despite the bans, many factories continue to discharge waste via concealed pipes. Even if discovered, bribes to the right people ensure they remain.However, recent environmental awareness initiatives by the government and some campaign groups mean a new wind might be blowing in Indonesia.‘Scavenger’ Mr Iwan, 34, collects recyclable material along the CitarumBut for now at least, every day along the Citarum people are still being poisoned by the dioxins and hydrocarbons in the air from coal-fired textile factories and by the water of a river that was once considered a paradise. 
Yemen: in a country stalked by disease, Covid barely registers:	On a ward in Ataq general hospital, in the dusty central province of Shabwa in Yemen, six-month-old Muna Bassam is lying on her back, eyes closed, her distended belly moving up and down with the labour of breathing.In the corridor outside her room, a poster shows before-and-after photos of several children admitted to the ward who have managed to recover from acute malnutrition – still painfully thin, but smiling and alert.Muna’s family have already taken her to hospital once before. Worried about being able to pay for her treatment and fuel to return to the village, their prayers for her this time around are even more urgent.“My wife and I had 20 children. Eleven of them died,” said the baby’s grandfather, Abdullah. “But that was a long time ago. This should not still be happening today.”Elsewhere in the overwhelmed hospital, children are suffering with cholera, diphtheria and dengue fever, contagious diseases that have stalked Yemen since the outbreak of war six years ago. For patients and doctors here, in what the UN says is the world’s worst humanitarian crisis, coronavirus barely registers.“We don’t have a neurosurgeon. We don’t have a maternity ward. We treat 20 children a month for malnutrition and now we are admitting more and more people severely ill with complications from dengue fever – more than 3,000 cases so far this year. The generator doesn’t always keep the equipment on,” says Dr Ali Nasser Saeed, the hospital director. “Coronavirus is nowhere near our biggest problem.”Shabwa, an oil-rich region contested by all three of Yemen’s warring parties, has been firmly under the control of government-loyal forces since last summer. The province is relatively wealthy and stable compared with other areas of the country, leading Yemenis displaced by the fighting or migrant workers sent home from Saudi Arabia to settle here.As a result, Shabwa’s population has swollen from 600,000 to an estimated 1 million, and concrete and breeze-block building sites on the outskirts of Ataq have begun to encroach on the sand. Silk Road caravans used to traverse the tabletop mountains that tower above Shabwa’s plains in search of frankincense; today they have been replaced by oil pipelines and convoys of tankers.Shabwa’s governor, Mohammed Saleh bin Adyo, appointed in 2018, has invested millions in beefing up local security forces and infrastructure projects to try to lure foreign oil companies back to the area. The fighting between the western-backed Saudi coalition, Iran-supported Houthi rebels and a separatist movement seeking renewed independence for South Yemen shows no sign of stopping any time soon, however. Al-Qaida still lurks in the desert.For ordinary Yemenis, the impact of war can be blunted only so far. The currency, the rial, has lost two-thirds of its value since the conflict began and continues to slide, making it harder and harder to put food on the table. A rise in food prices, coupled with devastating aid cuts, means the prospect of widespread famine is once again on the horizon.Serious malnutrition in southern Yemen, including Shabwa, has risen 10% this year and is up 15% among under-fives, according to a study conducted by UN agencies.In Ataq’s market square, everyone is selling but no one is buying. By 11am, glum honey traders and shepherds sit around still waiting to make their first sale of the day.At a sesame-oil shop nearby, owner Khaled is despondent. “Even if the electricity worked, I’ve run out of money to pay for it,” he says.Half of the country’s healthcare facilities have been destroyed, hundreds of doctors have died or fled the country, and public sector salaries often go unpaid, putting unsustainable pressure on the hospitals and clinics that remain.At the beginning of 2020, as Covid-19 began to spread from China and around the world, health workers and aid agencies predicted that the virus’s impact on Yemen’s vulnerable population would be catastrophic, forecasting a 90% infection rate.Yet despite its other afflictions, so far the war-torn country appears to have emerged relatively unscathed by the pandemic, reporting just 2,124 cases and 611 deaths to date.Testing facilities and comprehensive data are almost nonexistent, so it is highly unlikely the official statistics reflect the coronavirus’s true impact. But according to several doctors and healthcare officials, in Shabwa at least, the virus is not a pressing concern.A gleaming new Covid-19 testing, treatment and quarantine centre on the edge of Ataq city – regarded as the best facility in the country – hasn’t received a single patient since August. Staff in head-to-toe protective gear mill around the state-of-the-art testing machine, absent-mindedly disinfecting surfaces for lack of anything better to do, during a visit of a group of foreign journalists.The centre has conducted nearly 4,000 tests so far, only 90 of which came back positive, and Shabwa province as a whole has recorded 46 deaths.Asked why the number of Covid-19 cases in Yemen appears to be so much lower than elsewhere, despite the absence of social distancing and extra hygiene measures, the centre’s director Dr Hisham Saeed, says “high morale” and a population that skews young have kept Yemenis safe from the coronavirus.He worries, however, that the growing stigma associated with the disease and the difficulty of travel mean people in need of treatment are just staying at home. “It is very hard to tell what the impact is,” he says. “People think it’s a normal fever. Sometimes they ask me whether coronavirus is all just a big lie.”Satellite imagery analysis of graveyards in the southern province of Aden, where Covid-19 appears to have hit hardest, suggests otherwise. A study from the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine found that the number of new burials in the area had nearly doubled since the first case of Covid-19 was confirmed in April, and there have been 2,100 excess deaths, against an expected baseline of about 1,300 by the end of September.Analysis by the medical charity MedGlobal published in July found that at least 97 Yemeni healthcare workers had already died of the disease, suggesting that the true caseload and mortality figure is far higher than recorded.For now, the peak of the coronavirus pandemic in Yemen – or at least, its first wave – appears to have subsided, allowing healthcare workers to focus on the country’s other urgent health crises.Adyo has taken healthcare provision for Shabwa out of the weak and largely exiled central government’s hands, funding most of the operational costs at Ataq general and spending $2m on a new hospital complex near the Covid-19 centre.Work began on the site in 1994 but the facility was never finished as funding dried up or was siphoned off by corrupt officials. In 2015 the empty building was taken over as a base by the Houthis, leading the Saudi-led coalition to bomb it.Five years later it has been fully repaired, and construction workers are installing central air conditioning and lighting systems. Empty corridors smelling of fresh paint await medical equipment that international charities such as Médecins Sans Frontières have promised to help provide.The new facility should have 240 beds, compared with 140 at Ataq general, and will boast dedicated maternity, cardiac and infectious disease wards. A powerful new generator system should keep the electricity on for 24 hours a day, allowing monitors and ventilators to function without interruption.Local authorities hope the hospital will come online in early 2021, although many obstacles still stand in the way. Well-trained staff, functioning equipment and supplies of medicine are never guaranteed, even in parts of the country like Shabwa not subject to the Saudi blockade.“I lost a little boy last week to dengue fever because we had no anti-toxins to give him. I called every hospital in the south but no one had any. Maybe he could have lived,” says the head of paediatrics, Dr Saleh al-Khamsi. “Even if the war ends, I worry that we have already lost a generation.”
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	Working as a journalist in Gaza, says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion.“You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.”The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of spaceNow living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone.“I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window.Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks“For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience.“My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018.An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge“My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer).Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab IdolPalestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision“I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man.A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers“Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering.Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phoneQueuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list“These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.”Showing her coloursJehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
Inside Somalia: how Covid-19 created a perfect storm in a humanitarian crisis:	Considering the country was in the middle of a pandemic, the silence at the entrance to Mogadishu’s De Martini hospital felt unnerving.The stillness in its deserted, sanitised halls, sent a chill through me as I arrived in May to capture the work being done at what was, until recently, the Somali capital’s only hospital taking coronavirus patients. It felt like a prison.I was covered from head to toe in PPE kit because I feared contracting the virus myself and what would happen.Then I stepped inside the treatment centre and there was chaos. Movement everywhere, a lot of instructions being shouted, a lot of whispering between doctors and nurses. A camera usually attracts attention but now I felt invisible as the medical staff rushed around me, going from patient to patient or trying to change oxygen tanks. I was just trying to stand to the side and not interfere.Even before Covid-19, Somalia faced ongoing insecurity, the worst desert locust infestation in decades, flash flooding that has affected more than 1 million people since March, and a cholera outbreak that began in 2017.Then coronavirus began taking lives, stretching the health system in a country where 20% of the population is internally displaced, with many people spread out over more than 2,000 settlements next to crowded urban areas.When the outbreak began in March, Somalia had no ventilators and just two healthcare workers per 100,000 people.De Martini hospital has 71 beds, the main quarantine hospital for a city population of about 2.5 million, as well as the large displaced community living on the outskirts of the capital.Officially, the country has had just 93 deaths from the virus, but Action Against Hunger believes the true figure is much higher.“The official number of cases stands at 3,076, but this number simply doesn’t square with what we are seeing or hearing in our communities” says Ahmed Khalif, Action Against Hunger’s country director in Somalia.“Early evidence suggests the pandemic is slowing other health services, and we are seeing an alarming rise in hunger and malnutrition levels, particularly among the most vulnerable communities. If current trends continue, child mortality could increase an estimated 13% in Somalia. This is not normal. There is obviously a problem.”When I roamed around Mogadishu three months ago many people were still unsure about what to believe – and often quite sceptical about information they were given. When photographing in markets, I wore a niqab to cover my face mask, because a lot of people thought anyone who wore one was exaggerating the threat.In Mogadishu’s displacement camps, I met people who believed the virus was a problem that existed in the main city but did not affect them, even though they lived in crowded conditions with limited access to healthcare, water and sanitation.Many people had also started to believe that anyone who entered De Martini hospital never left.In Somalia, 20% of the population is internally displaced, living in camps such as Kahda (main image) and Xidig.But despite the country’s best efforts, its ability to respond to a pandemic remained inadequate. While oxygen tanks were available at the hospital, ventilators to treat the most serious cases of Covid-19 remained scarce. “If a patient needs to be intubated, we will have to watch the patient suffer because we can’t do anything. Eventually they will die,” Dr Xilwo Daud, who supervised the ward, told me at the time.With 60 cases already confirmed among the staff at De Martini hospital, all staff were housed on the premises to minimise the risk of spreading the virus. Despite missing their loved ones, it was a sacrifice they were taking in their stride.“I believe the reason I went to school to get an education is that if such pandemics take place, I can be on the frontline to support my people,” said Daud, who was forced to leave her young daughter with her parents.Somalia is now in its dry season, and malnutrition levels are expected to rise. According to the UN, one in five people in the country (3.5 million) will be pushed into food insecurity by September, and more than 1 million children will be malnourished. With already limited healthcare facilities struggling because of Covid-19, there are fears that aid agencies will not be able to cope in the face of overwhelming humanitarian need.Last month the Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC) launched its Coronavirus Appeal to raise money to help people in the world’s most fragile states, including Somalia, to protect themselves against Covid-19.Khalif is sombre in his appraisal of Somalia’s prospects. “The situation in Somalia is incredibly grave. Our health system has been overwhelmed and the money is drying up. Without more support from the international community, I fear Covid-19 could be the straw that breaks the camel’s back.”As told by Fardosa Hussein to Kaamil Ahmed
‘It has hit my dignity’: women fight for equal treatment from Indian army:	Nidhi Rao* has 13 years’ experience serving in the communications wing of the Indian army. Now she is looking for work online and doesn’t know where to start. “I am jobless in the middle of a pandemic, with no financial security.”When Rao joined the army, female officers were contracted for five years, after which time they might get an extension of five more years. Unlike men, they were not offered a permanent job. Later, the initial commission period was changed to 10 years, which could be extended a further four years.While men retired with pensions and other benefits, women could never reach the pensionable service length of 20 years, and remained out of the senior ranks.In 2010, after a group of female officers took their case to court, a ruling was made to put women on a par with men, but the Indian government challenged the order and refused to implement it. After a decade-long legal battle, in February last year India’s supreme court ruled the situation discriminatory and granted the women permanent status and entitlement to army pensions.The authorities set up a board, dividing women into categories. Those with 14 or more years’ service were given either a permanent commission (PC) or the option to retire with a pension. Those with 10-14 years’ service were selected for a permanent position or released from the army without a pension.In November, the army declared that 422 women out of 615 had been picked for permanent jobs. Rao was not among them. She says there were 68 such women from her service bracket who would be leaving without a pension.“Most of us are past our mid-30s and are married and have children. Some are expecting a baby; some could not plan it due to the job uncertainty,” she says. “After serving the institution for more than a decade, they are asking us to go and restart our careers, at this age, in the Covid-hit market. Who will hire us? Where do we go?”Anjali Sinha*, another affected soldier, says: “When I was pregnant, they asked me to run 5km and I did. When I gave birth, I rejoined within a week for fear of being relegated. I have worked in some of the most difficult terrains of the country, all while dealing with an unsupportive husband and family. And all this for what?”Sinha is in the 11th year of her service. She says: “I was deemed fit till a few months ago. But now when I am demanding PC, I have been declared unfit. More than anything, it has hit my dignity. I am questioning my worth every single day.”The female officers claim a lack of transparency in the selection process and say the true number granted PC may be lower than the army claims.What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth?Prakash Patil, an army veteran, says women undergo the same military training as men but while most of the male officers are absorbed into permanent roles and offered career progression opportunities, most of the women have to drop out.“When women were first inducted into the army in 1992, they were eulogised,” he says. “Newspapers published their interviews and compared them to female warriors of the past. But this antagonised many within the army, who simply could not bear the arrival of women. Hence, at every stage, women were made to prove themselves.”Rao says that once she lived with her baby in a tent in the desert, and on another occasion faced extreme pressure from her seniors to move to another location even though she was in the later stages of a high-riskpregnancy.Sinha says: “Men taunt us over maternity leave all the time. And, ironically, the same men then go on to take two-year-long breaks for specialised courses.”When male officers opt for permanent roles they can choose to study advanced technical courses, Patil says. But women miss out on the opportunity to take such degrees, reducing their chances of getting back into the job market.In September, Patil wrote to India’s president, Ram Nath Kovind, asking that the authorities grant permanency or pension to the 68 women, or help them get an advanced degree. He hasn’t received a reply. “What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth?” he says. “You cannot just leave out the women in their twilight years.”Lawyer Rakesh Kumar represents some of the 68 affected. “These women have been subjected to the policy’s gender bias. Further, there is no reasonable basis to distinguish them from those who have completed 14 years,” she says. “They should be at least allowed to serve 20 years.”Rao and Sinha believe it is a deliberate ploy to keep women out of uniform. There are about 1,500 women in the Indian army, less than 4% of the total strength. They are still banned from combat roles.“Most of the meritorious women in our batch have been chucked out,” Sinha says. “Most are absolutely fit and have no disciplinary cases against us. We have international shooters, bikers, and mountaineers who have represented India abroad and won medals for their work. Were they so afraid of us eating up command posts in future?”*Names have been changed.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
The mystery epidemic striking Nicaragua’s sugar cane workers – a photo essay:	For decades, a mystery epidemic has plagued young male labourers toiling in Nicaragua’s sugar cane plantations. The men start their work fit and strong, but after repeated harvests chopping cane under the tropical sun, they begin to suffer from nausea, back pain and exhaustion, get such severe muscle weakness that they can no longer earn a living, then end up dying of kidney failure, despite many being only in their 20s and 30s.In Chichigalpa, the centre of Nicaragua’s sugar cane industry, the mysterious illness accounts for half of all male deaths over the last decade. Just outside this “town of city and rum”, as it is known, one rural community has earned itself the moniker “La Isla de Viudas” – the Island of Widows.Patients in the dialysis clinic at Hospital España. Dr Nelson Garcia, bottom right, has 6,000 CKD patients, 60% of whom have CKDuAward-winning American photographer Ed Kashi first visited Chichigalpa in 2013 on assignment to document the plight of the region’s cane cutters. He was unprepared for the reality he found: “A funeral, literally every day, for a sugar cane worker who had died of this kidney disease.” He has since returned to Nicaragua and neighbouring El Salvador, as well as India and Sri Lanka, to cover the epidemic and scientists’ responses to it.Unlike chronic kidney disease, which is mostly seen among elderly people in urban areas, chronic kidney disease of unknown origin (CKDu) is believed to kill roughly 40,000 people a year, primarily from marginalised agricultural communities living along the equator.Neraldo Jardiel Cantillano Carrero, 30, receives dialysis at home. He was a sugar cane worker for two yearsBaffled by the ubiquity and intensity of CKDu in Nicaragua, researchers at first questioned whether the deaths could be put down to diet, toxins or dehydration, allowing sugar companies to deny any potential causal link between the disease and working conditions on the plantations. Now the science is underlining a clearer connection between heavy labour in high temperatures and incidence of CKDu. Research has shown that basic workplace improvements, such as regular access to water, rest and shade, can significantly decrease potential kidney injury among labourers.For the 2,500 field workers at Nicaragua’s largest and oldest sugar mill, Ingenio San Antonio (ISA), this is welcome news. Just five years ago, ISA was among a number of mills donating hundreds of thousands of dollars to research non-work related causes of CKD. Today ISA is at the very heart of an occupational health initiative that has the potential to substantially mitigate, if not eradicate, kidney disease among its sugar labourers.Sugar cane workers fill their water jugs and board buses at the start of their shiftsThe focus of the “Adelante” initiative is simple: to limit workers’ exposure to heat stress by introducing compulsory measures such as mandated shade, rest, water and electrolyte breaks. Data from the human rights and occupational health organisation La Isla Network, which is working with ISA to implement these interventions, found that an enhanced rest schedule and improved access to hydration and shade reduced kidney injury among labourers by 70%. The data also found that the labourers’ workload hugely matters: those with heavier loads were 12 times more likely to contract renal damage during harvest than those with a lighter load.Sugar cane workers in protective clothing arrive at the fieldsAs the global climate heats up, the potential for damage to human health increases. Research has shown that extreme heat stress can lead to fatal heart attacks and other cardiovascular fatalities, as seen by the deaths of hundreds of migrant workers every year in Qatar. In Nicaragua, while other factors such as metals, pesticides or toxins may still contribute to CKDu, “the most affected workers are those that work in very hot climates and at the same time have an enormous physical workload,” says Dr Catharina Wesseling, an epidemiologist based at the Karolinska Institute of Sweden.Sugar cane workers have their temperatures taken; bottom left, a worker has a heart rate monitor fitted and, bottom right, a temperature gauge sits in a sugar cane field“You can see sugar cane workers as a sentinel population. They are working in the hottest climates and conditions possible and at the same time their energy expenditure is comparable to half marathon runners … or to [those engaged] in military operations, only they do [this work] every day,” says Wesseling.“So the combination of those two factors causes an excessive exposure to external and internal heat, and that causes dehydration and alterations of the whole renal system, and leads, in the end, to chronic kidney disease.”Workers cutting in burned fields wear dust monitors on their chestsThe men working on ISA’s plantations used to chop as many as 7 tonnes of cane each day for seven days a week, labouring up to 14-hours a day in 38C (100.4F) heat with few, if any, breaks. Now they are working just six hours a day for six days a week, taking rest periods of between 10 and 30 minutes every hour after work begins at 6am. Labourers have also been given special wicking shirts and PPE to keep them cool and protect them from injury.“Many mills and many companies will tell you today they have some sort of ‘water and shade programme’. But having [just any] ‘intervention’ does not mean you have a sufficient intervention,” says La Isla Network’s co-founder Jason Glaser, who is leading the initiative.Workers take a rest break under the shelter of a tent“It’s no different than if you had high blood pressure and you were only taking half of your medication. If you don’t have adequate timing of rest, shade, water or electrolytes, you will not keep your core temperature down, and you will still get kidney damage.”Although CKDu was first documented among sugar cane workers in Costa Rica in the 1970s, it is likely that the “mysterious” epidemic has affected plantation labourers ever since sugar cane was first farmed in the Caribbean in the 1600s.“If you look at the death records [of slaves forced to work on sugar plantations], their mortality was much higher, much younger than if you compare them with those of slaves in other forms of forced labour,” says Glaser.Workers on ISA plantations are now provided with PPE to prevent injury as well as special wicking shirts to keep them cool“There are other stories from the 1930s of men in Nicaragua dying before their 40s of ‘exhaustion’. In India, in plantations where they only cut two tonnes of sugar cane per day, we don’t see CKDu reported; but if you compare it to the lowlands of Mesoamerica, where they cut six tonnes per day in the high heat, you do.“In every place you look that has this algorithm [of high heat combined with heavy labour] – like brickmaking, construction or mining, in Central America, south-east Asia or India or Sri Lanka – you will see it.”In Nicaragua, where sugar accounts for 4% of GDP, CKDu is officially recognised as an occupational-related illness. But to qualify for benefits and specialist healthcare – which involves haemodialysis – patients must prove they worked for 250 weeks and became sick while working. The problem is that many labourers get sick within just two or three harvests, says Glaser, leaving them without access to treatment.The people of ‘La Isla de Viudas’ meet to raise money for their community-built and maintained water system, which provides clean water to 1,500 peopleCurrently, there are no mandated, industry-wide occupational health protections for sugar cane workers. Bonsucro – the global sugar cane platform that maintains the most widely used standards for social and environmental sustainability in the industry, and which is also a founding member of the Adelante initiative – says it is a standard for all Bonsucro members (there are 135 mills in 19 countries) that field workers have access to “sufficient drinking water”. Yet what is deemed “sufficient” and what else might be “consider[ed] occupational risk such as heat stress and long working hours” must be determined by the mills themselves, says Bonsucro’s Latin America director Miguel Hernández. Over time, it may become a requirement that workers follow a specific rest schedule, dependent on the initiative’s findings, he added.The Adelante research is being logged into a database and shared with other mills and will eventually be rolled out to other countries such as Mexico and Costa Rica, say Hernández and Glaser. There is then potential that the findings could be used to improve working conditions in entirely different sectors, says Glaser, such as construction, mining and brickmaking.Maritza Zapata Gonzalez at her son Walter’s grave at Guadalupe cemetery. He died of CKDu a month ago. Maritza also lost her husband to CKDuFor communities at the heart of this epidemic, the initiative has already made a profound impact. Chichigalpa native William Martinez, who lost various uncles, cousins, friends and his father to CKDu, has watched the disease “end the dreams of entire families”. Thanks to improved working conditions at ISA, medical interventions such as dialysis and field research allowing better insight into what might cause CKDu, plantation workers are now encouraging their children to go to school rather than replace them in the fields.“The psychological damage of knowing that someone in your family is sick is also decreasing,” says Martinez. “And that is an extremely important outcome.”
Pakistan's #MeToo movement hangs in the balance over celebrity case:	It takes a lot to rattle Leena Ghani. As an artist turned activist helping to raise the voices of Pakistan’s women, she has often fielded abuse, threats and harassment.But when she learned, on a morning in late September, that police had charged her for criminal defamation, linked to Pakistan’s most high-profile #MeToo case, Ghani says she was shaken. “In terms of silencing and demonising people speaking out against sexual assault, it was a new low even for Pakistan,” she says.Ghani was not alone. Eight others were also named in the case, facing three years in jail for criminal defamation. Some only learned of their involvement through a newspaper article.Lawyers say the case has exposed how cyber defamation laws passed under the guise of protecting women from online harassment are being used instead to silence Pakistan’s victims of sexual assault.On 16 December, the authorities said there was enough evidence to take Ghani and others to trial – and the future of Pakistan’s #MeToo movement now hangs in the balance.That movement began in April 2018 after Meesha Shafi, a singer and actor who starred in The Reluctant Fundamentalist, sent out a tweet alleging sexual harassment.Shafi alleged that she had “been subjected, on more than one occasion, to sexual harassment of a physical nature” at the hands of one of Pakistan’s most beloved celebrities, Ali Zafar. Shafi wrote that by speaking out, she hoped to “break the culture of silence that permeates through our society”.Zafar denies “any and all claims of harassment lodged against me by Ms Shafi”, and so far has successfully defeated the sexual harassment claims she brought against him in court.The allegations reverberated through Pakistan’s deeply conservative Islamic society, where women speaking out against assault is rare and taboo. Because of Zafar’s popularity disbelief was rife, but dozens of women and men came out in support of Shafi on social media, including several who alleged assault by Zafar.Among them was Ghani, who said her concerns about Zafar’s treatment of women emerged after they became friends in 2014. Writing on Twitter, Ghani accused Zafar of behaviour towards her that “displays a clear lack of respect for women”, including “inappropriate contact, groping, sexual comments”.“You hide from him,” read Ghani’s post, “hoping his sleazy eyes and hands don’t find you again. His hands don’t make their way up and down your waist or hold you too tight while you desperately try to wriggle and run.”Similar accusations followed. Blogger Humna Raza alleged that Zafar had groped her at an event, while Maham Javaid, a journalist, recounted on Twitter an alleged incident where Zafar had “tried to kiss my cousin and pull my cousin into a restroom with him. Luckily, my cousin’s friends were there to push him off.”Zafar has accused Shafi of organising a social media campaign against him. According to newspaper reports, he said he could not believe that “anyone can come forward and accuse someone who is innocent and decent, has worked hard for over two decades – solely on social media”.Zafar filed a civil defamation lawsuit against Shafi, seeking a billion rupees in damages. The court accepted the lawsuit and placed a gag order on Shafi, which still prevents her from discussing the allegations in public.Over the next two and a half years, Zafar appeared on a dozen television shows to defend his name, sometimes breaking down into tears and occasionally accompanied by his wife. He alleged the accusations were a smear campaign, coordinated by a group of women who created fake accounts and were funded by foreign money. Last month, Pakistan’s president awarded Zafar the Pride of Pakistan, one of the country’s highest honours.In July 2018, Shafi also began legal proceedings, attempting to take Zafar to court for sexual harassment in the workplace. Her case was dismissed on the technicality that freelancers were not covered by the law. An appeal to the Lahore high court was unsuccessful and although her lawyers have challenged the ruling in the supreme court, the case has still not been heard.In November 2018 rumours began to swirl that Zafar had also filed criminal charges against Shafi and 25 of her online supporters and fellow accusers with the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), Pakistan’s most powerful investigating body.By July 2019, dozens of people, mainly women, who had written social media posts either making allegations about Zafar or expressing support for Shafi, began to receive notices to appear before the FIA for questioning.Ghani, Javaid and Raza were among them, as well as Iffat Omar, an actor who knew Shafi and Zafar personally. When Zafar claimed on television that the women taking Shafi’s side were being paid by the west to spread propaganda, Omar wrote “stop lying harasser” on her social media.Omar and Ghani were questioned by the FIA and both separately alleged they had been put under pressure by officers to retract their allegations against Zafar and apologise. Both refused. The senior FIA officer on the case was later suspended over a tweet which led to accusations he was being “Ali Zafar’s personal spokesperson” on social media. The FIA declined to comment on the case.At least three of the women also allege that Zafar applied “indirect harassment” through social networks. Omar says she received a “clear message from Ali Zafar that if I just apologise, everything will be better for me – and I have given him the direct answer that it is not happening.”Ghani alleges that “Zafar also tried to get to me through my family and would send cruel messages about my family’s problems through third parties. A lot of dirty tactics. He was trying to put pressure on me to apologise and I’ll admit it was scary.”But in late 2019, after she had filed a legal petition against Zafar and the FIA for harassment and Javaid had written to the senate human rights committee to complain, everything went quiet. Until September 2020, when news of the charges broke.Nine people, five women including Shafi, Ghani, Omar, Javaid and Raza, and four men, had been booked for defamation by the FIA’s cybercrime wing over the alleged social media “character assassination” of Zafar. The charges carried a three-year jail sentence.There was confusion as to why only nine had been booked in the case, when the original list had 25 names. But then, says Javaid, the penny dropped: “We realised we were the only ones who had refused to apologise to Zafar.”One of the accused, journalist Haseem uz Zaman, is facing charges for tweets that claimed “Ali Zafar harasses women”. They refuse to apologise. “That would not only harm my future and my journalistic credibility, but it would also harm every other survivor of sexual harassment who comes forward in the future,” they say. “And I could not live with that.”After news of the criminal charges broke, Ghani and the others began to face a barrage of online rape and death threats and harassment, and say they were vilified in Pakistani media.A week later, the blogger Raza created a new Twitter account and published a handwritten note retracting her allegations against Zafar and apologising for “the hurt” she had caused him and his family. Zafar shared the tweet. Raza’s name has been dropped from the case.For the women, most galling of all was the law they had been charged under. The Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act was passed in 2016 partly to protect women from online harassment, but the wing of the FIA tasked with prosecuting these cases is accused of being ineffective.Nighat Dad, Shafi’s lawyer, says she knows dozens of women who have complained to the FIA about online abuse, hate-speech, rape threats and vindictive sharing of intimate videos, but had received no response.“It’s rare the cybercrime wing will register cases lodged by women activists, and even if they do, it usually takes years for anything to happen,” says Dad. “So I was never expecting that they would be so shameless as to take action against women survivors who are speaking up.”This was not an isolated use of the law against women. When girls at the prestigious Lahore Grammar School recently alleged harassment by teachers and fellow students, several were threatened with criminal defamation, after which the accusations went quiet. At Lahore University of Management Sciences, a Facebook page for student testimonials of sexual assault was shut down with a letter threatening to report them to the FIA.“We are seeing this happen over and over,” says Dad. “The cyber laws that were enacted in the name of protecting women in Pakistan now are being misused and weaponised to silence them.”As Shafi’s lawyer, Dad claims she herself has been subjected to a “vicious smear campaign”, with newspapers making allegations that she is a foreign operative running an “illegal NGO”, unsubstantiated claims retweeted by Zafar. “They will not only try and silence victims, but anyone who tries to help victims fight for justice,” says Dad.On 15 December, the FIA presented evidence that Shafi and others in the case were “guilty” of defamation and asked for court proceedings against them to begin.Ambreen Qureshi, Zafar’s lawyer, declined to talk to the Guardian about the allegations but said “we have presented evidence to the FIA on account of which Ms Shafi and eight others are booked”. Qureshi says Shafi had failed to provide any witnesses to support her allegations. Shafi’s lawyers say she was not given the opportunity.According to Qureshi, the court documents so far show “in this case an innocent man was made a target of a criminally motivated malicious campaign by a group of closely related women.” The eight women facing charges deny any previous relationship or any campaign and say they intend to fight the case in court and push for the cyber defamation law to be repealed.Ghani says: “People keep saying #MeToo is dying in Pakistan, which is so terrible because it’s not like women are not getting harassed and assaulted and raped, but we are being silenced. We all realise that Pakistan’s #MeToo movement hinges on this case.”“The whole system is against us; Ali Zafar is a powerful man, and going to court is hard – but what can be harder than lying and living with that lie,” she adds. “I would rather go to jail.”Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
