Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
UK Covid: Priti Patel announces £800 house party fine; 1,290 further Covid-related deaths reported - as it happened:	Next week we will be introducing a new £800 fine for those attending house parties, which will double for each repeat offence to a maximum level of £6,400. These fines will apply to those who attend illegal gatherings of more than 15 people in homes. The science is clear: such irresponsible behaviour poses a significant threat to public - not only to those in attendance, but also to the wonderful police officers who attend to shut down these events. The executive today has reviewed the current restrictions and agreed that they remain an appropriate and necessary response to the serious and imminent threat posed by Covid-19. Following a detailed outline from health highlighting continuing pressures on hospitals and intensive care units and the emergence of highly-transmissible variants the executive has agreed that the restrictions will be extended for four weeks until March 5 2021. Today's vaccination data shows that yesterday was the biggest day of the UK vaccination programme so far - 363,508 people were vaccinated.  https://t.co/o46oqIKaAx That’s all from me for today. But our coverage continues on our global coronavirus live blog. It’s here. With  Boris Johnson  playing down the prospect of an early release from the lockdown, the  Covid Recovery Group , which represents Tory MPs pushing for restrictions to be lifted, has renewed its call for the measures to be eased from early March. In a statement its chairman, the Conservative MP  Mark Harper , said: Once the top four risk groups have been vaccinated and fully protected by 8 March - assuming the government hits the 15 February deadline - the government must start easing the restrictions.  Vaccinations will of course bring immunity from Covid, but they must bring immunity from lockdowns and restrictions too. Of course we must relax restrictions in a way that is proportionate and safe. The top four at-risk groups account for about 88% of deaths and about 55% of hospitalisations from Covid - that gives us a good guide to the reduction in risk and therefore a roadmap to the rollback of restrictions. Ministers must come forward now with a plan for lifting restrictions. People must see light at the end of the tunnel and feel hope for the future, and businesses need to be able to plan our recovery as more and more of the vaccinations are rolled out to the most vulnerable groups. Q: Was it a mistake to ease restrictions over Christmas given how high the death toll now? Patel  says every death is tragedy. But the government has always acted on the basis of scientific advice. That has always been the case and remains the case, she says. Q: Would you introduce fines for people who jump the queue for vaccines? Patel  says she agrees that doing this is reprehensible. All measures are kept under review, she says. And that’s it. The press conference is over. Q: Is the government considering putting new arrivals to the UK in hotels? (See  3.02pm.) Patel  says those are “speculative measures”. She says strong measures are already in place. Q: Are you disappointed that  No 10 has ruled out including police officers in the first wave of the vaccination programme? Patel  says this a decision for the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. But she says she is working on ensuring the police can be prioritised in phase two. Hewitt  says he would like to see police officers vaccinated as a priority. Q: What proportion of people are refusing to have vaccines? And are you worried about any particular group? Diwakar  says there is a huge amount of acceptance of the vaccine from people. There is a real sense of hope. There are communities with legitimate concerns about the vaccine. Black and Asian people have longstanding concerns, going back generations to when unethical experiments were carried out in the last century. He says the government will be tireless in addressing these concerns. From my colleague  Peter Walker  Unlike some of her fellow ministers,  Priti Patel  doesn't openly dodge questions. It's more than she spends five minutes making a series of apparently unconnected sentences until you're not quite sure what she meant, what the question was, or why it mattered in the first place. Q: Are there any circumstances in which the government will lift the lockdown in three weeks’ time?  Patel  says it is “far too early” to say or even speculate on when it might be possible to lift the restrictions. The priority is to make sure the most vulnerable people are vaccinated, she says. Diwakar  says he has learnt in this pandemic that you cannot look more than a few days, or a couple of weeks, ahead. So it is too early to look ahead to the lifting of lockdown, he says. Q: You seem to be blaming the public, when perhaps the rules are at fault. Should they be stronger? Patel  says the majority of the public are following the rules.  She says we have heard shocking examples of people breaking the rules. People want to know that people are being punished, she says. She says it is right that the government is doing “everything at the border” to protect the rollout of the vaccine. All measures are under review. The vaccine rollout is a “great British success story”, she says. She says it is right to protect it. Hewitt  says the police are not blaming the public. They are working with the public. But you have to focus on people breaking the rules, he says. He says he does not accept that, if 150 people attend a party, they don’t know the rules. Q: Should people be booking a foreign summer holiday? Patel  says it is far too early to speculate on what the situation will be in the summer. We are still in lockdown, she says. She says people are not allowed to travel. She says there are stringent measures at the borders for a very good reason - to protect health. Diwakar  repeats the point about there being “early glimmers of hope” from what the lockdown is achieving. Q: In  Northern Ireland  the lockdown is being extended. Will this happen in England? Patel  says it is too early to speak about new measures. The advice now is to follow the rules, she says. Diwakar  says it is very early, but there are “some glimmers” of positive news in the numbers. Hospital admissions have stabilised, he suggests. But he says that has not fed through to figures for people in intensive care beds. Q: Will there be tighter controls at the borders? Patel  says all measures are kept under review. Q: Why have the definitions of key workers being broadened to allow more children to stay in schools?  Patel  says in schools measures are in place to protect pupils and teachers.  (She does not even come close to addressing the question.) She passes this on to  Diwakar  who says a “difficult balance” must be struck. But the key point is that schools must be safe. (He obviously does not know anything about why the criteria were broadened either.) Dr Vin Diwakar , NHS England regional medical director for London, is speaking now. He talks about the new vaccination centres opening in England, including one in a mosque in Birmingham. (See  4.09pm.) He says he was horrified that  some people have been trying to jump the queue for vaccine because of an IT loophole.  That is “morally reprehensible”, he says, because it denies the vaccine to someone who needs it more. Martin Hewitt , chair of the National Police Chiefs’ Council, is speaking now. He welcomes the announcement about the new fine. He says the police have been asking for a power like this. There has been a significant increase in the number of fines issued to people breaching lockdown rules, he says. He says up to Monday 250 fines had been issued by forces in England to people attending large gatherings. He gives examples of parties the police have had to break up. Last week in Brick Lane in London, following reports from neighbours, offices attended a house party where there were more than 40 people indoors. Those people in there were hostile to the police, three officers were injured and one actually required hospital treatment. And we also found drugs on the premises. Patel  is reading out more figures from the dashboard, including the death figures. (See  4.27pm  and  4.52pm.) She says most people are obeying the rules. But some are not. She says she is announcing that from next week there will be a new £800 fine for people attending house parties. It will double for every repeat offence, going up to a maximum fine of £6,400. These fines will apply to people who attend illegal gatherings of more than 15 people in homes, she says. Patel  says she wants to counter vaccine disinformation, particularly aimed at black and minority ethnic people. She says the vaccine is safe. She would urge everyone to get it.
Electric vehicles close to ‘tipping point’ of mass adoption:	Electric vehicles are close to the “tipping point” of rapid mass adoption thanks to the plummeting cost of batteries, experts say. Global  sales rose 43% in 2020 , but even faster growth is anticipated when continuing falls in battery prices bring the price of electric cars dipping below that of equivalent petrol and diesel models, even without subsidies. The latest analyses forecast that to happen some time between 2023 and 2025. The tipping point has already been passed in Norway, where tax breaks mean electric cars are cheaper. The market share of battery-powered cars  soared to 54% in 2020  in the Nordic country, compared with less than 5% in most European nations. Transport is a major source of carbon emissions and electric cars are vital in efforts to fight the climate crisis. But, while they are already  cheaper to run , their higher purchase price is a barrier to mass uptake. The other key factor is “range anxiety”, but this week the first factory production began of  batteries capable of giving a 200-mile charge in five minutes . Government grants and tax breaks have cut the cost of electric cars in some countries, but the point when they become cheaper without subsidies is key, said James Frith, the head of energy storage at BloombergNEF: “That’s definitely an inflection point. [Then] we really see the adoption of electric vehicles taking off and real market penetration.” In 2020, 4.2% of new cars were electric. Prof Tim Lenton, at the University of Exeter, said: “There’s been a tipping point in one country, Norway, and that’s thanks to some clever and progressive tax incentives. Then consumers voted with their wallets.” Data from Lenton’s  latest study  showed that in 2019, electric vehicles in Norway were 0.3% cheaper and had 48% market share. In the UK, where electric cars were 1.3% more expensive, market share was just 1.6%. Once the line of price parity was crossed, Lenton said, “bang – sales go up. We were really struck by how non-linear the effect seems to be”. BloombergNEF’s analysis  predicts lithium-ion battery costs will fall to the extent that electric cars will match the price of petrol and diesel cars by 2023, while Lenton suggests 2024-2025. McKinsey’s  Global Energy Perspective 2021 , published on 15 January, forecasts that “electric vehicles are likely to become the most economic choice in the next five years in many parts of the world”. A  poll of 3,000 UK drivers  by the RAC, published on Thursday, shows the importance of prices, with 78% of motorists saying pure electric cars are still too expensive compared with conventional vehicles of a similar size and just 9% saying their next car would be electric. “The single biggest barrier to a driver choosing an electric car has to be cost,” said Rod Dennis of the RAC. The fall in battery prices in the past decade has been dramatic and much faster than most people predicted, Frith said. In 2010, even a small-car battery of 30kWh would have cost $30,000, far more than the total price of an equivalent fossil-fuelled car. Today, BloombegNEFs research shows the battery pack costs $4,100, thanks to a scale-up in production and cuts in material costs, such as reducing the amount of expensive cobalt required. Battery packs passed the milestone of $100/kWh in 2020 for buses in China, said Frith. But he expected further manufacturing improvements to mean this would be the average price for all vehicles in 2023, making a small-car battery cost $3,000 and electric cars the same price as their conventional counterparts. Electric cars are quieter and have faster acceleration, and rapid mass adoption will also be increased by the fact that, once motorists have one, they will not want to return to a petrol or diesel vehicle. In a recent poll of 2,000 electric car owners,  91% said they would not want to go back . “The poll shows the strong and enduring impact of switching to a clean car. The evidence in favour of electric vehicles grows more compelling with each one of our surveys, even in a year as disruptive as 2020, “ said Melanie Shufflebotham, at Zap-Map, which maps charging points. One automotive trend is moving the other direction – the rising sales of petrol-guzzling SUVs. The International Energy Agency reported earlier in January that in 2020, despite Covid-19 lockdowns cutting global emissions,  pollution from SUVs increased . Furthermore, over the past decade, SUVs were the only area among all energy-related emissions that increased in high-income nations. However, battery prices are expected to continue to plunge, suggesting even power-hungry SUVs will be going electric before long. New lithium-ion technologies being developed are creating cheaper, more energy-dense batteries, that could start being introduced mid-decade. An even more advanced technology, solid state batteries, could enter the mass market by 2030 if new manufacturing methods can be mastered, Frith said. BloombergNEF forecasts average prices of about $60/kWh at the end of the decade. “It is an incredibly exciting time,” Frith said. “We see so much innovation coming from all areas, whether industry or research, and so much money being poured in by governments and everyone, that it seems like there will be a lot of changes to come and it’ll just get more exciting.”
Kevin Lasagna and other footballers with surnames that are tasty dishes:	“Udinese have a player named Kevin Lasagna,”  notes Yuval Hyman.  “Do you know of any other players with a tasty dish as a surname?” Finding specific delicious meals in a footballer’s surname is no easy feat (or treat) but Tim Postins jumped at the opportunity to combine a few ingredients and serve up some choice dishes on the back of this question. “Adam Curry (currently on loan to Alfreton Town from Hull) would operate well with Declan Rice (West Ham 2016-present). And then there’s Mark Fish (ex-Bolton and Charlton) but only if Worthing’s striker James Lemon is putting the squeeze on. Plus the former Margate defender Paul Lamb who’d go well with a dash of Scott Mint(o). Or maybe you’d prefer a Patrick Berger with a portion of Jonas Fries?” Milton has written in with a menu that has a distinctly Mediterranean flavour. “The last name of  Víctor Espárrago , a winner of Libertadores and Intercontinental Cups, and coach of many teams in Spain, means ‘asparagus’ though it is debatable whether that counts as a tasty dish.”  If Yotam Ottolenghi’s cooking, then yes it probably does . “In Spanish there are the last names Zarza (blackberry) and Piña (pineapple) – Barcelona’s Clàudia Pina and former Mexico forward Enrique López Zarza are two examples.” If Frank Leboeuf was given a roasting he could be served up for Sunday lunch and Real Madrid’s wing-back Nacho would count as a dish if he had former Bristol City forward Paul Cheesley melted down and served up alongside him. And sticking with the cheesy theme, who can forget Massimo Maccarone at Middlesbrough? “Football Weekly posited that Erling Haaland and Alexander Sorloth may be the tallest strike partnership ever, both being 6ft 4in,”  writes Dylan Kenny.  “However, I think Jan Koller and Vratislav Lokvenc could be an even taller ‘big man, big man” duo. Did they ever play together? Is there a taller pair of forwards out there?” “It seems that Jan Koller (6ft 7 1/2in) and Vratislav Lokvenc (6ft 4in) did play together at least once – during the Czech Republic v France game at Euro 2000,” writes Nicholas Mandalos. “Lokvenc joined the fray just after half-time. I can’t be bothered to work out what overall height this gives them but I’m sure some anorak will [12 ft 11 1/2in – Knowledge Anorak Ed].” Tom Leonard thinks he can reach higher. “I’m not sure you could ever call them a ‘strike partnership’ but Peter Crouch (6ft 7in) and Nwankwo Kanu (6ft 5in) played more than a few games together at Portsmouth.” Two games together – against  Milan  and Heerenveen in the 2008-09 Uefa Cup – counts as a strike partnership in our book, Tom. Their combined height is a lofty 13ft. Can anyone take us higher? “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,”  reports Alex Crane.  “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” There are hundreds of cases of father and son playing professionally, so it’s only logical that there should be a few refereeing examples. “Scottish referee Andrew Dallas is the son of Hugh,” writes Keith Legg. “Both refereed in the Scottish top flight, so have been at all the current SPFL Premiership grounds, as well as some European and international ones too.” Chris Matterface also has a cracking tale to tell. “In 2009, Clive Oliver took charge of the League Two play-off final between Gillingham and Shrewsbury at Wembley,” he writes. “The following day his son Michael, then aged just 24, was the man in black for the League One play-off final between Millwall and Scunthorpe on the same ground. The older Oliver was arguably instrumental in Gillingham gaining promotion when he awarded a corner in the last minute from which the only goal was scored; replays showed it should actually have been a goal-kick. Mind you, as a Gills fan I am not complaining!” “A while back  there was a question and answer  about who would be Premier League champions if boxing rules were used,”  mails Michael Avilés. “Just wanted to share that I did some number-crunching and spreadsheet-reading and came up with a list of champions on a running basis. As a high-school chemistry teacher I tend to be a little familiar with number crunching, and  this  was a nice little micro-hobby to help pass time over Christmas break. A few things that jumped out at me: Manchester United never actually held the title when they won the Treble; and the game where Steven Gerrard slipped and Chelsea ended up winning also cost Liverpool the title under these rules!” “Steve Kabba has scored for Crystal Palace, Grimsby Town and Sheffield United this season,”  wrote Andy Holt way back in January 2003.  “Not counting own goals, what is the largest number of teams any player has scored for in a single season? I can’t imagine it would be many more than Steve’s achievement.” “Didn’t Tony Cottee score for four teams in four different divisions a couple of seasons ago, those being Leicester, Norwich, Millwall and Barnet,” mused Martin Smith. Although he was on the right track, Martin was wide of the mark. While Cottee  played  for four different clubs in four different divisions in 2001 (doubling up as Barnet’s hapless gaffer and steering them to relegation into non-league football for good measure), he blew his chance of making history by scoring only for Norwich and Barnet. “Cameroon international goalkeeper Fabrice Ondoa, 25, has played 44 times for his country since 2014, yet has only made a total of 38 league appearances,” writes Andrew Blackburne. “Is there anyone else who has more international caps for fewer domestic outings?” After Roma's debacle tonight, has any team ever lost a match by default after making too many substitutions before? Also, what's the shortest gap between red cards awarded for separate incidents - can anyone beat the 41s managed by Mancini and Pau Lopez tonight? “Some years ago I read a newspaper story of an ill-disciplined non-league team the rest of teams in the league refused to play, therefore allowing them to claim all points. As a result they were promoted and no longer a problem for the division. Any thoughts on who this was?” asks Chris Davis. @TheKnowledge_GU   @oilysailor  who was the oldest u21 international cap? Surely someone played at age 23 and 364 days. “With Tom Cairney not getting game time, Joachim Andersen is currently captaining Fulham,” writes Jim Miles. “Has there ever been an occasion where a loanee was the full-time captain?” Newport vs Brighton ended at 10.30pm last Sunday, surely the latest a match has ever ended on that day. But what's the latest in the evening a domestic match in the UK has ever finished? “A work colleague alerted me to the fact that Obafemi Martins is still playing, and while verifying this by checking his Wikipedia page, I noticed Martins only played six times for Birmingham and yet scored one cup final winner (the 89th-minute gift in the 2011 League Cup final). He featured in about seven minutes of League Cup action for Birmingham and scored the competition-winning goal. Can anyone boast such an impressive games- or minutes-to-cup-final-winning goal ratios?” wonders Michael Pilcher. One for  @TheKnowledge_GU , surely there can't have been many goals scored directly from a goal kick in England's top four divisions? @TheKnowledge_GU  Brazil have never won the World Cup when they have been drawn in the group stages with Scotland (1974, 1982, 1990 & 1998). Can any other pairing of countries beat this? •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Biden and Harris dress to reassure that normal service is restored:	There were a number of concerns about what might happen at the 59th presidential inauguration, but what  Joe Biden  would wear was never one of them. With reassuring predictability, he was sworn in as the 46th US president wearing a navy blue, single-breasted suit by that most wholesomely all-American of designers, Ralph Lauren. In contrast to his predecessor’s erratic approach to proportions, it fitted him perfectly. His sky blue tie was of a normal length. The message: normal service is restored to the White House.  The optics of this inauguration were serene, respectful and quietly joyous. Biden and his vice-president,  Kamala Harris , the rock stars of the hour, presented as humble public servants, not as celebrities. They dressed to reassure that their administration would serve all of America, instead of revolving around the attention-seeking theatrics of individual politicians. “Today we celebrate the triumph not of a candidate but of the cause of democracy,” the president said. A capital city in semi-lockdown, in a country where Covid-19 has claimed 400,000 lives, is no place for a catwalk show. American designers who were asked to submit inauguration day sketches and suggestions for Harris and the first lady,  Jill Biden , were told that neither woman wished to convey a “fashion” message. Instead, both chose to promote independent, purpose-driven American brands. The vice-president chose a purple coat and dress ensemble by two black American fashion designers, Christopher John Rogers and Sergio Hudson, for her big moment.  Rogers, who is from Louisiana and based in Brooklyn, is just 27. He was named the American Emerging Designer of the Year at last year’s CFDA fashion awards. He declared his team “honoured and humbled to have played a small part in this historic moment”. Hudson, who is based in Los Angeles, also designed Michelle Obama’s claret suit for the occasion. While both the president and the first-ever “second gentleman”, Doug Emhoff, wore Ralph Lauren, the women in the spotlight chose instead to promote small labels.  Jill Biden wore an ocean-blue tweed coat and matching dress designed by Alexandra O’Neill, whose Markarian brand, established in 2017, makes clothes to order to minimise wastage, with production taking place in New York City. O’Neill told Womenswear Daily that her six-strong team had been “all hands on deck” since December to create the pearl- and crystal-embellished two-piece look. It was not until Jill Biden appeared in front of the cameras on the morning of the ceremony that she knew her design had made the final cut. Harris also wore her signature pearls, an accessory with a classic heritage in the iconography of Washington power dressing. They have been favoured by first ladies Jackie Kennedy and Michelle Obama, but have personal significance for Harris as a symbol of solidarity with Alpha Kappa Alpha, the first black Greek-letter sorority, whose members are each given a badge decorated with pearls upon initiation. The stand-out colour of the day was not Democratic blue, but purple. The theme of the inauguration was “America United”, and purple – which represents common ground between red and blue on the colour wheel – was a visual flag for the message of unity, which featured repeatedly in Biden’s speech. The vice-president’s choice of a purple two-piece, with tonal blueberry leather gloves, was echoed in Hillary Clinton’s vibrant purple outfit. Laura Bush’s decision to join Jill Biden and Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, in wearing blue could be seen as another nod to bipartisan symbolism. It was left to the performers to bring the glamour, which they did in some style. The joy and relief felt by many of the audience watching the ceremony around the world found expression in the sunshine yellow jacket, scarlet silk Prada headband and diamante-studded mask worn by the young poet Amanda Gorman. Lady Gaga wore a red silk ballgown skirt of fairytale proportions, and a gilded peace dove on her fitted navy jacket. Lady Gaga’s look was custom-made by the avant-garde Paris fashion house Schiaparelli, currently designed by an American, Daniel Roseberry. Roseberry called the ensemble “a love letter to the country I miss so dearly”. Jennifer Lopez wore diamond-white Chanel, while Garth Brooks rocked blue jeans and a stetson. The internet also enjoyed Bernie Sanders’ parka and knitted mittens, which was dubbed “Vermont dadcore”. Sanders   explained his clothing choices to CBS News. “You know, in Vermont, we know something about the cold,” he said. “We’re not so concerned about good fashion. We want to keep warm.” The morning departure of the Trumps stood in stark contrast. None of his family wore masks for their appearance. (The inauguration was conscientiously masked up.) Melania Trump looked, as ever, like an ice-sculpture of a first lady – one so frosty that she has not melted, even in four years.  Her clothes were all-black, staggeringly expensive, and pointedly non-American. Her jacket was by Chanel, her dress Dolce & Gabbana, her shoes Christian Louboutin. The crocodile Hermes Birkin that she carried has a price tag of about £30,000. When the couple arrived in Florida, Melania had changed into a more relaxed ensemble – a colourful Gucci kaftan.  For the Covid memorial on inauguration eve, Harris wore a camel coat by Kerby Jean-Raymond of Pyer Moss, a black designer who last year transformed his New York studio into a donation centre and led fundraising for minority and female-owned small businesses hit by the pandemic. At that event, Jill Biden wore a mulberry coat, amethyst gloves and matching mask by the independent New York designer Jonathan Cohen. Cohen is a pioneer of upcycling, and the mask, and the lining of the coat, were made from past seasons’ fabric remnants.
‘Arm yourself with facts’: four ways to help convince your parents to ditch the dairy:	We are gathered here today to say goodbye to your parents’ milk dependency. But as your parents may have mentioned when thinking about your early years, weaning can be a slog. The tantrums, the suspicious looks, the flat-out rejection. Patience and a steely will are key, as is an ability to remain calm and stay focused on the end goal. But, as with a baby tentatively tasting their first stewed apple or mashed sweet potato and cooing with satisfaction, watching your parents experiment with a vegan lifestyle can be exciting beyond your wildest dreams. Perhaps you’ve caught them eyeing your dairy-alt latte and sneaking a cheeky bite of your jackfruit bolognese. Or you’ve walked into the room to find them scrolling through vegan recipe ideas on Pinterest, and you’re sure your oat drink is mysteriously disappearing from the fridge faster than usual. You’re not a preachy kind of vegan, but you know the diet works for you. You’ve done all your homework about the nutritional balance that it’s important to find. And you’re very clued up on the environmental and ethical arguments. But how do you know if your parents are really ready? And what’s the best way to approach getting them on board? Here’s your handy guide to weaning your parents off dairy … Be responsive to their cues  Nobody likes being caught off-guard or, worse still, ambushed. Your job, first, is to observe your parents. Have they just finished a work call and emerged from “the office” (the spare room) looking flushed and scowling? Not a good time. Or returned from the shops empty-handed because they forgot their face covering? Back away slowly. Instead, maybe the weekend is a better time. Offer to make them a latte while you’re making yours. Or better yet, don’t even ask. Just quietly place a beautifully foamed hot drink in front of your dad while he’s reading the paper. Even the most die-hard dairy lover would find it difficult to refuse something lovingly prepared by their offspring. Arm yourself with the facts   Before your parents weaned you as a baby, they read books, they researched, they asked others for advice. Now it’s your turn to take the same approach with them. It won’t help your cause if you’re not confident when they quiz you on fortification and you draw a blank. And speaking of vitamins and minerals, some dairy-alt drinks are fortified with important nutrients such as vitamins D and B12, iodine and calcium, but some aren’t. If you’re vegan you can sometimes miss out on certain nutrients, particularly iodine and B12. So make sure you read labels and choose a plant-based drink that’s fortified – interestingly, organic plant-based drinks tend not to be. Why? “Because fortification is not generally thought of as organic,” says nutritionist Dr Harriet Holme. “Lots of people think that organic is better, but organic plant-based drinks are not fortified with calcium. A lot of the range from Oatly has calcium in it, but iodine has recently been added too.” According to Holme, if you eat dairy, fish and eggs you’re pretty much sorted for iodine, but as a vegan your sources are limited. Vitamin D is another big one, not just for vegans but everyone, especially in the winter months. Foods fortified with this essential vitamin use either vitamin D2 or D3 but,  according to the Vegan Society , vitamin D3 is sometimes derived from an animal source such as sheep’s wool. So check food and drink labels to be sure. Are your vegans-in-training likely to quiz you at this level of detail? Maybe not, but you never know. Assure them veganism is a real thing Humans are curious by nature, and your parents are no different. So all this talk about veganism is likely to have caught their attention – even if they’re still a little unsure about it all. Point them in the direction of a  survey  by finder.com, which shows that the number of vegans in the UK is estimated to have increased by 419,000 (62%) in the past year – if this doesn’t convince them that veganism is a real thing, we don’t know what will. Teach them how to make the perfect dairy-alt hot drink Keep in mind that your parents are new to this, so help them get to grips with the art of making the perfect dairy-alt hot drink. Often, a lovely cup of coffee or tea can be ruined by the separation that can happen when plant-based drink is added to a piping-hot cuppa. This will cause an unnecessary setback to your mission, so do your research before you start – word on the street is that oat- and hemp-based drinks don’t tend to curdle. And now that you’re armed with all the knowledge in the world, there’s a good chance that before long your parents won’t even give dairy a second glance when they’re doing the weekly shop. Good luck! Need help talking to dad about plant-based drinks? Visit  oatly.com/helpdad
Morocco detects first case of UK variant – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Morocco ’s health ministry confirmed its first imported case of the more contagious variant of coronavirus first discovered in the UK. The variant was detected in the northern port of Tangier in a Moroccan national returning from Ireland via Marseille, the ministry said in a statement. Morocco has announced plans to launch a free vaccination campaign targeting 25 million people, or 80% of its population. The country ordered 66m vaccine doses from AstraZeneca and China’s Sinopharm. It has not yet received any. On 23 December, Morocco imposed a nationwide four-week curfew from 9pm to 6am to contain the virus. On Monday, the country said it has recorded a total of 460,144 coronavirus infections, including 7,977 deaths and 16,481 active cases. Health experts have raised concerns over new highly-transmissible mutations of the virus first reported in the UK and South  Africa  and now cropping up in several other countries. A third new variant has since been reported in Brazil. Donald Trump, the US president, has rescinded entry bans imposed because of coronavirus on most non- US  citizens arriving from  Brazil  and much of  Europe , including the  UK , effective 26 January, two officials briefed on the matter told Reuters. The restrictions are set to end on the same day that new Covid-19 test requirements take effect for all international visitors. Joe Biden, the president-elect, once in office could opt to reimpose the restrictions.  Rio de Janeiro  has kicked off its coronavirus vaccination campaign with what is likely to prove the most breathtaking immunisation launch ceremony on earth. Two Brazilian women, aged 80 and 59, received their first shot of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine at the feet of Rio’s Christ the Redeemer statue at dusk on Monday. The  spectacular televised event  on Corcovado mountain was attended by Rio’s media-savvy mayor, Eduardo Paes, and state governor Cláudio Castro. Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro – who is from Rio but has repeatedly undermined containment measures and vaccination and has attacked the Chinese vaccine – was a notable absence. Rio is one of the Brazilian states worst-hit by Covid-19, having registered more than 27,000 of Brazil’s 209,000 deaths. If the beachside state capital was a country, it would have one of the worst national Covid death rates. Ahead of the ceremony Paes, who took office early this month, tried to strike a positive note. “The start of vaccination is not the end of the pandemic but it is a light at the end of the tunnel,” he  tweeted , urging residents to continue wearing masks and respecting containment measures. Vaccination began in Brazil on Sunday after the country’s health regulator approved the emergency use of vaccines produced by China’s Sinovac and Oxford/AstraZeneca. More than 37,000 people with a symptomless Covid-19 infection have been detected through rapid lateral flow testing in the  UK , the chief medical adviser for NHS Test and Trace has said. Dr Susan Hopkins said the devices, which can give results in less than 30 minutes, were being rolled out across the country to enable those with no coronavirus symptoms to be tested. Lateral flow tests are regularly used by NHS staff and were the main method of testing during a mass pilot scheme in Liverpool, but some experts have questioned their accuracy. Dr Hopkins was asked at a Downing Street press briefing on Monday about the availability of the devices for teachers and supermarket workers who are yet to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. She said: “We are rolling out lateral flow devices throughout the country through community testing sites and also in workplaces to allow people to get tested where they are asymptomatic to reduce the spread of disease. “We’ve detected more than 37,000 individuals through lateral flow tests over the last number of weeks and we will continue to roll them out rapidly as an additional tool to help get this virus under control.” A new variant of the coronavirus first identified in  South Africa  is more contagious than earlier versions, experts said, but there is no evidence that it is more deadly. The new variant is 50% more contagious, said epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim, co-chair of the health ministry’s scientific committee. “There is no evidence the new Covid variant is more severe than the original variant,” he added. The experts drew their conclusions about the variant – now the dominant strain in South  Africa  – from an analysis of data collected from the main infection clusters across the country. With more than 1.3 million people infected, South Africa has recorded more cases than any other country on the continent and has also suffered more deaths, with 37,105 registered. The second wave of the virus has stretched South Africa’s health system to its limits. Health minister Zweli Mkhize on Monday said there had been a 23% fall in infections, but that the number of hospital admissions was up by 18.3% on the previous week. Dr Waasila Jassat, another member of the expert panel, said that even though admissions were up, the death rate from the virus in hospitals had not changed from the first wave of the virus. Brazil  on Monday reported 23,671 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the new total to 8,511,770, the country’s health ministry said. Deaths rose by 452 to 210,299 in Brazil, which has the world’s highest death toll from the pandemic outside the US.  Mexican  president Andrés Manuel López Obrador said the government aimed to compensate for a reduction in deliveries of Covid-19 vaccine doses from Pfizer Inc with those from other providers. The World Health Organization (WHO) said it was in advanced talks with Pfizer about including its vaccine in the agency’s portfolio of shots to be shared with poorer countries. Mexico had been expecting weekly deliveries of some 400,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine developed with Germany’s BioNTech SE. As a result of the US drugmaker’s WHO agreements, Mexico would for now only be receiving half that, López Obrador told a news conference. It was not clear how long the reduction would last. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is currently the only one being administered in Mexico, which has reported the fourth-highest death toll from the pandemic worldwide. Mexico has also signed deals to acquire vaccines from Britain’s AstraZeneca Plc and China’s CanSino Biologics. The country has approved the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot and expects to have it by March. It is still reviewing the CanSino vaccine. It is due to make the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and foreign minister Marcelo Ebrard said on Twitter that the active ingredient would on Monday be sent to Mexico from Argentina, allowing manufacturers to start the final packaging process. Mexico said it also expects to approve the Sputnik V vaccine for use soon, though it is likely to acquire fewer doses than it had previously suggested. Brazil’s  health minister Eduardo Pazuello said a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in the Amazonian city of Manaus was not tied to a new variant of the virus, and was instead the same coronavirus that caused the first wave of the disease.  Manaus has made headlines in recent days for its high death rate and a shortage of oxygen tanks for patients who develop severe cases of Covid-19. 
Brazil records 1,340 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  McKesson will replace some Moderna Covid-19 vaccines in the United States after they arrived colder than the low end of the required temperature range, Reuters reports. The company, which is the US distributor of Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccines, said some of the gel packs used to maintain appropriate temperatures during shipping on Sunday were too cold and it also impacted some shipments slated for Monday. Moderna expects to supply about 100m doses to the US by the end of the first quarter, with 200m doses in total by the end of the second quarter. McKesson, which did not provide the number of doses affected by the temperature issue, said it had not shipped the vaccines and would replace them within the next 24 hours. The doses are currently quarantined, waiting for a determination on whether they are viable, the company said. McKesson coordinated with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to notify each state expecting the shipments of the delay, the company said. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Oxford scientists are preparing to rapidly produce new versions of their vaccine to combat emerging more contagious Covid-19 variants  discovered in the UK, South Africa and Brazil,  The Telegraph has reported . The team behind the vaccine from Oxford and AstraZeneca is undertaking feasibility studies to reconfigure the technology, the newspaper said, citing a confirmation from the Oxford University. A university spokesman told the newspaper that Oxford is carefully assessing the impact of new variants on vaccine immunity and evaluating the processes needed for rapid development of adjusted Covid-19 vaccines. Separately, British prime minister Boris Johnson said on Wednesday that the nation’s medicines regulator will be ready and able to give approval to new versions of Covid-19 vaccines designed to counter new variants of the coronavirus that may appear. Brazil has registered 1,340 new coronavirus deaths , bringing the country’s total to 212,831. It has also registered 64,385 new cases of the disease, which now total 8,638,249.  Brazil’s foreign minister, Ernesto Araujo, said he still could not provide a timeline of when new coronavirus vaccine doses would arrive from India and China, raising concern in a country that is lagging behind others in vaccinating its people, Reuters reports. The World Health Organization (WHO) plans to approve several Covid-19 vaccines from Western and Chinese manufacturers in the coming weeks and months , a document published on Wednesday shows, as it aims for rapid rollouts in poorer countries. Covax, a global scheme co-led by the WHO, wants to deliver at least 2bn Covid-19 doses across the world this year, with at least 1.3bn going to poorer countries. But it has so far struggled to secure enough shots due to a shortage of funds, while wealthy nations have secured large volumes of vaccines for themselves. In the race to deploy vaccinations, regulatory approvals are key to confirming the effectiveness and safety of vaccines, and to boosting output. But some poorer countries rely mostly on WHO authorisations as they have limited regulatory capacity. The WHO is therefore “expediting” emergency approvals, according to a Covax internal document seen by Reuters. The Covid-19 vaccine developed by  AstraZeneca  and manufactured by the  Serum Institute of India  (SII) could be authorised by the WHO in January or February, the document says. The same vaccine produced in  South Korea  by  SK Bioscience  could be approved by the UN agency in the second half of February at the earliest, a provisional calendar published by the WHO on Wednesday shows. As well as vaccines, regulators usually authorise their manufacturing processes in different plants. Covax has supply contracts with AstraZeneca and SII for about 400m doses and an option for many more hundreds of millions, although the timing of deliveries is uncertain. Nobody should panic about getting access to a Covid-19 vaccine because everyone who wants one will get one , the World Health Organization said. AFP reports: The WHO’s assistant director general for access to medicines, vaccines and pharmaceuticals, Mariangela Simao, said the UN health agency was working towards ensuring access to coronavirus jabs all around the world. “No one needs to panic, because you’re going to get a vaccine,” said Simao. “We’ve been working very hard to ensure that all countries, all populations, do have the opportunity to access these vaccines.” Simao said that around 50 countries have started vaccination campaigns, with more than 40 of them being high-income states. The WHO co-led Covax facility, a globally-pooled vaccine procurement and distribution effort, has struck agreements with five manufacturers for two billion vaccine doses. It aims to secure vaccines for 20% of the population in each participating country by the end of the year, with funding covered for the 92 lower- and lower-middle income economies involved. “We are expecting to have the first doses reaching countries end of February,” Simao said. Amazon has offered to help with the Covid-19 vaccine efforts in the United States , according to a letter addressed to president Joe Biden, seen by Reuters. The world’s largest online retailer has an agreement with a healthcare provider to administer vaccines at its facilities, Dave Clark, chief executive of Amazon’s worldwide consumer business, said in the letter.  He added, “We are prepared to leverage our operations, information technology, and communications capabilities and expertise to assist your administration’s vaccination efforts.” Syria’s White Helmets , who rescue victims from the rubble of airstrikes, have added making personal protective equipment to their efforts saving lives in areas of the country outside Bashar al-Assad’s control. The civil defence service’s uniform-making unit has recently pivoted to manufacturing PPE with the help of a £920,000 award from a nonprofit organisation funded by the UK, US and Dutch governments. The local facility has already produced more than 2m masks, as well as protective gowns and face shields, and is handling the safe disposal of used PPE for north-west Syria’s  vulnerable population  of more than 3 million people. “The Covid-19 pandemic was the most difficult challenge the White Helmets faced in 2020. We witnessed the spread of the virus in north-western  Syria  among humanitarian workers and medical personnel while the global pandemic made cross-borders logistics almost impossible,” said Munir Mustafa, the White Helmets’ deputy general manager for humanitarian affairs. While doctors and humanitarian workers in Syria are still working at great personal risk to respond to and treat the disease, with the help of  Creating Hope in Conflict: a Humanitarian Grand Challenge , the White Helmets have been able to scale up community efforts to keep people safe from coronavirus. “Our volunteers and fellow humanitarians, healthcare providers, and other essential workers are safer now [thanks to the project] and can together continue caring for Syrian civilians and responding to the pandemic,” Mustafa added. Dubai has ordered hospitals to cancel non-essential surgery for the next month after a surge in coronavirus cases in the Middle East’s tourism and business hub, Reuters reports.  Health authorities said the decision, which takes effect on Thursday and could be extended in a month’s time, aims to ensure preparedness of health facilities to manage Covid-19 cases. The daily number of infections in the United Arab Emirates, which includes Dubai, crossed the 3,000 threshold on 12 January and has continued to climb, hitting 3,506 on Wednesday. It is the highest in the Gulf Arab region where daily cases in each of the other five states have fallen below 500. Visitors have flocked to international travel hub Dubai, as other countries imposed new lockdowns. The UAE has lifted most coronavirus restrictions but mask-wearing in public and social distancing are still required. Britain this month removed the UAE from its travel corridors list due to the rise in infections. Guardian reporters Archie Bland and Matthew Weaver looked into the flock of UK social media influencers who have headed to Dubai in recent weeks while their home country remains in lockdown, with the writer Clive Martin describing the hotspot as “the Covid Casablanca”.  Here is a quick re-cap of the key Covid-related events around the world: Some good news, as the Associated Press reports: Zélia de Carvalho Morley (106) rolled up a sleeve and looked stoically to the side as a nurse slid in a Covid-19 shot. She was one of thousands in Brazil to get the shot on Wednesday, but one of very few old enough to recall an earlier viral pandemic that swept her nation and the world a century ago. Born in  Rio de Janeiro  in 1914, Morley was a girl when the so-called Spanish flu killed millions around the world in 1918-1920, when no vaccines were available.  The French health ministry reported 26,784 new confirmed Covid cases over the past 24 hours, up from 23,608 on Tuesday and 23,852 last Wednesday. Wednesday’s tally was the highest since the 28,383 registered on 18 November, during  France ’s second lockdown, Reuters reports.  Spain  logged another record number of new infections on Wednesday afternoon, recording 41,576 new cases in the preceding 24 hours and bringing the country’s total caseload to 2,412,318. It also recorded 464 deaths. The new record came five days after the previous single-day high of 40,197 new cases.  The number of cases per 100,000 people also rose from 714 on Tuesday to 736 on Wednesday. To date, the central government has distributed 1,346,100 doses of the vaccine to the country’s 17 self-governing regions, of which 1,025,937 have been administered, meaning that around 2% of the country’s 47 million people have been vaccinated.  On Wednesday, the regional health minister in  Murcia , southeastern Spain, resigned after it emerged that he, his wife, and around 400 staff in the health department had been vaccinated despite the current round of vaccinations being intended for the staff and residents of care homes, and for frontline health workers. Health authorities in  Madrid  have started mass testing hundreds of young people for Covid-19 at universities in a bid to detect asymptomatic carriers. With the country in the grip of a third wave of infection, authorities called on young people to attend makeshift medical centres at nine university campuses to take a rapid antigen test, Reuters reports.
Grave matter: Germans seek new ways to talk about dying:	O n a plane tree-lined shopping street in Berlin’s fashionable Gräfekiez neighbourhood, two children are glued to the front of a brightly lit ground-floor office space, decorated with the understated minimalism of a design agency. The object of their curiosity is a Lego window display, showing a miniature cemetery and a coffin carried by four tiny pallbearers, complete with black top hats. “I love this”, says their mother as Birgit Scheffler, the co-owner of funeral home Das Fährhaus (The Ferry House), steps out of building’s front door. “It would be nice if death becomes less of a taboo for my kids’ generation than it was for my own.” Das Fährhaus’ inviting exterior is a deliberate contrast to traditional funeral parlours, who usually have “blacked out windows or drawn blinds, and maybe a dead fly lying on the window sill”, as Scheffler put it. Specialising in alternative or bespoke funerals, her undertaker’s business is one of several ventures that are currently brightening up a German way of death that used to be considered one of the gloomiest, most ritualised and rigidly regulated in  Europe . “In postwar  Germany , our grief culture was shaped by the legacy of the two wars”, said Scheffler, 43, who used to work in marketing and distribution for a media company before retraining in 2017. “In a culture that was focused on building something new from the ruins, death was pushed aside.” The psychoanalyst couple Margarete and Alexander Mitscherlich famously diagnosed Germany with an “inability to mourn”, a phrase that was amplified by the 1968 student movement and has since echoed through the country’s postwar history. Coronavirus, however, is proving a catalyst for a new way of talking about mortality. “Death is suddenly at the centre of our lives”, Scheffler said. “The first thing many of us do when we wake up is look at the number of people who have died in the last 24 hours.” A national conversation about dying has captured the radio waves and television screens. In My Perfect Funeral, a critically acclaimed new series for radio broadcaster Deutschlandfunk, interviewees describe how they want to be put six feet under. Netflix’s recent  The Last Word , meanwhile, stars German comedy star Anke Engelke as a widow who reinvents herself as a eulogy speaker. “There is no wrong way to mourn”, says Engelke’s voiceover in the concluding episode. “Death is only terrible if you take it seriously.” Scheffler and her co-owner Sahra Ratgeber opened Das Fährhaus in August, at a time when neighbouring shops were struggling with social distancing requirements and losses incurred during the spring lockdown. New hygiene rules have also proved a burden for undertakers, limiting the number of people allowed to attend funerals and requiring embalmers to wear additional PPE. Open-casket funerals have been banned; the bodies of those who have died of or with Covid-19 are buried in body bags. Yet among bereaved families the lockdown has inspired creative new ways to send off the departed. This year, Das Fährhaus has organised a funeral in which mourners were allocated time slots to adorn the grave with painted stones rather than the conventional flowers. At another, family and friends dropped chocolate bars rather than sand onto the coffin of a deceased chocaholic. Her business offers mourners the opportunity to build their own coffin or work with a ceramicist to make a bespoke urn. “The more elements of the funeral relatives or friends can create themselves, the better.” Increasingly, she said, people were getting in touch to put down specific instructions for their own funeral in writing: one woman dreamt of being buried in her wedding dress, a composer wanted to make sure some of her works were burned alongside her. A heightened sense of one’s own perceived uniqueness may be associated with the much-derided “snowflake generation” of the 2010s, but Scheffler said she has noticed a change across all ages. “Even people in their 70s and 80s are becoming more creative.” Outside the German capital, with its high tolerance threshold for alternative lifestyles, more traditional last rites still prevail, said Louise Brown, who presents the My Perfect Funeral podcast. A Hamburg-based journalist for print and radio, Brown has since 2015 also worked as a  Trauerrednerin , a freelance “mourning speaker” for those who don’t want a eulogy to be spoken by the clergy. While the tradition of such “free speakers” goes back to the free religious movement of the 19th century, other aspects of the typical German funeral remain unusually heavily steeped in tradition. The country is one of the few in the world where coffins or urns must be buried in a cemetery, the so-called  Friedhofszwang,  and where scattering the ashes of the cremated or dividing them between family members is banned. “Most Germans still have a small-c conservative attitude to death”, said Brown, 45, a dual British-German citizen. “The organ music at the start of the funeral, the church bells on the walk to the grave: to many people these rituals still matter”. What was changing, she said, was the bandwidth of what could be said in a eulogy: “People want more personalised speeches, and they no longer want me to skirt around the conflicts and the difficult phases in a person’s life.” Interviewing family and friends in preparation for her speeches, said Brown, was like leafing through a photo album: “Often the funniest, most honest and authentic pictures are filed loosely near the back pages. The pictures that were taken on the fringes of the official photo session on a holiday, after an award ceremony or a 50th birthday. The pictures no one tried to pose for, the ones we thought were too blurry or out of focus. In a funeral speech, these are often the images that the bereaved most identify with.” The pandemic has also constrained the jobs of mourning speakers, forbidding not only communal singing but also the customary post-funeral meet-up over coffee, which Brown says can be more important than the funeral itself. “After the body has been laid to rest, there is usually a moment where the bereaved are both still very vulnerable and very open with each other. The intimacy of these gatherings isn’t something that you can recreate in a Zoom call.” In times of Covid-19 families are increasingly opting for cremations, in the hope they can postpone the communal get-together until after the pandemic is over (urns, unlike coffins, can be put into storage for up to six weeks): according to Germany’s national association of undertaker’s, cremations now make up 70% of all funerals. But even before Germany’s severe second wave and the ensuing Christmas lockdown squashed hopes of get-togethers in the near future, many had started looking for alternative new rituals. Graphic artist Anemone Zeim started her “remembrance workshop” Vergiss Mein Nie (Forget Me Never) seven years ago, helping bereaved people to come up with creative projects that conserve memories of their lost ones: films cut together from old Super 8 footage, scarves recycled from a late grandmother’s favourite jumper, or lampshades patterned with a deceased friend’s handwriting. “You can’t solve your grief with a checklist”, said Zeim. “You need to get creative to find individual solutions. You need to use your hands to stop you getting trapped in your brain. That’s what we help with.” In recent months, requests for her agency’s services have doubled, with emails flooding in not just from the Hamburg area where her business is based, but from across Germany, Austria and Switzerland. So-called “grieving tools” sold via Forget Me Never’s website, such as funeral cards, an “anger capsule” for writing down unresolved feelings towards the deceased, or “flower tears” containing bulbs and a clump of soil, have been in high demand. “We’ve been working flat out”, said Zeim, “not necessarily because more people have died because of coronavirus but because people who have suffered a loss have been shacked up in their own four walls. There are advantages to that too: you don’t have to deal with the social stigma of grieving in public. But the danger is that you can become wrapped up in your sorrow.” Zeim said she expected demand to keep on rising in the new year. “The process of mourning can take months or years, and not just individuals can mourn, but societies too. We as a society are already grieving for the toll that this pandemic has taken of us. We just haven’t realised yet.”
Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
Sri Lanka v England: second Test, day two – live!:	8th over: England 8-2 (Bairstow 1, Root 2)  In all three innings of this series, Zak Crawley and Dom Sibley have been dismissed in single figures by Embuldeniya. Crawley’s defensive shot did have a bit of curtain rail about it, but it was still a very good bit of bowling from Embuldeniya. “Poor Sibley has made 4, 2 and 0,” writes OBO maestro Tim de Lisle, “so in his next innings we can be fairly sure he’ll get minus 2.”  And Crawley has made 9, 8 and 5, so I think he’s on for a duck next time. Max Fischer will confirm.  Yeah, England are well and truly in the malodorous stuff. Crawley pushes defensively at a fine delivery that straightens sharply to take the edge, and Thirimanne takes a comfortable catch at slip. 7th over: England 5-1 (Crawley 5, Bairstow 0)  Another quiet over from Lakmal, who is bowling almost everything in Geoff Boycott’s corridor. I doubt it will be long before we see Dilruwan Perera at this end. “Hurrah!” says John Starbuck. “The Gimp is back (in the second over) but not with his mask. In these times, is that wholly wise?” You say that, but don’t those masks have mouth holes for t- no, let’s not do this. 6th over: England 4-1 (Crawley 4, Bairstow 0)  That’s six runs in three innings for Sibley - and, crucially, he has fallen to the left-arm spin of Embuldeniya on each occasion. There is some good news in that Ravi Jadeja could be out of the upcoming series in India, but his problems with left-arm spin are a worry.  Bairstow almost goes for a duck as well, edging Embuldeniya just short of gully. Scoreboard pressure + Embuldeniya = oh dear. Dom Sibley goes for a duck! He went right back to a delivery that skidded on to hit the flap of the pad in front of middle and leg. It was given out on the field and, though Sibley reviewed, replays showed it was hitting the bails. England lose a review, and an opener. 5th over: England 4-0 (Crawley 4, Sibley 0)  Crawley gets off the mark with an elegant, disdainful pull stroke for four off Lakmal. On Sky, Bumble cites the pulling of Michael Vaughan in Australia - the exact point made by Wisden.com alumnus Jonathan Hungin this time last year. Crawley has the perfect game to make runs in Australia. “It’s probably fantastical,” says Niall Mullen, “but is Murali too far in the distance?” Well, look, I’d probably need to get a call-up before my 50th birthday, but I have been turning it in the back g- oh, you mean Jimmy Anderson. I’d say it’s almost impossible, though  I quite fancy him to overtake Shane Warne . 4th over: England 0-0 (Crawley 0, Sibley 0)  Sibley blocks his way through another over from Embuldeniya. It’s been a (very) slow but sensible start from England.  “Is this the start of some kind of valedictory lap from Anderson, righting the (few) wrongs of his career?” says Matt Dony. “‘Well, I’ve never really monstered a Test in Sri Lanka. Better take a bunch of wickets.’ And, through skill and will, he’s done it. Ridiculous.” He’s 38 years old. It’s not normal, this. In this series he’s taken six wickets at an average of 6.66. If I could be bothered, I’d tap my nose.  3rd over: England 0-0 (Crawley 0, Sibley 0)  Crawley is beaten by a wide delivery from Lakmal that keeps slightly low. Another maiden, the third in a row, and you know what that means. 2nd over: England 0-0 (Crawley 0, Sibley 0)  Lasith Embuldeniya, who dismissed England’s openers in both innings of the first Test, unsurprisingly shares the new ball. He has a slip and short leg for Sibley. There shouldn’t be much spin at that stage, so the threat is psychological more than anything. Sibley ignores the Chimp, Gimp or whatever you call the voice in your head, and plays out another maiden.  “After THAT set of figures, can we please knock all this ‘Jimmy is past it’ talk on the head,” says Nico Bentley. “The man will be able to come off five paces when he is 58 and still walk into any county side. Line and length, line and length. Long may he continue.” Was there any such talk? If so, it didn’t reach me –I’ve only really heard excitement at the prospect of him taking Test wickets in his forties. 1st over: England 0-0 (Crawley 0, Sibley 0)  The returning Suranga Lakmal will open the bowling. Chaminda Vaas is the only fast bowler to take more Test wickets for Sri Lanka, so he knows which end to hold the ball. There’s some gentle outswing to Crawley, who watches a couple of deliveries go by and then blocks the straight ones. A maiden. “Last time England’s seamers got all 10 wickets in Sri Lanka it was a nod to football with a 4-4-2 share,” says Phil Russell. “With it being 6-3-1 this time I’m wondering if it is a specific nod to Steve Bruce?” Arf. If so, aren’t they a week too late?  “Good morning Rob!”  says Jack Green. “I find it strange no one ever mentions having a different balance to the team. The best England team of my lifetime was the Strauss era with Bell @ 6, Prior 7, a spinner and 3 x pace. We will get destroyed by both India & Australia if we don’t get huge runs and that’s very difficult with your keeper @ 6. Scoreboard pressure gets wickets and so whilst with Stokes we can have a fifth bowler that bats in the top 6, when he is not available I would always replace him with a batsmen. With five batsmen we are relying on a miracle innings like Root’s last week but that doesn’t happen often enough to consistently win against the best teams.  First Test v India: Burns, Sibley, Crawley, Root, Stokes, Lawrence, Foakes, Ali, Broad, Archer, Anderson .” The difference with the Strauss team is that Swann was a great spinner. I don’t think you could risk it with any of the current group, even allowing for Root as a fifth bowler. That said, I would be tempted to have five bowlers (inc Stokes) in India. I suspect they’ll go with six in most games though – Broad or Anderson, Mr Speed, Stokes, two spinners and then, depending on conditions, a third spinner or a third seamer. Teatime reading That’s tea. James Anderson leads the England team off, with the ball in his hand and absurd figures of 29-13-40-6 on the scorecard.  Perera hooks Curran towards deep backward square leg, where Leach takes an excellent running catch. That was a beautifully judged innings by Perera, which has taken Sri Lanka to a really useful score. And  for the first time since 7 March 2001 , the seamers have taken all 10 wickets in a Test innings in Sri Lanka: Anderson six, Wood three and Curran one.  139th over: Sri Lanka 377-9 (Dilruwan 63, Fernando 0)  This is Wood’s 28th over, which registers highly on the hardyakkometer. Dilruwan sees off another over and steers an easy single off the last delivery to keep strike.  “This is so beautifully poised Rob,” says Guy Hornsby. “A flat track, Sri Lanka building a lead they hope could win the game (possibly 50-75 short), England’s pace bowlers weighing in - and for all Jimmy’s beauty I’m so chuffed for Mark Wood - as if to say to our spinners ‘your turn next innings’, then our batsmen having to reckon with a pitch that’ll need big runs before it crumbles. Our opening pair especially will want to make their mark after the first test. All results are still on, and this is the best game in the world.” It’s Saturday, I’ve been up since 6am, it’s freezing in my office, and you come at me with this… this  joie de vivre ? Shame on you.  138th over: Sri Lanka 376-9 (Dilruwan 62, Fernando 0)  A harmless over from Sam Curran. He had a fine time in Sri Lanka two winters ago, certainly with the bat, but this series has been slightly sobering: no runs, two wickets. The more we see him, the less we know about his Test future. “Morning, Rob,” says Smylers. “Your potential England lower order for India (133rd over) suffers somewhat from Mark Wood having to bat at nine from his home in Ashington, where he’s returning after this Test match. Maybe Jofra Archer instead?” Yes, that’s him. Or Stone. THE QUICK ONE, OKAY. 137th over: Sri Lanka 375-9 (Dilruwan 61, Fernando 0)  The admirable Wood continues. He has gone into one-day mode too, and hoodwinks Perera with a deliberate slower bouncer. Perera turns down a couple of singles early in the over and then squeezes a wide yorker to third man for four. He’s played jolly well for a No8, and will keep the strike by virture of a single off the last ball.  Since you asked, it’s 20 years since all ten wickets fell to the seamers in a Test innings in Sri Lanka. England were bowling then as well, and even managed a nod to football with a 4-4-2 formation: Darren Gough (4), Andy Caddick (4) and Craig White (2) did the necessary  at Kandy in 2000-01 . It’s never happened in Galle though. “Morning Rob,” says Simon McMahon. “So, James Anderson has taken over 100 Test wickets at 20 since turning 35, gets to travel the world doing something he loves, is universally admired by his teammates and the public, and is extremely fit and handsome. But is he  happy? ” Sorry, I thought thwas a rhetorical question . 136th over: Sri Lanka 369-9 (Dilruwan 56, Fernando 0)  Bess won’t get to bowl to Fernando, because he’s been replaced by Sam Curran. Fernando is a rank No11, with a Test average of two, but he defends carefully and survives the over. 135th over: Sri Lanka 369-9 (Dilruwan 56, Fernando 0)  Dilruwan has gone into one-day mode. He flicks Wood extravagantly round the corner for four, but Wood does well to deny him a single towards the end of the over. That means Bess will get to bowl at the No11 Fernando. “Durif is indeed a lesser-known Australian wine,” says Richard Speed, “but it’s not normally called ‘elegant’. It’s a wine often associated with a disturbingly bad next morning, so possibly very similar to the effect of Anderson.” Surely it should be named after another great English swing bowler, Lord Beefy ( see the penultimate paragraph )? 134th over: Sri Lanka 365-9 (Dilruwan 52, Fernando 0)  Dilruwan is  dropped by Bess , a sharp return chance between his legs. That’s all she wrote. “Morning Rob,” says Brian Withington. “An idle thought prompted by discussion of the inevitable deterioration of the wicket - what exactly causes it? Prolonged exposure to sunlight without watering; progressive toll of bouncing leather balls; entropy?! Discuss.” Funnily enough,  we anticipated this question 18 years ago . 133rd over: Sri Lanka 364-9 (Dilruwan 51, Fernando 0)  “I believe England may regret not playing Broad with Anderson at the expense of one of the spinners (Root could have bowled 15 overs),” says Ian Wilson. “Anderson could end up with eight wickets and Broad would have been more effective than both Curran and Wood; they can get their rest on the Indian leg of the tour rather than this two-Test jaunt.” I suspect they’ll need both spinners (and Root) in the second innings. There is an argument for playing Broad and Anderson together in some Tests in the subcontinent - but it’s tricky because, all things being equal, they’ll need two spinners, a fast bowler and a bowler who can bat No7. If Moeen plays in India, which he surely will, they could maybe have a lower order of Buttler/Foakes, Moeen, Leach, Wood, Broad, Anderson. I’m not sure; I’d probably stick to playing one or the other this winter. That said, I have a hunch both will start the Ashes next winter. A third wicket for Mark Wood. Embuldeniya fishes outside off stump at a sharp delivery, and Root takes a smart catch at first slip. Wood roars with delight, then realises he is too weary to do any more celebrating. 132nd over: Sri Lanka 363-8 (Dilruwan 50, Embuldeniya 7)  Bess replaces Leach and bowls a maiden to Embuldeniya. Well done him. “It seems to me that Anderson should be treated like a fine red wine who simply gets better with age,” says Colum. “A Barolo, a Burgundy or a Taurasi, which is the local austere red here in Campania, southern Italy. I just googled to see if there was a wine in his honour and came across two Anderson Wineries in the US of A and Australia. The motto of the Anderson Winery in Indiana is ‘where patience, time and quality come together’ which I think is a fitting epithet for our Jimmy, I mean James. The Anderson winery in East Victoria boasts a Storyteller Durif (a lesser-known red) which has a degree of elegance and class (so perhaps Anderson at the outset of his career).” I’m surprised they didn’t call it  the Ljungberg . 131st over: Sri Lanka 363-8 (Dilruwan 50, Embuldeniya 7)  A terrific yorker from Wood is well blocked by Dilruwan Perera, who then flicks a boundary round the corner to bring up a  superb fifty from 134 balls . Five fours, one six and a whole lotta commonsense. “Modern medicine,” says Niall Mullen, “has long since dismissed the practice of applying a Leach as a cure for the runs.” 130th over: Sri Lanka 359-8 (Dilruwan 46, Embuldeniya 7)  Embuldeniya is fine. In fact I think the ball him him on the shoulder. Leach continues, still looking in vain for his first wicket; he and Dom Bess have combined figures of 62-6-194-0. In one sense that is good news for England, who will hope they can score plenty of first-innings runs off Sri Lanka’s spinners before the pitch goes rogue.  129th over: Sri Lanka 356-8 (Dilruwan 44, Embuldeniya 6)  This has been an excellent innings from Dilruwan Perera - not just the runs (44) but also the balls (128), which has allowed the pitch to wear a little more. I don’t think it’s going to age as well as James Anderson. Wood’s over ends with a bouncer that clangs into Embuldeniya’s helmet, so there will be a break in play while he is assessed.  128th over: Sri Lanka 353-8 (Dilruwan 41, Embuldeniya 6)  Embuldeniya gets off the mark in style, carting a slog sweep for  six  off Leach. That takes Sri Lanka past 350, which most observers think is a par score. I think they’re in a really strong position, assuming the pitch deteriorates.  Mean while, this is a brilliant piece  from one of the world’s finest cricket writers.  How I learnt to stop worrying and like (this) India (side)  https://t.co/HuYSHuFDHZ 127th over: Sri Lanka 346-8 (Dilruwan 40, Embuldeniya 0)  Mark Wood replaces Anderson, who has those despicable figures of 29-13-40-6, and beats a flat-footed Embuldeniya with a lovely delivery that leaves him from round the wicket. A maiden. “Welcome back,” says John Starbuck. “The longer this goes on, the higher the chances of a draw (which England would’ve taken if asked this morning).” Nobody knows anything when it comes to pitches, but I don’t think it’ll be a draw - local experts like Mahela Jayawardene expect this pitch to crumble on day four. It could be a 370/410/150/buttock-clenching case of 111 kind of game.  Thanks Adam, morning everyone . Shall we start with a stat? Since turning 35, the retirement age for fast bowlers, James Anderson has taken 126 Test wickets at an average of 20.47. To be honest, I’m getting a bit sick of him disrespecting the ageing process. 126th over: Sri Lanka 346-8 (Dilruwan 40, Embuldeniya 0)  Leach is doing all he can to get himself into the book, in at Dilruwan who he (probably) had out earlier in the session. He’s nice and consistent from around the wicket, really giving it a rip. But the right-hander is up to the task, safely defending his way through a maiden. With that it is both drinks and time for me to hand over to the master of the over-by-over genre,  the great Rob Smyth . Have fun. Back with you tomorrow! 125th over: Sri Lanka 346-8 (Dilruwan 40, Embuldeniya 0)  The same pattern: Dilruwan is happy enough taking a single from the third ball. Anderson around the wicket at   Embuldeniya - it’s a good match-up. But it doesn’t go the way of the Englishman, the left-hander once again swinging and missing at a temper to finish. “We all know Anderson is a great swing bowler,” writes Dean Kinsella. “But he’s no good away from English conditions.” Even this morning on twitter I was seeing a bit of this from cranks who will never accept any other reality. Bless them all. 124th over: Sri Lanka 345-8 (Dilruwan 39, Embuldeniya 0)  Leach’s turn to get three cracks at Embuldeniya, albeit after Dilruwan swept him for four earlier in the over. Now there are men around the bat for him, three of them - two on the legside, coming over the wicket at his fellow left-hander. And he gets through it safely. Back to Anderson, for what presumably will be his sixth and final over of the spell.  123rd over: Sri Lanka 340-8 (Dilruwan 34, Embuldeniya 0)  Dilruwan gives the strike away with half an over to go. How will Embuldeniya go against Jimmy, who probably only has nine balls left in this spell? Ooh, beaten on the inside edge to begin - not far away at all, into the pads. Now leaves. “Likes to be called James instead of Jimmy,” says one of the commentators on TV, who has  suuuurely  been wound up? Anyway, one ball to go and he has a swing and a miss outside off! Close. “Jimmy Anderson has been playing test cricket for just shy of 18 years yet seems to get better as he ages,” says Phil Withall. “A freak for a fast bowler.” True, that.  And Brian Withington on the same theme: “This is surely turning in to one of the great 5 fers on a wicket offering so little to the seamers. Shame for Dickwella but almost an honour to be prised out by the cunning old dog.” Let’s dream of eight. 122nd over: Sri Lanka 339-8 (Dilruwan 33, Embuldeniya 0)  Dilruwan isn’t going to mess around now the tail are with him, dancing at Leach and launching him inside out over extra cover for  SIX!  He’s been better than the 0/100+ he’s on track to recording, especially since lunch, but that’s the game. But for those of us who like big, fat bags of wickets, he has done his job by leaving two on the shelf for Jimmy.  🌟 FIVE FOR ANDERSON! 🌟 A 30th five-wicket haul for the England legend in Test cricket as Dickwella slashes to Leach at wide mid-off to fall for 92 🏏 Sri Lanka 332-7  #SLvENG  🇱🇰🏴󠁧󠁢󠁥󠁮󠁧󠁿 📺 Watch 👉  https://t.co/bT0CP9Q8No 📱 Live blog 👉  https://t.co/thLvSDgcvt   pic.twitter.com/N9Gk5hrCCG Anderson has  six ! Two in the over! Lakmal earns a second ball duck after playing with hard hands and no footwork, gifting a catch to Crawley in the gully. Just when Sri Lanka were in a strong position to control the game, they are now staring down the barrel of a below-par score on the flattest possible track. Poor cricket.  121st over: Sri Lanka 332-8 (Dilruwan 26)  Double wicket maiden. Anderson: 27-13-38-6 Goodness me! Why did he do that? Dickwella, eight away from a maiden ton, has a pop at Jimmy’s wide one, on the up, and slaps a catch to Leach at cover. Anderson has his 30th five-wicket bag in Tests. But how did Dickwella fall for that? Oh no. 120th over: Sri Lanka 332-6 (Dickwella 92, Dilruwan 26)  Dickwella laps early and laps well, getting off strike from the first ball of Leach’s fresh set. Back to Dilruwan, who the spinner should have dismissed just moments ago, around the wicket with a slip. Nice flight again here, pitching it up. “He’s found a decent rhythm,” adds Mark Butcher. Of course, after pumping him up, he drops a short ball in at the right-hander, who steers it away with ease behind point for four. That’ll sting.  119th over: Sri Lanka 327-6 (Dickwella 91, Dilruwan 22)  Dickwella into the 90s for the first time in Test cricket after passing 50 on 15 occasions before today. “He’ll seldom get a better chance,” says Mark Butcher on TV. “Against a tiring attack on a hot day on an absolute belter.” Oh, and guess what? Dilruwan  did  glove the Leach delivery in the previous over. Based on Snicko,  it would have been overturned! Dickwella was dismissed to two balls in a similar area in the first Test. In this innings, he has been more watchful, leaving balls in the region that had previously caused him problems.  #SLvEng   pic.twitter.com/Ne1OZLgOuH 118th over: Sri Lanka 324-6 (Dickwella 88, Dilruwan 22)  The call is Joe Root’s again: did Dilruwan glove a beauty from Leach? It’s given not out on the field and... they are  not  throwing it upstairs for a second look. The extent to which that decision was informed by the shocking review in his previous over? That shout looked to have more going for it; I’m sure we’ll get a look at the technology at some stage thanks to the TV broadcasters. Leach has been more dangerous since lunch. I miss this. Joe Root’s review gesture leaves much to be desired  #SLvsENG   pic.twitter.com/K2aFXWovZ3 117th over: Sri Lanka 323-6 (Dickwella 87, Dilruwan 22)  Anderson to Dickwella: an important exchange to determine which team will be best placed to dictate terms as we get deeper into this second day. He gets off strike halfway through the over though, easing behind point with soft hands again; going very nicely. Dilruwan’s turn and he’s savvy enough to only shoulder arms and defend - no risks required.  116th over: Sri Lanka 322-6 (Dickwella 86, Dilruwan 22)  I suppose England had all three reviews in their backpocket and Jos Buttler was keen on another look. I can’t wait for this third review to be junked when we’re through these temporary Covid-19 playing conditions. To recap: because of home umpires, an extra review was thrown in to safeguard against misguided suggestions of bias. Having just covered the best Test series in Australia for decades, overseen by three superb home umpires, it would be a travesty if they can’t officiate Tests over here again. The teams definitely don’t need a third review to burn to verify their integrity.  NOT OUT!  Yep, that’s a stinker. Pitched outside leg by a long way. Very odd.  HAS LEACH TRAPPED DICKWELLA LBW?  It is given not out and looks like it has both pitched outside leg and drifted down leg but... here we go anyway. Stand by. 115th over: Sri Lanka 319-6 (Dickwella 84, Dilruwan 21)  Naturally, it’s Jimmy Anderson starting the session from the Fort End. Leach has done his job, so it’s Dickwella - the big wicket - on strike to the champion. Over the wicket, he has a slip and a catching cover. But that’s a lovely shot first up, using the angle to time him behind point just wide of the gully for a boundary. Into the 80s he moves; this is now his highest Test score. The job is far from done though - he has to take it to the next level today and keep England out there until at least the tea break.  114th over: Sri Lanka 314-6 (Dickwella 79, Dilruwan 21)  A good start from Leach to Dilruwan after Dickwella takes one to midwicket from the first ball of the session. At the right-hander, he’s drifting it in nicely, bringing him forward. No catching men under the lid though, so he’s able to lunge without risk. Sorry in advance: I will keep going on about this while Leach/Bess are bowling with just a slip.  The players are back on the field.  It’s Leach to continue his spell, starting at Dickwella. The partnership he’s put together with Dilruwan is worth 70.  PLAY!  Good morning to those waking up.  This feels like the right time for most of our audience to be joining on a Saturday morning, lockdown or otherwise. To bring you up to speed: England had a super start with two wickets inside the first 20 minutes (including Mathews, for 110) but Sri Lanka did nicely from then until the lunch break, with Dickwella 22 runs away from his maiden Test ton. And check out Jimmy’s bowling figures: 23-13-29-4. He’ll be back on straight after lunch, I’m sure. On This Day in 1999.  An international incident of sorts between these nations at Adelaide Oval. But really, it didn’t have anything to do with England and everything to do with the ego of Umpire Ross Emerson. Not a good day.  Truly bad cricket scenes, disgraceful stuff On this day in 1999....Australian cricket umpires continued to cause controversy when Muralitharan was involved..... Ranatunga taking absolutely no sh*t from Ross Emerson  pic.twitter.com/H8uPsvDDjQ Lunchtime/breakfast listening.  Geoff Lemon and I have had a signficant response to our conversation with Marcus Stoinis on  The Final Word  podcast  this week. The Australian all-rounder told us the moving story of his father’s illness and passing.  Geoff and I never anticipated that this would be the topic of our interview with Marcus Stoinis but, as we soon realised, to understand the man and cricketer, the tender story of his dad's long illness and passing informs everything else.  https://t.co/ESXGth2sEO   pic.twitter.com/P1J5ex3hkn Two wickets and 84 runs in the session.  Sri Lanka lost wickets in the second and fifth overs this morning, Anderson immediately picking up yesterday’s century maker with nice bit of inswing (and an excellent review). When Wood ended Ramesh Mendis’ debut innings before scoring down the legside, the good work from the hosts yesterday was coming undone. However, Dickwella (78*) was never diverted from his plan to score whenever he had a bit of width with Dilruwan (21*) using his feet nicely to the spinners in support. The pair have put on 70 to date, the wicketkeeper well placed to collect his first Test ton after the lunch break.  113th over: Sri Lanka 313-6 (Dickwella 78, Dilruwan 21)  Curran wasn’t far away from Dickwella’s woodwork with final ball of his previous over - how will he play this before lunch? A bouncer to begin, pulled away nicely for one. So, that contest is over for now. Dilruwan’s turn, defending then ducking. Nothing wrong with that. “There’s no time pressure whatsoever,” says Simon Doull on TV and he’s spot on, with Sri Lanka giving themselves the chance to bowl when the pitch is going to suit their spinners best. One last bumper before lunch, ducked again. It’s to the left-armer’s credit that he’s coming to this with a plan, it must be said.  And lunch.   112th over: Sri Lanka 312-6 (Dickwella 77, Dilruwan 21)  Nup, it’ll be Leach. With three minutes on the clock, this is likely to be the last before lunch... which means slow it down with players around the bat, right? Hmm, seemingly not - just the slip, field spread, rushing. Nothing much wrong with Leach’s radar or angle at Diulruwan around the cricket but he hasn’t many routes to a wicket other than finding an edge, hitting a pad or going through the gate. A single is on offer around the corner, which is accepted. Dickwella’s turn with one ball to go and 60 seconds left, so they will get another one in, the left-hander keeping the strike after using his feet and driving down to long-on. He’s had a super morning for Sri Lanka. 111th over: Sri Lanka 310-6 (Dickwella 76, Dilruwan 20)  It’s always a good scrap when Curran is involved, sending down a skiddy bouncer at Dickwella who takes him on with a hook, getting it fine enough for four. He goes upstairs again straight away again, pulling two more into the gap this time. Wood for one before lunch? 110th over: Sri Lanka 302-6 (Dickwella 68, Dilruwan 20)  Leach continues with Bess replaced, the left-armer through with just one single added, Dickwella placing a full ball down the ground for one. Maidens have been a problem for England’s spinner so far, sending down five of them across 52 overs. Not enough. “Morning Adam.” And to you, Brian Withington. Indeed, good morning to everyone who has woken up over the last little while. The news is that England picked up a couple of wickets in a couple of overs inside the first quarter of an hour but it has been smooth sailing for the hosts thereafter with ten minutes till lunch. “Good to see you back where you belong. Sorry not to have been rugged enough to be with you from the off today. In my defence, our weekly poker session via Zoom and BetPoker (other platforms available) contained more than the usual heartbreak, including accidentally folding pocket Kings when about to win a monster hand. Not sure of the segue to the cricket action, although I expect someone can find one.” I’m sure they will, my friend. Nice to have you here.   109th over: Sri Lanka 301-6 (Dickwella 67, Dilruwan 20)  Right, it will be seam, via Sam Curran, the man who started the day for England. He has a fly flip for Dickwella, a leg gully and a conventional gully - unorthodox. The short ball on the hip won’t be troubling the set left-hander though, pulling an easy single. Dilruwan’s turn, getting in behind the left-armer’s wide of the crease attack.
Binged Bridgerton? Find your next lockdown watch with our TV quiz:	 Stuart Heritage  Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.00 GMT   Last modified on Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.03 GMT   Lockdown three is a nightmare for television viewers. All the good stuff – the stuff you really wanted to watch – was wolfed down in the first two lockdowns, and now chronic indecision has set in. You now spend your evenings scrolling endlessly through streaming menus, from Netflix to Disney+ to iPlayer, desperately looking for something – anything – to fit your mood. Well – fear not. Take this personality quiz and, based on your answers, we will provide you with the perfect series to watch, and some wild cards, too. Grab a pen and paper, and enjoy.  A.  Approximately 125 hours B.  Approximately 56 hours C.  Approximately 26 hours D.  Exactly 22 hours and 32 minutes A.  A bit of fun escapism B.  An excuse to laugh C.  An opportunity to demonstrate my intellectualism D.  A chance to witness the relentless cruelty of humanity A.  That we are decent people who usually do the right thing B.  That we are flawed and messy, but often bound by a common cause C.  That we exist to be exploited by larger interests for money D.  That we are meaningless pawns destined to be slaughtered by our indifferent masters A.  Wacky, inspirational, occasionally melancholy B.  Gross, offensive, borderline illegal C.  Sophisticated, luxurious, aloof D.  Dry, gruelling, genuinely horrific A.  Candid and earnest B.  Obnoxious and loud C.  Knowing and superior D.  I don’t understand. What is a ‘laugh’? A.  Trippy imagery and a thumping electronic theme B.  Ironic wholesomeness C.  High-end glamour D.  Just loads and loads of burning human faces, if possible A.  James Corden B.  Josh Groban C.  Monica Bellucci D.  General Hasso von Manteuffel A.  My children B.  My partner C.  Nobody D.  The group of ghosts who live in my house A.  “Hate is always foolish, and love is always wise” B.  “I am untethered, and my rage knows no bounds” C.  “Who wants good news in this ocean of misery and drama?” D.  “Down this road on a summer day in 1944, the soldiers came. Nobody lives here now” A.  Happy, uplifted, slightly frustrated about declining quality B.  Happy, dirty, slightly frustrated about declining quality C.  Happy, intelligent, continental D.  Completely, irreparably depressed Answers Mostly As: Doctor Who You need something bright and fun to distract you from the relentless drudgery of lockdown, and ideally something family-friendly. This is a perfect opportunity for you to watch all 167 episodes of Doctor Who currently available on iPlayer; every new-Who episode ever made. True, it won’t all be plain sailing, because Doctor Who is lumpy by nature, but what else are you going to do with your time? Wild cards:   Chilling Adventures of Sabrina  (Netflix) | The Great Pottery Throw Down (All4) | The Vicar of Dibley (iPlayer) | Absolutely Fabulous (Britbox)  Mostly Bs: It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia You want comedy, and lots of it, which is why you should watch  It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia , 14 seasons of which are on Netflix. If you haven’t seen it, you have missed out on one of the grimiest, most amoral sitcoms in television history. One episode is called Mac Kills His Dad, for instance. But even if you have seen the show, it’s worth rewatching from the beginning, if only for the scene where Danny DeVito crawls out of a sofa naked.  Wild cards:   Pls Like  (iPlayer – series three released on 24 Jan) | Chewing Gum (Netflix) | Crashing (All 4) | Ramy (Amazon Prime) Mostly Cs: Call My Agent! OK, we get it, you’re a smartypants. Your favourite TV show of all time is Mad Men, but a part of you is upset that it was performed in a language you speak. Behold  Call My Agent !, a Paris-set comedy-drama about a talent agency in crisis. This isn’t just great TV, it’s great TV brimming with highbrow cinematic and literary references. You want a show where Jean Cocteau is cited for a punchline? This is for you. Better yet, a new series comes to Netflix this week. Get started now and you’ll be all caught up in plenty of time. Wild cards:  Trigonometry  (iPlayer) |  Pretend It’s a City  (Netflix) | The Bureau (Amazon Prime) | Succession (Sky Atlantic/Now TV) | Mostly Ds: The World at War You dislike fiction, and lightness, and fun. Therefore the only option for you is  The World at War , ITV’s 26-part 1973 monolithic documentary about the causes and consequences of the second world war, narrated in doomy tones by Laurence Olivier. In all honesty, everyone should watch this landmark series at least once. That said, everything is terrible at the moment and this will probably make it worse. The full series is on UKTV Player right now. Just pick your moment, OK? Will you be watching our lockdown picks? And which other unexpected TV treats have you discovered of late? Have your say in the comments. 
Data on Covid infections in England suggests cautious approach best:	A quick glance at the government’s coronavirus dashboard might be fuel for optimism. But new data suggests the picture may not be so rosy. According to the dashboard, the number of people testing positive for Covid is falling: 37,892 positive tests were reported on Thursday, compared with 62,322 on 6 January. Cases by specimen date show similar trends. A summary of rebuttals offered by the  Anti-Virus website  to selected claims made by sceptics – detailed in full on the site. Claim:  The infection fatality rate (IFR) is very low – 99.5% of people who get it survive Response:  The 0.5% figure has been challenged by significantly higher recent estimates, and it understates how lethal Covid is to older people who get it. The IFR is being kept low by lockdown – and if the virus were allowed to spread, the death rate would be higher because there wouldn't be enough space in hospitals to treat those who need it. Claim:  91% of Covid ‘cases’ are false positives. This is a ‘casedemic’ Response:  This theory is based on a statistical misunderstanding, and since during the summer (when Covid cases were low) only 0.3% of tests were showing positive results, it cannot be that a much greater proportion of positive tests are now “false”. In any case, the huge rises in hospitalisations and deaths disprove the idea that people aren’t really getting sick. Claim:  There are no excess deaths Response:  The ONS recently estimated 14% more deaths in the previous year than the baseline from the previous five years – and that happened even though in the latter part of the year, deaths from causes other than coronavirus actually fell. Claim:  Lockdowns cause more deaths than they prevent Response:  This contradicts all the evidence that virtually all of the excess deaths we have seen have been attributable to Covid. Suicide rates have not risen, and violence may have fallen. Pressure on the NHS is being increased by coronavirus, not lockdown, and would only grow if restrictions were lifted. Claim:  Danish study shows masks don’t stop the spread Response:  The study was only testing protection for the wearer, not others in the vicinity. Problems with its design were pointed out before it was conducted, and there is lots of evidence from around the world that mask-wearing is associated with a lower rate of increase in the spread of the virus. The data reflects people who have taken a test, generally after having developed symptoms. However there are also large variations in test numbers, which could affect trends. To take the latter into account, it is possible to look at the percentage of people who have taken a test that get a positive result. According to  the weekly report into pillar 2  (community) testing data from Public Health England, there was a sharp decline in this positivity rate over the first two weeks of January. However, an analysis of the data by the Independent Sage group of experts suggests the decline in positivity rate slowed down or even plateaued in many regions of England towards the end of that period. To get a clearer idea of what is happening with Covid infections, a number of research teams carry out population surveys whereby randomly selected people in the community are swabbed for coronavirus – this picks up both those with symptoms and those without, and is not affected by biases in testing. This data suggests the overall picture is a little less cheering than first thought. According to the latest data  release from the population survey run by the Office for National Statistics , covering the period 3 to 16 January, there has been a decline in the percentage of people testing positive in England   – but this is not as dramatic at the PHE figures might suggest. Indeed some regions, including the south-west, have actually shown a rise in infections since the start of the year while others such as the north-west, north-east and West Midlands have levelled off. Even in London, the east Midlands and Yorkshire and the Humber, where positivity rates have dropped, modelling by the ONS team appears to tentatively suggest the decline may have recently slowed, although more time needs to pass to be sure. “Caution should be taken in overinterpreting any small movements in the latest trend,” the ONS team warns. The latest findings from another population survey, known as React-1, which cover the period from 6 to 15 January, have also prompted concern. These results suggest that, while new infections might previously have fallen they  may now be flattening off  at a national level, or even showing signs of a slight rise. While the signs all point to the peak of infections having passed, for England at least, the outlook warrants optimism tinged with caution. A plateau at present would be of deep concern, with hospitals under severe pressure and deaths at record highs – although it is hoped that the vaccination programme will eventually help these to fall. It would also raise the question of what new restrictions might be needed, and for how long. However it may yet be that cases, and positivity rate, will proceed to decline. For now, it is seems, only time will tell.
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Europe can only fix its relationship with Africa if it exorcises its colonial ghosts:	Black Lives Matter protests last summer sparked an uncomfortable reckoning for many European nations with a legacy of slavery and colonialism. Excavating this dark history via revised school curriculums and initiatives such as  Black History Month  is difficult. But it is badly needed, and not just to dispel the self-congratulatory and entirely false narratives about Europe’s “civilisational” past still being driven by nationalist and populist politicians. The new conversation is urgently required if the EU is to salvage flagging efforts to launch a so-called  partnership of equals  with African nations. And it is needed, too, if European governments are to put relations with  African European  citizens on a sounder and more respectful footing. There are encouraging signs. In Germany, BLM protests injected momentum into efforts to  change street  names with colonial-era or racist references. In France, the  armed forces  ministry provided local authorities with a guide to 100 Africans who fought for France in the second world war, so that streets and squares may be named after them. President  Macron  had, in 2019 during a visit to Ivory Coast, denounced the French “hegemonic view and the trappings of colonialism”, which he said were “a grave mistake – a fault of the republic”. In Belgium, authorities responded to protests by removing at least some public monuments to King  Leopold II , whose forces seized Congo in the late 19th century and ran an exploitative regime that led to the deaths of millions. And in an unprecedented step last summer, Belgium’s King Philippe, an indirect descendent of Leopold II,  wrote to the Congolese president , Félix Tshisekedi, to offer his deepest  regret  for the “humiliation and suffering” inflicted during Belgium’s colonial occupation of the country. The pain of the past, said the king, was “revived by the discrimination that is still all too present in our societies”. They may have been a long time coming, and carry only symbolic value, but such gestures matter. Macron’s  recent decision  to invite young Africans rather than their political leaders to a France-Africa summit on biodiversity in July and to involve African Europeans in the effort are also steps in the right direction; as are efforts to bring female entrepreneurs, cities and business leaders into continuing African-European conversations. Because  Europe  and Africa are interconnected and interdependent. They need each other to create jobs and growth on both continents, to   ensure a post-pandemic economic recovery and to tackle climate change. The EU remains the  leading aid, trade and investment  actor across the continent. African  exports  of raw materials, chemicals and petroleum products, minerals and metals as well as fishery and agricultural goods, continue to be the mainstay of many European industries. Yet, even if Africa’s once dynamic growth rates have been slowed by the pandemic, its economic potential, youthful population and plans to build an  African Continental Free Area , (AfCFTA) modelled on the EU single market,   will intensify international rivalry and competition – especially between Europe and China. EU policymakers insist that their policies are better than Beijing’s, and that while China’s investments under the  belt and road initiative  grab global attention, they are worsening Africa’s already  high debt burden  and making debt-relief measures even more urgent. African commentators  accuse  the EU, which makes its aid conditional on human rights and other norms, of harbouring “paternalistic” attitudes, saying the bloc could learn from Beijing on consulting, informing and working with African states as true equals. They have a point. African Union leaders cancelled a much-trailed online EU-Africa mini-summit in early December at the last minute. That followed the postponement because of coronavirus of a full-format meeting scheduled for October. This can not be brushed off as just another routine diplomatic mishap. It is time to come clean. A reset of this relationship is difficult because many increasingly self-confident Africans are understandably sceptical about Europe’s motives. Africa-Europe relations have for years been marked by an imbalanced donor/recipient relationship, with African governments seeking access to EU trade and aid preferences, while European leaders have cultivated privileged ties with African elites and ignored the needs of the continent’s younger generation. Fortress Europe’s aim to keep out African migrants has added to the mistrust. Tasked with picking up the pieces, Portugal, as current holder of the rotating EU presidency, is hoping it can replicate this year a successful EU-Africa summit it organised in 2007. But times have changed. Geopolitics have become more unpredictable, the uncertainties triggered by the pandemic are countless and more countries, including post-Brexit Britain, are vying with the EU for economic opportunities in  Africa . One way forward would be an EU acknowledgment of the damage wreaked by colonialism followed by a recognition by African governments that a new generation of modern European leaders – as EU council President Charles Michel noted last year – can no longer be weighed down by the “ burden of nostalgia ”. A joint statement that admits the missteps of the past but also promises fresh beginnings may not lead to an immediate uptick in EU-Africa relations. But it would represent a very good start. If they are to make good on plans for a  fairer revamp of relations  with African states, EU leaders must take collective action to exorcise the ghosts of Leopold II – and those of other colonial “heroes” who trod similar ground. That will mean addressing African grievances over Europe’s role in the slave trade and the crueller aspects of colonial rule, as well as persistent modern-day discrimination, racism and unconscious bias. It will require a change in Europe’s toxic debate on migration, implementation of a  new EU anti-racism agenda  and stepping up work on “ international partnerships ” to replace the traditional EU policy of aid – or, as it was known in Brussels until recently, “development cooperation”, in which outdated white saviour narratives were firmly embedded. Shada Islam is a Brussels-based commentator on EU affairs. She runs New Horizons project, a strategy, analysis and advisory company
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
‘It’s being built on our blood’: the true cost of Saudi Arabia’s $500bn megacity:	“The future has a new home,” proclaims the website. “It’s a virgin area that has a lot of beauty,” says the voice over a string section soundtrack as the  promotional video  tracks colour-tinted panoramic shots of picturesque desert expanses, and deep azure lagoons. “Better humans, better society,” it boasts extravagantly. The brainchild of Crown Prince  Mohammed bin Salman , the new city state of Neom, named from a combination of the Greek word for “new” and the Arabic term for “future”, is intended to cover an area the size of Belgium at the far north of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea coastline. There has been no shortage of outlandish promises for the $500bn (£400bn) city-state. According to  strategy documents leaked last year , the project may include a huge artificial moon, glow-in-the-dark beaches, flying drone-powered taxis, robotic butlers to clean the homes of residents and a Jurassic Park-style attraction featuring animatronic lizards. Advertising materials stressed Neom will be built on “virgin” land, ready to be conquered with futuristic technology. “In 10 years from now we will be looking back and we will say we were the first ones to come here,” declares a Neom staff member featured in the video. Yet part of the site is the home of the Huwaitat tribe, who have spanned  Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Sinai peninsula for generations, tracing their lineage back before the founding of the Saudi state. At least 20,000 members of the tribe now face eviction due to the project, with no information about where they will live in the future. “For the Huwaitat tribe, Neom is being built on our blood, on our bones,” says Alia Hayel Aboutiyah al-Huwaiti, an outspoken activist and member of the tribe living in London. “It’s definitely not for the people already living there! It’s for tourists, people with money. But not for the original people living there.” For some Saudis, the Huwaiti tribe among them, Neom, with its parallel legal system reporting directly to the king, represents an elite version of Saudi society, one designed simply to shut them out. Residents and visitors to the site will probably be allowed to drink alcohol and enjoy fine dining in a futuristic version of paradise that is also set to include a vast  data-gathering network , including drone and facial-recognition technology covering the entire city-state. The  death  of Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti on 13 April highlighted the tension between the tribe and the kingdom’s development plans. A resident of the town of Khuraibat, he had become the face of the tribes’ criticism of their forced eviction, voicing complaints in videos posted to social media, and appearing in others’ videos.  One  piece of footage showed him confronting a Saudi official who visited the town to speak with residents. Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti made one of his last  videos  in mid-April. “They have begun the process of removing people, beginning with surveying homes with the intent of removing people and deporting them from their land,” he said, referring to the security forces in his town. “They arrested anyone who said they’re against deportation, they don’t want to leave, they want to remain [in] their homes, that they don’t want money. “I would not be surprised if they come to kill me in my house now, and place a weapon next to me,” he added. Later the same day, he shot a video from his rooftop of the police down below. “See them? The police have come to get me,” he  said . Others from Khuraibat recorded  videos  of gunfire from outside his house. Later, they recorded  footage  inside his house, pockmarked with bullet holes. In a statement, the Saudi authorities  claimed  he’d been killed in a shootout with regional security forces, stating that Abdul Rahim injured two after he shot back. His supporters have described the shooting as “an extrajudicial killing”. So too have rights groups. “They killed him to set an example – anyone opening their mouth gets the same treatment,” says Alia al-Huwaiti. According to the Saudi rights group Al Qst, the authorities have  since  worked to cover up Abdul Rahim’s killing and placate the tribe. “They are hoping to pull off a major publicity stunt by getting prominent figures among the Huwaitat to publicly disown Abdul Rahim and ‘renew their allegiance’ to the king,” said the group. This was accompanied by the arrest of eight members of the tribe. For Alia al-Huwaiti, the killing of Abdul Rahim and the forced displacement of the Huwaitat people highlights the kingdom’s lack of care towards tribal communities long dominated and suppressed by the state. “MBS [Mohammad Bin Salman] began by telling the tribes: ‘We will develop your area, you will make money.’ They believed him at first. By 2019, they said ‘We will empty three villages, and force people to move,’” she says. “There is nothing called a tribe for Mohammed bin Salman,” she adds. “He doesn’t care about the tribes.” Alia said she has received death threats for posting about the plight of Abdul Rahim and the tribe on social media, including threats she has reported to the British police. The public relations team for Neom, as well as executives from the management consulting firm Teneo, hired by Saudi authorities  for more than $2m  last year to represent the project, did not return requests for comment. The Saudi Arabian embassy in Washington DC did not respond to a request for comment. But Ali Shihabi,  a member of the Neom advisory board , told the Guardian that the displaced members of the tribe would be compensated. “Practice in Saudi has been that people have to accept it, and have usually done so because the government has a tradition of compensating generously.” He said he did not know how much members of the tribe would be compensated, or when. “We anticipated there might be problems, especially with as large of a land grab as Neom. It’s inevitable that there would be some kind of forced displacement happening,” says James Suzano, of the European-Saudi Organisation for Human Rights. “When the state has done this before, it was accompanied by human rights violations.” The destruction of communities on the Neom site follows decades of tensions between the House of Saud and the tribes it has ruled over since the creation of the Saudi state in 1932. Exerting control over the land through construction projects or destruction of some heritage sites have marked this rule. In 2017, the UN  condemned  the kingdom’s forced demolition of the walled city of Awamia, in the eastern Qatif region, as violating human rights. Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur for cultural rights, said that “historic buildings have been irremediably burned down and damaged by the use of various weapons by the military, forcing residents out of their homes and of the neighbourhood, fleeing for their lives”. A $10bn King Abdullah financial district in Riyadh,  intended  as a “special zone,” has sputtered since its inception in 2006, weathering construction delays and confusion over its purpose, even after government attempts at a relaunch in 2016. Critics of Neom say the project risks the same fate. Construction is ploughing ahead despite the challenges of the pandemic and the  historic drop  in the price of oil, Saudi’s primary export. The project is part of the crown prince’s flagship Vision 2030 project, intended to diversify the economy away from oil, which has sustained the kingdom since the early 20th century. Yet the funds required to see Neom realised will inevitably require oil wealth. “It’s quite revealing that [Neom] is more of a vanity project targeting the domestic elite and an international audience in terms of a new Saudi, one that’s open and economically or socially liberal,” says Josh Cooper, of Al Qst. “But at the same time, not allowing the involvement of local actors or interests in these decision-making processes.” For Cooper, Neom is less a shining vision of the future than a grim symbol of Saudi human rights violations, underscored by the treatment of the Huwaitat tribe. “It shows the lack of platforms people have to express their opinions, even on less contentious matters than civil or political rights,” he says.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
The teenage taekwondo trainer fighting child marriage in Zimbabwe – photo essay:	I t is 11am on a Sunday and Natsiraishe Maritsa, 17, is running through some workout drills with a group of sweating teenage girls from her neighbourhood in Epworth, a poor township nine miles (15km) south-east of the capital, Harare. On a normal Sunday, Maritsa and her friends would be attending church, but the strict 30-day lockdown imposed by the government earlier this month has banned religious gatherings – so it’s time to catch up on a taekwondo training session. Maritsa shouts instructions as the group punch, kick and break a sweat in the morning sun in her yard, where she has created a makeshift training ground. Natsiraishe Maritsa runs through taekwondo stretching drills at her family home in Epworth. Among those attending are young mothers and girls who were forced into child marriages, a practice common in Epworth and across  Zimbabwe , where many under the age of 16 are married off by poor families who would otherwise struggle to provide for them. According to Girls Not Brides, which campaigns  for an end to child marriages , about  34% of girls in Zimbabwe are married before they are 18  while 5% are married before they are 15. Maritsa works with young children from her community. Maritsa keeps a journal of heart-rending testimonies from some of the teen mothers who confide in her about their abusive marriages. One of her most promising taekwondo students was recently stopped from attending training sessions by her husband. “The girls are being abused. There is one lady who told me that she was stabbed with a knife by her husband and was threatened with death,” Maritsa says. After losing most of her friends to early marriages from the age of 13, Maritsa looked for ways to raise awareness about the dangers of the practice. Maritsa practises at home. “I decided to do something for the girl child. I had to create a foundation so that they grow up in a better environment.  Most of my friends got married due to poverty  and others were forced by their guardians because their parents had died,” she says. According to girls’ rights organisations, teenage pregnancies and marriages have been rising since Zimbabwe announced its first lockdown in March last year. The situation has been worsened by the protracted closure of schools and growing poverty, with families’ livelihoods suffering amid harsh economic conditions. Marrying off their young daughters is the easy way out. Zimbabwe outlawed marriage for girls under the age of 18 in 2016, but the practice has continued and become more acceptable in poorer communities such as Epworth.  Maritsa’s neighbourhood. In 2018, Maritsa set up her foundation, Underaged People’s Auditorium, which seeks to stop more children becoming brides, through a combination of taekwondo and discussions about the dangers of early marriage. With scant resources, the organisation has helped raise awareness of the dangers of child marriage for 40 teenage mothers and young women. Driven by her desire to see an end to early marriages, Maritsa has used the lockdown to engage parents. She has vowed to use her influence in taekwondo to further the campaign. In 2019 she won two gold medals at the Epworth Junior Cadet Championships and a silver medal at the Korean Ambassador trophy. “A lot of people look down on Epworth, but I would like the world to know that something big can come out of a despised place,” Maritsa says. Having started taekwondo at the age of five, Maritsa has inspired her 10-year-old sister to take up the sport with the help of their father – a taekwondo and fitness enthusiast. Family life revolves around taekwondo in a household where everyone is an enthusiast. Maritsa dreams of joining the Zimbabwe air force as an armament engineer and fancies a shot at representing her country in the sport. “I took taekwondo as a sport because I want to take part in taekwondo [at the] Olympics. Although Covid-19 has slowed me down in terms of my training, I believe I can still make it,” Maritsa says, showing off her medals in the family lounge. Her mother, Ndanatseyi Karigundu, says her daughter’s struggle against child marriage should be taken up by every adult in Epworth. Maritsa with her brothers and sister and their mother. “Adults must report what is happening within the community, but [that] is something that is not happening because of poverty. Parents are consenting to their little girls’ marriages and it is sad. It is not good for parents to accept  lobola  [dowry] for the young girls,” Karigundu says. Mainly made up of families who migrated from rural areas in the early 1990s looking for work, Epworth’s girls are often married off to richer men or into polygamy. Inspired by their daughter’s passion to see an end to child marriage, Maritsa’s parents have joined the campaign. They say, however, that it has been a significant task to change deep-rooted attitudes. “We always hear sad stories here when Natsi is conducting her sessions. If we had resources, we would help them rebuild their lives. I am planning to help them start a soap-making business so that they can grow from there,” says her father, Richard Maritsa. Maritsa’s parents, Richard and Ndanatseyi; Desire Mtunzi, 17: ‘I think child marriages are not good for the girl child.’ One of Maritsa’s students, 17-year-old Desire Mtunzi, agrees: “I have been coming for the sessions for about three months. It helps me keep fit and I learn about early marriages. I think child marriages are not good for the girl child.” Maritsa is also determined to get teenage mothers back into school. In Mbare, southern Harare, a group of young mothers gather for a support session at a community centre. Most of them dropped out of school after becoming pregnant. At sessions organised by nonprofit group Ignite Youth girls are encouraged to create vision boards and set achievable targets for themselves, which include returning to school. An initiative that started as a Covid-19 response has become a life changing experience. Master and pupils. Emily Nderezima, 17, who could not finish her O-levels after becoming pregnant, oozes confidence after her first training. “I have learned how to take responsibility as a mum. I have the power and strength to achieve my goals,” she says. Ignite Youth founder Tadzi Madzima says the programme is aimed at dealing with stigma associated with teenage pregnancy. Although Zimbabwean law now  prevents pregnant girls being expelled from school , society still stigmatises them, she says.  “As much as we applaud the fact that teen mums can continue with their education after giving birth, a lot [is still needed] to educate parents, teachers and communities on how stigmatisation of teen mums is unfair and detrimental to their future.”
Reasons why Covid variant could kill more people are uncertain:	Those who may have been comforted in recent weeks by the evolutionary theory of virus mutation – that the more transmissible they become, the less lethal they are – may now be pondering the news that the variant that originated in Kent not only spreads more easily  but may kill more people too . Britain’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, at the Downing Street press briefing, said it could be that in people over 60 with Covid, 13 or 14 might die in every 1000, instead of 10 as has been the case. The reasons still seem to be uncertain. A summary of rebuttals offered by the  Anti-Virus website  to selected claims made by sceptics – detailed in full on the site. Claim:  The infection fatality rate (IFR) is very low – 99.5% of people who get it survive Response:  The 0.5% figure has been challenged by significantly higher recent estimates, and it understates how lethal Covid is to older people who get it. The IFR is being kept low by lockdown – and if the virus were allowed to spread, the death rate would be higher because there wouldn't be enough space in hospitals to treat those who need it. Claim:  91% of Covid ‘cases’ are false positives. This is a ‘casedemic’ Response:  This theory is based on a statistical misunderstanding, and since during the summer (when Covid cases were low) only 0.3% of tests were showing positive results, it cannot be that a much greater proportion of positive tests are now “false”. In any case, the huge rises in hospitalisations and deaths disprove the idea that people aren’t really getting sick. Claim:  There are no excess deaths Response:  The ONS recently estimated 14% more deaths in the previous year than the baseline from the previous five years – and that happened even though in the latter part of the year, deaths from causes other than coronavirus actually fell. Claim:  Lockdowns cause more deaths than they prevent Response:  This contradicts all the evidence that virtually all of the excess deaths we have seen have been attributable to Covid. Suicide rates have not risen, and violence may have fallen. Pressure on the NHS is being increased by coronavirus, not lockdown, and would only grow if restrictions were lifted. Claim:  Danish study shows masks don’t stop the spread Response:  The study was only testing protection for the wearer, not others in the vicinity. Problems with its design were pointed out before it was conducted, and there is lots of evidence from around the world that mask-wearing is associated with a lower rate of increase in the spread of the virus. The theory of the tradeoff between infectivity and lethality goes that a virus is programmed for survival. If it is too deadly, it will kill off its hosts. So if it starts to spread more, the lethality reduces, because if it didn’t, there would be nobody left to infect. Sars-CoV-2 has a way around that conundrum. It infects people before they know they are ill. So anyone carrying the virus could be walking around feeling fine and spreading it. By the time someone has been admitted to hospital and is fighting for their life on a ventilator, transmission to other people has already happened. “The fact the people die is almost like a side-effect,” said Prof Deenan Pillay, a virologist at University College London. One possible reason is that the increased transmissibility that we have been seeing in the virus is a result of people having a higher viral load – more of the virus in their respiratory system. “It would then follow if that is the mechanism, then, with more viral replication going on, you can imagine that could correlate with worse disease,” said Pillay. Until now, that has not been documented, he says. Vallance said they did not think a higher viral load was responsible. He said it may be that the new variant binds more solidly to the receptor and gets into cells more easily or grows more readily in certain cell types. There is clearly a lot more work to do before they get real answers and the data may not be sufficient yet for that. Pillay points out that the results come from people tested in the community. These are not people with severe illness in hospital so the sample size of those who die is smaller. Undoubtedly, this discovery is going to make other countries pull up the drawbridge on people wanting to visit from the UK. And that’s the right thing to happen, says Pillay. Border control has worked well in many places, such as Australia and New Zealand. In fact, what this really tells us is just that we have got to use all the measures to control the virus that we know about already. There is no new way to deal with it. Increased lethality just means we have to try even harder not to catch it. Pillay points out that the first lockdown was more restrictive and better observed than the current one. There is more mobility, for one thing. The news will strengthen hopes that we can be delivered from our sorry plight through mass vaccination, yet even that now looks less certain. There are suggestions that the variants originally found in South Africa and Brazil may be less susceptible to the vaccines we are now using. The Mail reported remarks apparently made by the health secretary, Matt Hancock, at a webinar for travel agents. He said there was “evidence in the public domain” that the South African variant reduces vaccine efficacy by “about 50%”. Although he followed up by saying: “We are not sure of this data so I wouldn’t say this in public.” The good news is that the vaccine manufacturers have consistently said they can tweak the vaccines to deal with variants – and there are indications that they are working out whether and how to do exactly that right now.
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Coronavirus live news: Hong Kong orders partial lockdown; Covid fragments found in Sydney sewage:	Russian  sovereign wealth fund RDIF said on Saturday it had signed an agreement with Turkey on the production of its Sputnik V vaccine against Covid-19, the Interfax news agency reported.  RDIF added that it had begun transferring the production technology to Turkey. RDIF has also signed deals to produce Sputnik V with manufacturers in South Korea, China, India, Brazil, Belarus and Kazakhstan.  Schools throughout  Jordan  have been closed for nearly a year now, and the economic fallout from the novel coronavirus pandemic has eaten into breadwinners’ ability to feed their families. “As school is shut, I help my family financially,” said 14-year-old Omar, who one of many minors experts say have been forced prematurely into the labour market. He works repairing and cleaning kerosene heaters and collapses into bed after working 12-hour days. Overall, the work “doesn’t bother me”, he said. “What is unbearable is the smell of kerosene... (it) doesn’t go away.” He earns three dinars (around $4.25) a day, which helps pay the family’s monthly rent of 130 dinars. His contribution is vital because his father, a day labourer, has struggled to find work due to the coronavirus downturn. But Omar has not given up hope and said he was determined to return to school as soon as possible. “I would love to continue my studies” and eventually become a pilot, he said. “I don’t want the coronavirus to destroy my dream.” Thousands of people from  Hong Kong  were ordered to stay in their homes for the city’s first coronavirus lockdown as authorities battle an outbreak in one of its poorest and most densely packed districts. The order bans about 10,000 people living inside multiple housing blocks within the neighbourhood of Jordan from leaving their apartments until all those in the area had been tested. Officials said they planned to screen everyone inside the designated zone within 48 hours “in order to achieve the goal of zero cases in the district”. “Residents will have to stay at their premises to avoid cross-infection until they get their test results,” the health minister, Sophia Chan, told reporters on Saturday. The government had deployed more than 3,000 staff to enforce the lockdown, which covers about 150 housing blocks. Residents were seen lining up for testing at more than 50 mobile specimen collection vehicles parked in the area and for basic daily supplies provided by the government. By lunchtime on Saturday, about 3,000 people in the area had been tested. Hong Kong was one of the first places to be struck by the coronavirus after it spilt out of central China. China  has reported more new cases of Covid-19 and the financial hub of Shanghai imposed new restrictions as the country marked the anniversary of the world’s first coronavirus lockdown in Wuhan city, where the disease emerged in late 2019.  The national health commission said 107 new cases had been identified in the mainland on Saturday, up from 103 cases the day before. The commission said in a statement that 90 of the cases were local infections.  The north-eastern province of Heilongjiang recorded 56 new cases and neighbouring Jilin province had 13. Beijing and Shanghai recorded three new cases each, and the province of Hebei, which surrounds Beijing, recorded 15 cases.  Shanghai’s health commission designated a new medium-risk area in the city’s northern Baoshan district, locking down a neighbourhood in response to two new cases. The city had earlier named a hotel and a neighbourhood near its historic Bund riverfront as medium-risk areas.  The number of new asymptomatic cases, which China does not classify as confirmed cases, fell to 99 from 119 cases a day earlier.  An adviser on the UK government’s scientific pandemic insights group on behaviours (Spi-B) said the current lockdown rules were not enough to tackle the more infectious variant of coronavirus and called for tighter restrictions.  Prof Susan Michie, director of the Centre for Behaviour Change at University College London, said a new government advert urging people to stay at home, as well as talks about higher fines for rule-breakers, were made on the basis that people were not adhering to the rules.  “But actually, all the data show that the overwhelming number of people are sticking to the rules with one exception which is self-isolation,” she told Times Radio.  “In fact I would say that it’s not so much people not sticking to the rules, but it’s the rules themselves that are the problem.” She said there were twice as many people going to work and using public transport compared with the first lockdown, and more children in classrooms because the government “has widened the definition of who’s a key worker”. In the  UK , Dr Chaand Nagpaul from the British Medical Association said he understood the rationale behind the decision to delay the second dose of the coronavirus vaccine to 12 weeks, but said the UK should follow “best practice”.  Speaking on BBC Breakfast, Nagpaul highlighted the World Health Organization (WHO) analysis that recommended second doses of the Pfizer vaccine only be delayed “in exceptional circumstances”.  “What we’re saying is that the UK should adopt this best practice based on international professional opinion,” he said.  “Most nations in the world are facing challenges similar to the UK in having limited vaccine supply and also wanting to protect their population maximally.  “No other nation has adopted the UK’s approach. We think the flexibility that the WHO offers of extending to 42 days is being stretched far too much to go from six weeks right through to 12 weeks.”  Norway’s  capital Oslo and nine neighbouring municipalities will impose some of their toughest lockdown measures yet after an outbreak of a more contagious coronavirus variant, first identified in Britain, the Norwegian government said on Saturday.  Shopping centres and other non-essential stores will be closed from noon local time on Saturday, organised sports activities will be halted and schools must rely more on remote learning, the health ministry said in a statement.  Hello everyone and thank you for following the Guardian’s live feed on coronavirus. I will be bringing you all the latest developments from around the world.  Please get in touch if you want to share any thoughts, comments or news tips with me via any of the channels below.  Twitter:  @sloumarsh Instagram:  sarah_marsh_journalist Email:  sarah.marsh@theguardian.com It’s evening here in Australia so I am handing the blog over to my UK colleague  Sarah Marsh .  Here is a recap of events so far today: The BBC is reporting that the British Medical Association has written to the  UK  government’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, calling for the gap between jabs of the Pfizer vaccine to be shortened. The private letter, seen by the BBC, says the current plans of people waiting up to 12 weeks for a second dose – which the health secretary, Matt Hancock, says is supported by data from an Israeli study – are “difficult to justify”. The BMA letter says: “The absence of any international support for the UK’s approach is a cause of deep concern and risks undermining public and the profession’s trust in the vaccination programme.” The government says the gap between doses was extended from three to 12 weeks to increase the number of people getting the vaccine. Prof Whitty described it on Friday as a “public health decision” that would allow “many more people to be vaccinated much more quickly”. In early January we reported that experts from the World Health Organization said there was no scientific evidence for a delay of more than six weeks in administering the second dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. You can read our  full story on that here . In the  UK , the prime minister,  Boris Johnson,  has warned the new variant of Covid-19 may be 30% more deadly. In findings that dampened hopes of the increasingly prevalent B117 variant becoming less lethal over time, researchers on the government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag)  concluded  that it may increase the death rate by 30%-40%. Scientists urged tighter controls, and one said the news could take the country “back to square one”. It is also likely to increase the concerns of EU leaders, who were already considering strengthening border measures against the “British mutation”. You can read more here:  For more on the  Hong Kong  lockdown order, you can read this piece by AFP.  The order bans about 10,000 people living inside multiple housing blocks within the neighbourhood of Jordan, on the Kowloon Peninsula, from leaving their apartments unless they can show a negative test.
New UK Covid variant may be 30% more deadly, says Johnson:	The new UK coronavirus variant may be 30% more deadly,  Boris Johnson  said on Friday as he warned of stricter travel curbs and continued lockdown measures while the infection rate remains “forbiddingly high”. In findings that dampened hopes of the increasingly prevalent B117 variant becoming less lethal over time, researchers on the government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag)  concluded  that it may increase the death rate by 30%-40%. Scientists urged tighter controls, and one said the news could take the country “back to square one”. It is also likely to increase the concerns of EU leaders, who were already considering strengthening border measures against the “British mutation”. Addressing a Downing Street press conference on Friday, the prime minister struck an extremely cautious note when asked about the prospects of any imminent return to normal life, despite the rapid pace of the vaccine programme. One in 10 adults in England had been vaccinated, he said. “Currently, the rate of infection is forbiddingly high, and I think we have to be realistic about that,” he said. “I think we will have to live with coronavirus in one way or another for a long while to come. I think it is an open question as to when and in what way we can start to relax any of the measures. Obviously, we want to do everything we can to open up but only safely, only cautiously.” Johnson hailed the speed of vaccine delivery, with 5.4m doses administered, putting the government on course for the 15 February deadline it set for immunising the first four priority groups. But he urged the public to continue to comply with restrictions. The government’s chief scientific adviser, Patrick Vallance, shared early evidence about the UK variant, which first emerged in south-east England in September and has become prevalent across the UK. It was a key factor in the cancellation of most Christmas socialising, and has led to travel bans around the world. Explaining the scale of the difference, he said for every 1,000 60-year-olds infected with the new strain, perhaps 13 or 14 might be expected to die, compared with 10 in 1,000 for the original strain. The variant is also believed to be 30%-70% more transmissible. “There is no preferential age, it can affect anybody at any age, similarly to the original variant, the original virus,” Vallance said. Dr David Strain, a senior clinical lecturer at the University of Exeter Medical School, said the possibility that the new UK variant was not only more contagious but also more deadly than previous variants was worrying. “The key fact here is that all of the good work that’s been done with [the drug] dexamethasone and is being done with better treatment strategies has reduced the mortality in the UK by about a third. [If the new mortality figure is correct that] has now been lost and we are back to square one,” he said. Gabriel Scally, visiting professor of public health at the University of Bristol, said: “We can’t go on having these variants coming at us like this, so we do need to do something stop them.” The briefing heard there was good evidence of vaccines continuing to work against the variant. But there were worrying early findings in relation to other variants identified in South Africa and Brazil. Vallance said they may have certain features making them less susceptible to vaccines, though there was no evidence they were more transmissible. Earlier, footage emerged showing Matt Hancock, the health secretary, saying there was “evidence in the public domain” that the South African variant reduces vaccine efficacy “by about 50%”. In a recording of an online webinar with travel agents this week, seen by MailOnline, Hancock said: “There is evidence in the public domain, although we are not sure of this data so I wouldn’t say this in public, but that the South African variant reduces by about 50% the vaccine efficacy. “We’ve got some of the South African variant in Porton Down, and we’re testing it. We’ve got a clinical trial in South Africa to check that the AstraZeneca vaccine works. Nevertheless, if we vaccinated the population, and then you got in a new variant that evaded the vaccine, then we’d be back to square one.” The news deepened a mood of pessimism in Downing Street about when lockdown restrictions could be lifted. Official figures released on Friday suggested infection rates were declining – but only very slowly. The Office for National Statistics survey, based on swabs from randomly selected households, found that between 3 and 16 January, 1.9% of people in the community in England, or one in 55 people, had Covid – down from about one in 50 between 27 December and 2 January. A further 40,261 people tested positive for the virus on Friday, and 1,401 deaths were reported. The weekly death figure, of 8,686, was up 16.4% on the previous seven days. Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, said there appeared to have been “a turning of the corner” in terms of infections but that cases were coming down from “an exceptionally high level”. “Overall, the number of infections is broadly going down, but it’s at a very very high level, and it’s extremely precarious,” said Whitty. “A very small change and it could start taking off again from an extremely high base.” Vallance said: “The death rate’s awful, and it’s going to stay high for a little while before it starts coming down.” Ministers are steeling themselves to tighten border measures in order to protect the hard-won gains of the vaccine programme, with some in government warning that tough controls could be in place for months. Asked about tighter curbs, which ministers are expected to discuss on Monday, Johnson said: “We may need to go further to protect our borders.” The government is preparing to launch a hard-hitting new advertising campaign featuring footage of severely ill Covid patients and exhausted medical staff, exhorting the public to stick to lockdown rules. The ads, which will run across TV, radio and social media, will carry the message: “Can you look them in the eyes and tell them you’re helping by staying at home?”
Summer holidays cancelled? UK faces big decision on border:	S lumped on the sofa after another day of home schooling, many families will have longingly eyed adverts for getaways: sun, sandy beaches and glittering pools, a much-needed reward after a year in the shadow of the coronavirus pandemic. But ministers are becoming increasingly concerned they may have to ask the British public to sacrifice their hopes of a break abroad this summer. On Thursday, Priti Patel became the latest cabinet minister to say it was too soon to book an overseas break; Matt Hancock has already announced he is  going to Cornwall . Officials are anxiously awaiting the results of studies on whether new Covid variants  are resistant to the existing vaccines , millions of doses of which are being distributed across the UK, but they are not expected for several weeks. Tough  UK border measures  that came into effect this week were initially planned to last a fortnight, but stricter enforcement is already under consideration, including obliging arrivals to pay to stay in “quarantine hotels” while they self-isolate. There are growing fears in government that the prime minister, so reluctant to “cancel Christmas”, may have to tell the public to abandon hopes of a dose of foreign sunshine this summer. Several government sources told the Guardian they expected border measures would have to be tightened, and ministers are even discussing a total travel ban. A Department of  Health  and Social Care source said: “Should things proceed as we hope – which is cases come down because of lockdown, the rollout of the vaccine continues at pace and starts to have an impact – the focus on borders would increase, and rightly. “As the cases come down in the UK, it will become more and more important to make sure that we are not introducing any variants that could be, if not immune, more resistant [to the vaccines]. There’s nothing to say they would be at the moment. If that evidence comes to light, then obviously that’s when borders would become the real focus.” Hancock, the health secretary, has stressed that reformulating the vaccines to cope with a resistant variant should be relatively straightforward – he has compared it to replacing the  wing mirrors on a Range Rover  – but the new jabs would still need to be approved by the medicines regulator, manufactured and delivered to millions of people. “With these new variants, we do need to be extremely cautious,” a No 10 source said. Meanwhile, travel from the UK to a string of other countries remains banned, as scientists assess the risks of the Kent variant that spread rapidly from south-east England. The government’s approach to the UK’s borders is in sharp contrast to the first wave of the pandemic, when banning international travel seemed  unthinkably draconian  to Boris Johnson. Tough initial restrictions on arrivals from Wuhan, 273 of whom who were sent into enforced quarantine, gave way to a free-for-all from 13 March, when scientific advice suggested the virus was already being transmitted domestically. Quarantine requirements were not introduced until 9 June. Many experts inside and outside government now believe that not imposing border restrictions earlier was a mistake – perhaps one of the most serious mistakes of last year. Michael Head, a senior research fellow on global health at the University of Southampton, described the failure to introduce border curbs early on as “very much a missed opportunity”. “Covid-19 transmission is driven by  super-spreading events , this is where dispersion is important. A small number of people will contribute to most of the transmission. Thus, even if the actual numbers of cases coming from international travel are low, these can seed new outbreaks and contribute to onward transmission around the community,” he said. The Labour MP Yvette Cooper, the chair of the home office select committee, has consistently pressed the government over the lack of border controls. “If we had our time back again, and were thinking about January, February and the measures that could have been brought in and would have made a difference in helping to limit the scale of the pandemic in the first wave, border measures clearly should have been part of dealing with the crisis,” she said. “Other countries, including New Zealand, Australia, South Korea, they put in very strong quarantine arrangements right from the very beginning, and the UK didn’t do any of those things. And then it inexplicably lifted [the guidance it had eventually put in place] on  13 March .” “There was then no testing, no self-isolation,” she added. “What actually happened during that period before lockdown was that 1 million people came back into the country with no tests. Other countries were doing the opposite. Everywhere else was bringing in stronger and stronger restrictions at the border, and the UK was removing restrictions at the border. The first wave was significantly worse, and developed faster, as a result of us not having those.” Experts told the home affairs select committee, which published a report on border controls in August, anything from 1,000 to 10,000 Covid cases may have been imported into the UK during this period. Patel staked her claim to be on the right side of history this week. In  comments that subsequently leaked , the home secretary told the Conservative Friends of India group: “On ‘should we have closed our borders earlier?’ the answer is yes, I was an advocate [of] closing them last March.” People with knowledge of the discussions last year corroborated Patel’s account – but claimed she had not pressed the point. “Priti was up for it. I’m not sure it was because of a strongly held epidemiological view or just because she heard ‘close the borders’ and liked the sound of it,” one senior Tory commented drily. Another said: “She didn’t really push it.” The prime minister’s  former chief aide Dominic Cummings  was also in favour of a more robust border policy, according to one source – with Johnson, as well as transport secretary, Grant Shapps, more sceptical about the benefits. Others recall “pushback” from Dominic Raab’s Foreign Office. Government insiders point out that their scientific advisers were not pressing for tighter controls on arrivals either. Published minutes show the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) committee of experts estimated on 3 February that reducing imported infections by 50% might only delay the onset of the pandemic in the UK by about five days – too short a period to make a difference to the under-pressure NHS, they concluded. By March, they believed thousands of cases had already arrived in the UK, and it was too late for action to be effective. The chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, said at a  Downing Street press conference on 13 March , as border controls were lifted, that there were already probably “between 5,000 and 10,000 people infected”. Prof John Edmunds, of Sage, agrees with that, saying: “March was already way too late.” At the time, ministers were also concerned about the impact of halting flights on freight and trade. When quarantine measures were eventually introduced in June, freight drivers were excluded. In the run-up to the restrictions being imposed, ministers were also subject to intensive lobbying from a “quash quarantine” campaign, involving travel companies and backbench Conservative MPs alarmed about the economic costs of the measure. “It’s not like just closing the door; it’s like closing the door and also refusing all parcels and deliveries. It has implications on food security, freight, all sorts of things, so it’s not something you want to do lightly,” said one witness to last year’s agonising decision-making. But they added: “If you knew now what you knew then, you would have closed the borders.” One harrowing year on, as the vaccine programme gathers speed but the UK has already mourned 100,000 Covid deaths, ministers appear determined not to make the same mistakes again – and that may mean sunshine breaks abroad will have to wait.
Indian hesitancy sets back world's biggest Covid vaccination drive:	India’s Covid-19 vaccine drive has been hampered by turnout as low as 22% in some states, as fears over the safety of the vaccine and the spread of misinformation has fuelled widespread hesitancy. On Saturday,  India  launched the world’s largest vaccination programme as it began the massive task of vaccinating its 1.3 billion citizens against coronavirus. On the first day of India’s vaccine drive on Saturday, more than 200,000 vaccinations were given –  the highest first-day total of any country, a government minister said  – but it nonetheless fell short of the nationwide government targets by more than 100,000. By Tuesday evening, the government said 631,417 people had been vaccinated, far below the expected figure. So far the overall national turnout has averaged a lacklustre 64%, while in states such as Tamil Nadu and Punjab, uptake of the vaccine was as low as 22% and 23% in the first two days of the vaccination drive. The low turnout was attributed to a nervousness about safety among the healthcare workers who were first in line to receive the vaccine, as well as technical difficulties with the app designed to alert people to their vaccine appointments. Two Covid-19 vaccines have been approved for emergency use in India, the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine – known as Covishield in India – and a domestically developed vaccine called Covaxin, produced by Indian company Bharat Biotech. The Oxford/AstraZeneva vaccine, which has completed international trials and was found to have about 62% efficacy with two doses, has already been widely distributed in the UK. Britain’s NHS  says  of the vaccines in use in that country: “The coronavirus vaccine is safe and effective. It gives you the best protection against coronavirus.” Covaxin has not completed phase 3 trials and so there is no final data on its efficacy, making India one of the few countries rolling out a vaccine still in its trial stages. However, the drugs controller of India said interim data from an ongoing trial of more than 22,000 people showed it was “100% safe” and effective. Nonetheless, some healthcare professionals in India expressed concerns that they had not been provided with enough data on the vaccines’ safety and efficacy and were nervous at the speed the vaccines were being rolled out. Dr Namrata Agarwal, a paediatrician in Kashipur, was among those not eager to take the vaccine. “I’m very hesitant,” she said. “All the protocols have been rushed and hurried through. I am not so concerned about the efficacy of a vaccine – that can vary – and I can handle that but what concerns me is its safety and the chance that it might cause harm.” On Tuesday, Bharat Biotech released a fact sheet of those with underlying heath problems who should avoid the Covaxin vaccine, raising questions about why it had not been publicised before the vaccine was released. Dr Mandeep Aulakh, a pathologist in Chandigarh, said she would wait a few weeks before getting vaccinated. “The vaccine development was rushed,” she said. “I also have a few allergies so I have not volunteered to take it.” The Indian government had hoped to vaccinate 300 million people by August, a target that will prove challenging if uptake remains at its current rate. In the capital, Delhi – which hopes to vaccine 100,000 people a day – only 3,598 healthcare workers received their vaccine on Monday, far below the daily target of 8,136, making uptake just 44% that day in India’s capital. In Delhi’s largest hospital, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), just eight healthcare workers out of an expected 100 turned up on Monday for their jab. In Mumbai, one of the cities worst affected by Covid-19, turnout for vaccines was 48% on the first day, with 1,926 out of a target of 4,000 people turning up for their vaccine. It was far below Mumbai’s ambitious target of vaccinating 50,000 healthcare workers a day. Dr Amit Thadhai, director of Niramaya hospital in Mumbai, said: “There have been a long series of questions which have been raised about the safety and efficacy of the vaccine. The fact that doctors have been asked to take it first has caused problems; doctors are not used to enrolling in trials which is why the uptake has been so low.” Thadahi said there was also a decreased sense of urgency to take the vaccine because the number of Covid cases in India was in rapid decline, with new cases at their lowest level since mid-June. “The motivation to take a vaccine is not great at the moment,” he said. On Saturday, the state of Maharashtra, which is home to Mumbai, temporarily suspended the vaccination drive after less than 2,000 people were vaccinated across the state. It was partly attributed to widespread technical glitches which meant people were not given alerts for their vaccination appointments. Misinformation and fake news about the vaccine was also doing the rounds on WhatsApp. In one widely circulated video, Dr Johan Denis, an alleged “medical doctor and homeopath” from Belgium, made the unsubstantiated claim that “the vaccine is not proven safe or effective” and the false statements that: “It’s a fake pandemic … it’s all been orchestrated to create fear to make you take the vaccine which might cause irreversible changes to your DNA.” Ashraf Buchson, a carpet seller from Delhi who had been forwarded the video, said the videos had given him second thoughts about the vaccine. “When I see these videos, I feel anxious. I don’t know who to believe and everyone in my family is divided,” said Buchson. The low turnout appeared to take state governments by surprise. In Karnataka only 47% of people registered to receive a vaccine had turned up to their appointments by Monday, making the state government unlikely to hit its target of vaccinating 650,000 healthcare workers by the end of the week. “Despite the district having the highest literacy rate in the state, I am surprised at why healthcare workers are reluctant to take vaccines,” Karnataka’s health minister, K Sudhakar, told local media. Many doctors said politicians and public figures should be publicly taking the vaccine to allay fears. “If well-known figures take it, it will help push up the numbers,” said Dr Sanjiv Zutshi, a cardiologist in Delhi who is going to get the jab in two days. Dr Arun Shah, a senior paediatrician in Muzaffarnagar, agreed. “The prime minister himself and the health minister should have the vaccine. That would reassure many people. And to create a sense of confidence, every vaccinated person should share photos and their experience on WhatsApp to spread reassurance,” said Shah. •  This article was amended on 22 January 2021. The 200,000-plus vaccinations given on the first day of India’s programme were the highest first-day total of any country, not the highest one-day total of any country as stated in an earlier version.
Portugal bans all UK flights – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Japan’s government has privately concluded the Tokyo Olympics will have to be cancelled  because of the coronavirus,  The Times has reported , citing an unnamed senior member of the ruling coalition. The government’s focus is now on securing the games for Tokyo in the next available year, 2032, the newspaper said.  French president Emmanuel Macron said France will make PCR tests compulsory for all travellers into France from Sunday , including from fellow EU countries, Reuters reports. Cross-border workers and land transportation will be exempt from that obligation, the French presidency added. The test will have to be carried out no later than 72 hours before departure. Here is a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe: Hotspots of Covid-19 infections in the European Union will be labelled “dark red” zones , and travellers from those areas will be required to take a test before departure and undergo quarantine, the chief of the bloc’s executive said. “A dark red zone would show that in this zone, the virus is circulating at a very high level,” European commission president  Ursula von der Leyen  said after a meeting of EU leaders, Reuters reports. “Persons travelling from dark red areas could be required to do a test before departure, as well as to undergo quarantine after arrival.” This system would apply to travel within the EU, she said. Von der Leyen said that with infections rising and contagious variants of the virus spreading fast, non-essential travel should be “strongly discouraged” within the EU but essential workers and goods must be able to cross borders smoothly. Spanish tennis player Paula Badosa has become the first player to test positive to Covid-19 while in hard quarantine ahead of the Australian Open. The world No 67 was one of 72 players forced to isolate in their hotel rooms after passengers on three separate charter flights to Melbourne tested positive. The 23-year-old took to Twitter late on Thursday night, stating that she had tested positive on the seventh day of her isolation. Authorities have not confirmed where she contracted the virus. “I have some bad news. Today I received a positive COVID-19 test result. I’m feeling unwell and have some symptoms, but I’ll try to recover as soon as possible listening to the doctors,” she said. “I’ve been taken to a health hotel [medi-hotel] to self-isolate and be monitored.” pic.twitter.com/9SLzW46HuZ Originally all players travelling to participate in the Australia Open were meant to enter a bubble where, after testing negative upon arrival, they would be allowed to leave their room for five hours a day to train at specially designated tennis courts. But this plan was complicated when three international charter flights had passengers test negative to Covid-19 prior to taking off, but positive upon arrival in Melbourne, suggesting they may have been contagious while flying. Portuguese prime minister  António Costa  has said all flights to and from Britain will be suspended from Saturday onwards as Portugal scrambles to tackle the rapid spread of the new variant of the coronavirus. Only repatriation flights will be allowed between both countries, Costa told a news conference.  He described the measure as a move to reduce the “risk of contagion” due to the new, more contagious variant of the coronavirus discovered in Britain, which is spreading across Portugal. Anthony Fauci , the top infectious diseases expert in the US, has spoken of a “liberating feeling” of being able to speak scientific truth about the coronavirus without fear of “repercussions” from Donald Trump. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, endured a tortuous relationship with the former president and was increasingly sidelined from public briefings. But the 80-year-old returned to the White House podium on Thursday after  Joe Biden  released a national Covid-19 strategy and signed 10 executive orders to combat a pandemic that has now claimed more than  400,000 lives  in the US. “One of the things that we’re going to do is to be completely transparent, open and honest,” Fauci told reporters. “If things go wrong, not point fingers, but to correct them. And to make everything we do be based on science and evidence. “That was literally a conversation I had 15 minutes ago with the president and he has said that multiple times.” Asked if he would like to amend or clarify anything he said during the Trump presidency, Fauci insisted he had always been candid, noting wryly. “That’s why I got in trouble sometimes.” Fauci and other public health advisers were forced to walk a delicate line as the president used coronavirus taskforce briefings to downplay the virus, push miracle cures and score political points. Fauci also said that, based on seven-day averages, the coronavirus may be plateauing in this US but warned there can always be lags in data reporting. “One of the new things about this new administration: if you don’t know the answer, don’t guess,” he said. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, has raised fears that tough Covid restrictions could continue well into the spring and beyond , as ministers refused to be drawn on plans for any potential easing of lockdown. While the vast majority of Tory MPs have toed the line since the new variant of the virus sent cases soaring, Downing Street’s reticence is already causing anxiety among a few backbenchers, who are urging an easing of the restrictions if vaccination rates stay on target. Downing Street is committed to reviewing the current England-wide lockdown in mid-February, by which point all people in the four top target groups for vaccinations should have been offered at least their first injection. But with 1,290 more UK coronavirus deaths recorded on Thursday, fears that infection rates in England might not even be falling, and the continued spread of the new, more infectious variant of Covid-19, Johnson was notably more cautious about lifting lockdown than he previously has been. “I think it’s too early to say when we’ll be able to lift some of the restrictions,”  he told reporters  during a visit to  flood-hit Didsbury  in Greater Manchester, when asked about the mid-February target. After Johnson’s spokesman declined to rule out lockdown remaining in place until the summer,  Priti Patel , the home secretary, was similarly cautious at the No 10 Covid press conference on Thursday afternoon. “It’s far too early to even contemplate where we go with restrictions,” she said, when asked about timings.  Patel instead announced  beefed-up fines to better enforce social distancing rules, with guests found at house parties of more than 15 people liable to incur fines of at least £800.  Joe Biden has said the US death toll from the coronavirus will probably top 500,000 next month, painting a grim picture of what he said would be a difficult battle. In a White House event, the new US president said the rollout of the vaccine had been a “dismal failure so far”. It will not be possible to host carnival celebrations in July, Rio de Janeiro’s new mayor has said, as Brazil’s second wave of coronavirus infections spreads, and with vaccine supplies still scarce. On Twitter, Eduardo Paes said he was aware of the economic and cultural benefits the world-famous party, originally scheduled for next month, brings to the city. But he said there was no way it could be held even in the middle of the year. I have never hidden my passion for carnival and the clear vision I have of the economic importance of this cultural event for our city. However, it seems pointless to imagine at this point that we will be able to hold the carnival in July. This celebration requires a great deal of preparation on the part of public bodies and of samba associations and institutions, something impossible to do at that moment. Thus, I would like to inform you that we will not have carnival in the middle of the year in 2021. Nunca escondi minha paixão pelo carnaval e a visão clara que tenho da importância econômica dessa manifestação cultural para nossa cidade. No entanto, me parece sem qq sentido imaginar a essa altura que teremos condições de realizar o carnaval em julho.  pic.twitter.com/B932v233En The latest delay to this year’s celebrations is not a surprise. Brazil is reeling from a brutal second wave in a pandemic that has claimed more than 200,000 lives, the second highest total in the world after the US. Meanwhile, the government is under growing pressure over the slow pace of its vaccine rollout. The French government will recommend that people wear surgical masks in public because fabric masks do not provide enough protection from Covid-19 transmission, health minister  Olivier Véran  has said. France already requires masks to be worn in public places, but until now has not made recommendations about the type of masks that should be worn in that setting. Véran, speaking to French broadcaster TF1, also said it was unlikely restrictions on ski resorts would be lifted next month, effectively ruling out a return to skiing in time for the February school holidays. He said the government could not rule out a tightening of coronavirus restrictions if virus transmission accelerates, Reuters reports. Spanish health minister Salvador Illa will resign next week to campaign in regional elections in Catalonia , an official from his party said, while national authorities reported a record 44,357 new daily coronavirus cases. From Reuters: “By Thursday of next week at 12 midnight, he will have given up his portfolio,” said  Miquel Iceta , the secretary of the Catalan Socialist Party. Illa, who has overseen Spain’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, had said he would step down when campaigning got underway for the election, which is set to take place on 14 February. Spain has been routinely reporting record daily coronavirus infections since the end of December, but a top health official said the recent surge appeared to be stabilising. “The increases we are seeing are getting smaller every day, which implies that we have reached an inflection point,”  Fernando Simón , the country’s health emergency chief, said. Despite that optimism, the nationwide incidence of the virus as measured over the past 14 days climbed to a new high of 796 cases per 100,000 people on Thursday from 736 cases the previous day. Simon warned that pressure on hospitals would likely continue into at least the next week. The latest figures brought the cumulative total of coronavirus cases in Spain to 2,456,675, while the death toll increased by 404 to 55,041. The Czech parliament has extended the country’s state of emergency until 14 February , a week less than the government had wanted as it seeks to keep in place measures to tamp down coronavirus infections. Reuters reports: The extension, pushed through with support of the Communist party, provides the government with a legal basis for some measures such as limits on assembly and movement, or temporarily shuttering businesses. The country of 10.7 million has been one of the worst-hit globally with 14,973 deaths so far and over 150 deaths most days this month as many hospitals are filled to capacity. Health minister  Jan Blatný  has called on the public to observe limits on social interactions to help break the trend, with the aid of stricter social distancing rules and the closure of most shops that came into force on 27 December. Officials have also said the number of those hospitalised with Covid-19 needs to fall by more than half to below 3,000 patients for the government to consider lifting some restrictions. The European Union has promised to help  Ukraine  obtain coronavirus vaccines as soon as possible, the county’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office has said, Reuters reports. Zelenskiy received assurances of support in a letter from European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen and European Council president Charles Michel, Zelenskiy’s office said in a statement. “It is emphasised that Ukraine can count on the solidarity of the European Union in obtaining a vaccine against coronavirus. The EU is taking steps to ensure Ukraine’s access to vaccines as soon as possible,” the statement said. The first batches of Covid vaccine under the Covax scheme could arrive in Ukraine in the first half of February, television channel Ukraine-24 quoted a senior Ukrainian lawmaker as saying earlier on Thursday. Ukraine, which has a population of 44 million and has registered around 1.2 million coronavirus cases along with 21,499 deaths, has already agreed to buy some vaccines from China. Ireland ’s Covid death rate is at its highest level since the start of the pandemic with an average of 44 deaths per day in the past week, a senior health official has said, Reuters reports. “The number of deaths confirmed per day over the last seven days, 44, is the highest we have seen at any point during the pandemic,” Philip Nolan, head of the government’s Covid modelling unit, told a news conference.  The infection rate, however, has fallen sharply from a pandemic high registered earlier in January. There were an average of 2,430 new cases over the past five days, down from a five-day average of 4,473 reported a week ago. The January spike followed an easing of public health restrictions in December. The growth was also fuelled by a new more transmissible variant of the virus that first emerged in Britain. The variant now accounts for around 60% of transmission in Ireland, chief medical officer Tony Holohan told journalists. Ireland on Thursday reported 2,608 new cases of Covid-19 and 51 deaths. A total of 2,818 have died from the disease in Ireland, which has a population of 5 million. Ireland on Tuesday reported a record 93 deaths. Hungary  has licensed Russia’s coronavirus vaccine, breaking ranks with other EU countries and ignoring calls to stick to a common European vaccine policy. Its foreign minister, Péter Szijjártó, was on his way to Moscow on Thursday to discuss the purchase, after Hungary’s medical body gave the Sputnik V vaccine emergency approval. Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s rightwing prime minister, has been strongly critical of the slow speed of the EU vaccine distribution programme. His chief of staff, Gergely Gulyás, said on Thursday: “If vaccine shipments arrive at this rate from Brussels, we can only get vaccines from other, alternative sources.” So far abut 140,000 people in Hungary have been vaccinated, with the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines. Officials are also in Beijing for talks over the approval of China’s Sinopharm vaccine. Surveys show Hungarians are among the biggest vaccine sceptics in  Europe , with fewer than half prepared to be vaccinated. The UN’s cultural agency has called on  France  to do more to stop the Musee de l’Eventail in Paris becoming the cultural world’s latest coronavirus victim, AP reports. The museum classed as a historical monument has until Saturday to pay up over 117,000 euros in rent arrears — stemming mainly from losses during lockdowns, otherwise it will close. And with it will go the savoir-faire of its workshop. The studio that teaches design and restoration to a new generation of fan-makers was placed on France’s intangible heritage list last year. In a rare intervention, Unesco called on France to honour the implementing of “safeguarding measures identified for this particular living heritage,” noting in response to AP’s reporting that Paris’ decision to place this knowhow on the list was taken already “while the pandemic was starting to expand at a fast pace.” “It is a tragedy. I can’t believe Parisians will let a part of their heritage die. I have a problem, because I always believed there would be a miracle,” the museum’s 74-year-old director, Anne Hoguet, said. The US House of Representatives is planning to bring a coronavirus relief bill to a vote in the first week of February, the speaker, Nancy Pelosi, has said. “We will be doing our committee work all next week so that we will be completely ready to go to the floor when we come back,” she said, according to Reuters. Biden has proposed a $1.9 trillion Covid-19 bill that would provide enhanced jobless benefits and direct cash payments to households struggling amid the economic fallout from the virus.  Though Biden’s Democratic party holds narrow majorities in the House and Senate, the legislation will likely need bipartisan support to clear procedural hurdles and emerge out of the Senate. Some Republicans have raised questions about shovelling out more direct payments on the heels of last month’s enactment of a coronavirus aid bill. Many of them also oppose aid to state and local governments, a top priority of Democrats.
What is the Order of Australia, who decides the awards and can they be challenged?:	The process of awarding Orders of Australia has come under scrutiny in recent years, after a series of contentious appointments sparked furious backlash. Between 2019 and 2020, formal reviews have been requested for awards made to  controversial sex therapist Bettina Arndt , robot sex expert and former far-right political candidate  Prof Adrian Cheok  and former journalist  Mike Carlton . The decision to give former tennis player  Margaret Court the highest honour  in the awards system has also been heavily criticised due to Court’s stance on LGBTQ+ rights, including comments that transgender children  were the work of “the devil” . How does the process work? The awards are considered by an independent body called the Council for the Order of Australia. Nominations can be made by any member of the public  by submitting them online to the council. Staff at the council conduct additional research and contact referees. The council then decides whether to recommend the nominations to the governor general, to not recommend, or defer. Officially, the governor general, David Hurley, then considers and approves the award appointments, but he does so on the advice of the council. The council itself has 19 members, who are appointed by the governor general on the recommendation of the prime minister. The current chair is Shane Stone. Orders of Australia are awarded twice a year – on 26 January and the Queen’s birthday. Awards take between 18 months and two years to be processed, according to the council. There are four levels of award within the Order of Australia. Court, for example, had already been made an Officer of the Order of Australia (the second highest honour) in 2007, and will be made a Companion of the Order, the highest rank, in 2021. Awards can be reviewed by the council, and concerned parties can also write to the governor general, who can then refer the award to be reviewed by the council. In February 2020, awards given to Arndt and Carlton were referred for review. Arndt’s award for “gender equity through advocacy for men” was heavily criticised due to  a 2018 interview she conducted with a convicted paedophile  in which she described the behaviour of female students as “sexually provocative”. She was further criticised after she  congratulated Queensland police for saying they would keep an “open mind”  about whether the death of Hannah Clarke and her children was a case of a  “husband being driven too far” . Arndt  accused her critics  of “engaging in virtue signalling at the expense of supporting free speech and proper discussion of key social issues”. The Victorian attorney general, Jill Hennessy, wrote to Hurley asking him to rescind the honour over the interview with the paedophile. The Victorian Liberal MP, Tim Smith, also wrote to Hurley asking him to rescind the honour over her comments on Clarke. The federal Liberal senator, Sarah Henderson, wrote to Stone, the chair of the council, saying the award “should be cancelled”. My letter to the Chairman of the Council of the Order of Australia Shane Stone. Ms Bettina Arndt’s award as a Member of the Order of Australia in the General Division should be cancelled.  pic.twitter.com/8vlUdJFtdy Carlton’s award was referred after journalist  Sharri Markson criticised  swearing and violent imagery in his tweets. He responded that he’d been subject to a News Corp Australia attack that was “a vicious and disgraceful vendetta”. In June 2019, Cheok –  a man who advocates sex with robots who had been accused of poor conduct with his peers , and  had run as a candidate for Fraser Anning’s Conservative National party  – also had his honour reviewed. The chapter president of the Digital Games Research Association Australia, Brendan Keogh, wrote to formally challenge the honour alleging that Cheok had a “track record of abusive behaviour towards other academics” on social media. In the 2019 federal election, Cheok attracted 868 votes in the lower house seat of Boothby in South Australia  running for Anning’s party. Cheok also said in 2019 he was setting up a graduate school that  would teach classes on “Trumpism” and “Bannonism”. At the time of the honours controversy, Cheok  told the Guardian he was a worthy recipient  and the criticism was “about creating a perception and getting an emotional public reaction rather than dealing in precise facts”. The office of the governor general told Guardian Australia in February 2020: “In all matters relating to the Order of Australia, the governor general acts on advice from and recommendations made by the Council for the Order of Australia. “When the governor general receives correspondence – including requests to terminate or cancel an award – it is referred to the council … for advice and action.” Yes, but the bar is high. Last year, Stone said none of the awards that were reviewed would be revoked. Awards can be revoked when a person “has behaved or acted in a manner that has brought disrepute on the Order”. But Stone said this grounds would require a criminal conviction. “In the council’s view and as a general principle, for the Order to be brought into disrepute, a conviction, penalty or adverse finding must have occurred,” he said. “In essence, the council … uses law as the threshold for termination and cancellation.” He added that political or social views would not be grounds for “disrepute”. “In a system that recognises hundreds of people each year, it is inevitable that each list will include some people who others believe should not be recognised,” he said in a  statement . “Unanimous community approval is not a criteria for council to make a recommendation … Individuals are neither qualified nor disqualified on the basis of their political leanings, social views or religious convictions.” Other grounds for termination include when information for the recommendation “is found to be based on false or misleading material”. In 2019, Scott Morrison said he would strip Cardinal George Pell of his Order of Australia  if he failed in his appeals against multiple sexual assault convictions . Pell was later acquitted by the high court, and he retains his award. The council says that it includes the legal appeals process in its consideration for criminal charges. The percentage of people who win awards after being nominated is generally quite high. In 2019, there were a total of 1,374 nominations for the Queen’s birthday honours and 993 were granted – 72%. More statistics are here:
'Do we have that much to fear from a 12-year-old Aboriginal kid that we need to cage them?':	Daniel Daylight will never forget the day a young Indigenous boy asked for bail in the children’s court so he could attend his year 6 farewell. The 33-year-old Gamilaroi man was working as the Aboriginal client and community support officer at Parramatta children’s court in Sydney’s west. His main role was to refer kids to support services but he did whatever he felt was needed: talked to parents and lawyers, and bought kids lunch when they turned up hungry with no money. Daylight soon noticed a pattern. The same kids kept returning to the court, from the age of 10 to 18. “You don’t see them after 18 because they graduate,” he says. “They’ve gone into big boys’ jail.” But why was it the same kids, with the same needs? Why were some still homeless, year after year? After a decade working in the system, he reached a conclusion. The system isn’t working. The system is broken. “The system as a whole still looks at Aboriginal people and wants to control us,” he says. Daylight believes that if some of the funds governments spend on detention were funnelled into Aboriginal-owned and -run programs, the outcomes would be different. He now works for a not-for-profit organisation called Weave Youth & Community Services. It can be hard to tell which “system” he is referring to – youth detention, the out-of-home care system, or the courts. To him they’re the same interconnected series of traps young people need to survive. “I had more cousins in jail than other people had cousins,” he says. “What I like to do is try and extricate ourselves from those systems, try and help our people get self-determination where they don’t have to report to parole, they’re not being told where to live.” At the children’s court Daylight saw kids with complex needs, while the available services were siloed. As kids bounced from service to service, their underlying problems were rarely addressed. Some were known as “crossover kids”, going from out-of-home care into to the criminal justice system and back again. Once a child came to court for breaching an apprehended violence order for putting honey in a washing machine. The boy was charged with malicious damage. Daylight regularly saw 10- and 11-year-olds charged with minor offences. One kid was brought to court for stealing a chocolate bar. Police decided a caution wasn’t enough because “he had an attitude”, he says.  “Maybe he has an attitude because he’s had a hard life?” Daylight says. “If you are a 10-year-old coming before the children’s court and coming quite often, it is because you have no support. You’re in an out-of-home care placement and you’ve got a lot of issues … We’re criminalising them.” One day Daylight got an email from Sue Duncombe, a magistrate at the New South Wales children’s court. Duncombe wanted to explore alternative sentencing options for young Aboriginal offenders. “I just said whatever it is, I’ll do it,” Daylight says. “I was watching 14-year-olds going to adult custody, 10-year-olds languishing in juvenile custody and we were all sitting there getting paid. We were not doing anything to change the trajectory for these young people. We needed to try something different.” In February 2015, on the back of the goodwill of people in the system and the community, the youth Koori court began. At its opening, Duncombe spoke of the need to work “with and alongside” Aboriginal people.  The court is for Aboriginal kids aged 10 to 17 who have entered a guilty plea. The magistrate, elders and support workers sit in a circle and discuss any problems the young person is facing – such as homelessness, drug use, anger management issues – and assess his or her physical, emotional and spiritual health. Then they make a plan. Meetings take place every four weeks for up to 12 months. Each plan is tailored to suit the changing needs of the child and, at the end, the subject’s performance is taken into account during the sentencing process. Time spent on a Koori court plan can count as “time served”. In 2018 University of Western Sydney researchers found that young people engaged with the court were less likely to end up in detention, with average days spent in detention falling by more than 50%. A second youth Koori court was established in inner  Sydney  in early 2019. But Daylight doesn’t measure success in numbers. Though he left the Koori court in 2018 his life is still intertwined with those he met there. One young man who had spent most of his childhood in custody from the age of 12 was able to get a job and housing, and is now accessing support services at Weave. Daylight regularly sees one of the first participants of the Koori court, then a 15-year-old whose brothers were all in custody. She’s now in her early 20s and hasn’t spent a day in custody in the past five years. But Daylight says waiting for kids to come to court and plead guilty is starting way too late. “I want to stop people from ever going to court. I want to stop us focusing on having culturally safe courts, when really we need to have culturally safe communities and cities – where we don’t assume that an Aboriginal person walking down the street has a criminal record.” At Weave, he helps 18- to 30-year-olds leaving prison resettle into the community. According to the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics, almost 60% of people in this age group are back behind bars within a year. In  this program  it’s less than 5%. But Daylight says repeated attempts to secure government funding have been rejected. He sees the lack of funding for community-based solutions and Aboriginal community-controlled organisations as a big part of the problem. In 2019 NSW spent  $17.7bn  on the “stronger communities cluster”: services including the police, courts, corrective services, child protection and emergency services. One of its key aims was “breaking the cycle of reoffending” but Daylight says the money rarely goes to Aboriginal organisations. “The whole issue comes down to self-determination and community control,” he says. “Our people know what the answers are.” A key to success is flexibility. Government-run programs have strict criteria, meaning kids who may need the most support can be ineligible. “We need to help people who need help. The biggest problem with the whole system is there’s no caring.” For Daylight, one of the most important ways to stop Indigenous kids from entering into a troubled system is raising the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14. “Do we really have that much to fear from a 12-year-old Aboriginal kid that we need to cage them away from their family and away from their community?” “Or do we need to take a good hard look at ourselves and realise the 12-year-old did not get there by themselves. They were pushed on to that path by circumstances they had no control over. “The fact that we still need to argue to not lock up a 13-year-old kid is ridiculous to me and it shows how far we have to go.” The Childhood in custody series is supported by the Barlow foundation. Read more about how the Guardian funds some content  here .
I thought my eating disorder was my protector, but I have been anorexia's prey:	Name:  Melis Layik Age:  21 Dreams of:  Being a lawyer, an author and a grassroots organiser I increased my dosage of antidepressants today. With the loosening of Victoria’s Covid restrictions and the surge of New Year’s weight loss marketing, my eating disorder has once again overwhelmed me with feelings of inadequacy and self-loathing. I’m splayed on the couch, light-headed and nauseous; classic side effects of my medication. But it’s worth it. Antidepressants have been a life-saving intervention in my mental health journey, particularly in the past year. I’m so glad I never listened to the fear-mongering and mythology which surrounds them. The notions that I would “feel nothing” and that my “personality would change” have turned out to be completely unfounded. To the contrary, they have allowed me to live my life free from perpetual rumination, anxiety and self-harm. In the short term, though, I am dizzy. I’ve been recovering from an eating disorder for over five years. The illness has infiltrated my mind and robbed me of joy. I have missed out on dinners, parties and holidays because of my chronic fear of gaining weight. I have spent hours at the gym instead of seeing friends and have self-harmed after eating food I perceive as unhealthy. I have internalised so deeply that my value lies in my proximity to thinness that my self-worth has become directly proportional to how little I can consume on any given day. I have been anorexia’s prey, all while thinking that it was my friend and protector, my arbiter of discipline. When I heard that gyms were going to be closed during the pandemic, I spiralled into paranoia. My mind was plagued with visions of my future obesity, accompanied with delusions that my friends, family and partner would find me repulsive. While I recognised the absurdity of these claims, the power of the illness was overbearing; my rationality did not stand a chance. My fears were validated by the endless barrage of home workouts which were marketed to me and I loathed myself for not creating an at-home gym using my couch and some sacks of rice or lifting my fridge a hundred times a day. My mind repeated its bigoted script:  You are so lazy, you are weak, you are repulsive. With so much time on my hands during Victoria’s extended lockdown, with uni being online and still with no work for me to go to, it became even easier to berate my appearance. Hours were spent in front of the mirror, pinching my skin, measuring my waist, checking my reflection from every angle for signs of imperfection. I felt profoundly lonely in these ruminations and feelings. It seemed like everyone else could eat and exist without a second thought. But I recognise now that I wasn’t the only one. Around one million Australians suffer from eating disorders and the limitations of extended Covid lockdowns and restrictions have reportedly  worsened many people’s illnesses . Disruptions to routine, use of videoconferencing (which exposes individuals to their own image) and increased marketing of weight-loss programs have also culminated in heightened negative body image and restrictive behaviours in the  general population. Now in the New Year, I once again feel victimised by the fitness industry. It jeers that I need to fix myself, become thinner and transform into a better “me”. My eating disorder agrees, bolstered by this external validation. Years of therapy have taught me that I need to resist the compulsion to appease my illness and buy into this narrative, but it’s so hard when both the outside world and my internal dialogue is telling me otherwise. I feel defeated, but equally, I feel enraged. It’s the same trick every year. Images of models chiseled and photoshopped to perfection, thrust upon us all to inspire feelings of inadequacy, all cloaked in the language of health. Ads meticulously engineered to target feelings of insecurity so we buy whichever product promises us thinness and eternal happiness. No wonder eating disorders are so prevalent. It’s essential to raise awareness for the insidiousness of these tactics and advocate for better mental health education. I’m glad I can finally recognise this propaganda for what it is. I’ve lost years of my life to an eating disorder and I will not lose any more. The truth is I don’t want to lose weight in 2021. I want to gain mental wellbeing. •  In Australia, support is available at  Beyond Blue  on 1300 22 4636,  Lifeline  on 13 11 14, and at  MensLine  on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity  Mind  is available on 0300 123 3393 and  Childline  on 0800 1111. In the US,  Mental Health America  is available on 800-273-8255
Portugal's health system 'very close to limit' – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Brazil  had 33,040 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 551 fatalities, the first day in six the death toll has been below 1,000, the health ministry said on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 8,488,099 cases since the pandemic began, and the official death toll has risen to 209,847, according to ministry data. It is the world’s third worst outbreak behind the United States and India. Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the  NHS  in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. Stevens said the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” Stevens said on Sunday. Over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the  UK  government has announced. More than 3.8 million people – including over-80s, care home residents and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will begin to be offered to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups but sites that have enough supply, and capacity to vaccinate more people, will be allowed to offer jabs to the next two cohorts. Ghana ’s Covid-19 infection rates are skyrocketing and include strains of the virus not previously seen in the country, threatening to overwhelm the health system, President Nana Akufo-Addo said on Sunday. Since 5 January, the number of active cases has risen to 1,924 from about 900 , Akufo-Addo said in a speech. There are now  120 severe cases, up from 18 a week ago . The president said that some people arriving from abroad had tested positive for “new variants” of the virus. Last week, Gambia recorded its first two cases of the highly infectious UK variant, in what appears to be the first confirmation of its presence in Africa. Ghana is not yet close to the peak seen during the first wave of infections in the middle of last year, but could quickly reach that level if cases keep rising at the current rate. If they do, the president said he would impose another partial lockdown, despite worries about what that would do to one of west Africa’s largest economies. “Our Covid-19 treatment centres have gone from having zero patients to now being full because of the upsurge in infections,” the president said. “At this current rate ... our healthcare infrastructure will be overwhelmed.” Across Africa, a second coronavirus wave is infecting twice as many people per day than at the height of last year’s first wave  and has yet to peak, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The rise has raised concern across the continent where, unlike in  Europe  and the United States, cash-strapped governments have been unable to secure supply deals with vaccine manufacturers, putting the onus for now on containment. Akufo-Addo said details about access to vaccines and a rollout plan would be announced “very soon”. Schools in  Malawi  will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday. After reporting no positive cases for almost two months, the country has seen a sudden resurgence in coronavirus cases since the middle of last month. The country of 19 million people has reported 12,470 cases of Covid-19 and 314 deaths since the pandemic began last year. Chakwera said  a third of those deaths were reported in the past 16 days , forcing the government to seek additional funding to contain the pandemic at a time when the country is in 4.1tn kwacha ($5.37bn) of debt. The new measures concerning schools and bars will take effect from Monday. Chakwera also said the government has allocated an additional 1.6bn kwacha ($2.1m) in funds to be spent on recruiting frontline healthcare workers, 1,000 intensive care unit beds and 1,000 oxygen cylinders among other requirements. Last week the government reported that two senior cabinet ministers and two other high-profile members of the government had died from Covid-19. Workers in  Melbourne  are expected to return to city offices in large numbers on Monday, with research indicating most feel safe and ready to return after nine months of remote working. Private workplaces in  Victoria  are able to return to 50% capacity from Monday, with public service offices permitted to ramp up to 25%. A Roy Morgan survey of 503 city workers from late November to mid-December shows almost two-thirds were either willing to return to their central  Melbourne  workplaces (44%) or had already (15%). The most commonly cited factors making workers feel safe to return were Covid-safe plans and adherence to health measures. France  reported a further 141 deaths from coronavirus on Sunday, taking the cumulative toll since March to 70,283, the public health authority said. It also reported 16,642 new infections within the previous 24 hours. The infection figures on Sundays are usually lower because fewer tests are taken. The number of daily cases has been hovering around 20,000 for the last week. The health ministry said in a separate statement that 422,127 people had now been vaccinated, up from about 413,000 on Saturday. Eurostar  has said it is facing an existential threat, as business leaders pleaded with the government to step in and save the “vital link” with Europe. A 95% drop in passenger numbers  has brought the cross-Channel train service to its knees, and the company reiterated on Sunday that while government loans had been extended to aviation, international high-speed rail had also been severely affected by the pandemic. Here’s a graphic showing the number of vaccine doses US states have administered, courtesy of ourworldindata.org  Portugal ’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. “Our health system is under a situation of extreme pressure,”  Health  Minister Marta Temido told reporters on Sunday afternoon after a visit to a struggling hospital. “There is a limit and we are very close to it.” The health system, which prior to the pandemic had the  lowest number of critical care beds per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe , can accommodate a maximum of 672 COVID-19 patients in intensive care units (ICUs), according to health ministry data. The number of people in ICUs with COVID-19 reached 647 on Sunday, according to health authority DGS. The Portuguese Association of Hospital Administrators said the number of coronavirus patients needing hospitalisation was likely to dramatically increase over the next week. Three days into a nationwide lockdown, the country of just 10 million people reported 10,385 new cases and 152 fatalities on Sunday, bringing the total number of infections to 549,801, with the death toll increasing to 8,861. According to  ourworldindata.org , supported by Oxford University,  Portugal had the highest number of coronavirus cases in Europe per capita over the last seven days . Most new cases were concentrated in Lisbon, where many patients at the city’s public hospitals have already been transferred elsewhere, including to health units in the country’s second biggest city Porto. The  UK  variant of the coronavirus has killed three residents at a retirement home in northwestern  Belgium  and infected 111 people including 39 staff members, its director Jurgen Duyck told AFP on Sunday. The cluster represents two-thirds of the residents of the De Groene Verte home in the  western Flanders city of  Houthulst  near the border with France. Belgium has suffered one of the worst per capita death rates in the world during the epidemic with its nursing homes representing more than half of overall deaths from the disease, according to the Public  Health  Institute. Mayor Joris Hindryckx said the outbreak prompted a halt to “all social and sporting activities” in the town of around 10,000 people. The source of the contamination is unknown, but the mayor said the infection must have been “indirect” as none of those testing positive was known to have travelled to Britain. Brazil ’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. The vaccines produced by Oxford/AstraZeneca and China’s Sinovac will both now be permitted in South America’s biggest country, which has the world’s second highest Covid death toll with more than 209,000 deaths. The decision was taken on Sunday afternoon after three of Anvisa’s five directors voted for the move. The ruling is a major victory for Brazil’s 212 million citizens - reeling from one of the worst epidemics in the world - but a stinging political defeat for the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro. Bolsonaro has failed to acquire any doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and as a result vaccination with Sinovac’s CoronaVac is likely to begin on Sunday in São Paulo state. São Paulo is governed by one of the president’s biggest political rivals, João Doria, who has championed the Chinese vaccine. Doria will reportedly offer the first shot to a local intensive care nurse called Mônica Calazans on Sunday, making a high-profile pronouncement he hopes will cement his image as Brazil’s Covid saviour in the public imagination. “Brazil is in a rush to save lives,” Doria tweeted on Sunday afternoon. Bolsonaro’s Twitter account remained silent.
