'We can't cope': Lesotho faces Covid-19 disaster after quarantine failures:	A Covid-19 disaster is threatening the small southern African kingdom of  Lesotho  after revelations that the government released people who had tested positive for the virus from quarantine early. Government sources this week said they had been sending Covid-19 patients home from as far back as last June over cost concerns. It comes as the country, the last in Africa to record a case of the virus, recorded a sharp rise in cases in recent weeks after high numbers of workers travelled home from  South Africa  for the Christmas holidays. According to the latest figures from the National Covid-19 Secretariat (Nacosec), Lesotho had 4,137 cases as of Wednesday, up from 2,137 on 1 December. The country has a population of about 2 million. Moeketsi Majoro, the prime minister, has responded by imposing an 8pm curfew, closing bars and nightclubs, banning sports and closing schools. It came as South African immigration officials estimated that, since Monday, more than 100 travellers a day from Lesotho were testing positive at border points. The department of home affairs said that those who tested positive for the virus were being turned back, except for South African citizens, who were being quarantined. Of about 130,000 people who have entered Lesotho from South Africa since the beginning of December, just 20% had Covid clearance certificates and only about 39,000 were tested for the virus. Thousands more people are believed to have crossed the border illicitly, unable to afford the 800-rand (£38) Covid-19 test, and seven bodies were  recovered from the Mohokare River  in the last week of December. Police say others are still missing. On Wednesday several minibuses transporting Basotho people without Covid-19 clearance certificates were stopped by the police in South  Africa . A Lesotho government source told the Guardian authorities had stopped quarantining travellers because most of those sent to the facilities were not showing symptoms. He said it was decided that seriously ill patients would be sent to hospital. However, the hospitals are also overwhelmed. “We did away with quarantine facilities in June because most of the people sent there were not even showing signs, hence it was a strain on our already thin budget. It was decided that only those who were seriously ill would be sent to hospital. We now owe them [the quarantine centres] over R100m rand (about £4.8m),” the source said. Nacosec risk communications manager Baroane Phenethi said new quarantine facilities were now being identified. “We never anticipated a surge. We are trying to identify quarantine facilities for those who are asymptomatic. Those who are visibly sick would be sent to hospitals,” Phenethi said. He warned of more deaths in the coming weeks. Lesotho authorities have been overwhelmed because of the huge cross-border traffic with South Africa, where cases have also risen exponentially over the festive period. “We are anticipating a rise in cases and even deaths. Cases are rising because people crossed [into Lesotho from South Africa] through illegal borders and are only being tested now when they are returning to South Africa. What’s worse is that the new Covid-19 variant is more severe than the one we had during the first wave,” Phenethi said. Last week the government said it would ensure that at least 200 people a day were tested for Covid-19 in each of the country’s 10 districts. Motlatsi Maqelepo, the health minister, said this would ensure 2,000 results daily. However, a tour of the Maseru testing centre at Makoanyane primary school in Ha Leqele this week revealed that fewer than 100 people were being tested each day. A health worker who wished to remain anonymous said the dire situation was worsening. “The system is overwhelmed and it cannot cope with the huge numbers. Of course, the minister said 2,000 results would be available daily but that is ambitious. “We have a colleague here at Queen Mamohato Memorial hospital who was tested in December and results were expected on the next day. She got confirmation that she had Covid-19 after the hospital authorities begged the laboratory to speed up the process on 2 January. She died two days later. “The situation is bad and we cannot cope.”
Indian village run by teenage girls offers hope for a life free from abuse:	Each afternoon the men of Thennamadevi leave their village and head for the surrounding fields, many carrying bottles of high-strength home-brewed alcohol. Hours later they stagger back home through the paddy fields of the state of Tamil Nadu in southern  India . Thennamadevi is racked by alcoholism. Most of its 150 male inhabitants participate in ruinous daily  drinking sessions . Around 90 women with families in the village have been widowed. The youngest husband to die was 21. However, over the past six months something remarkable has happened to break the cycle of squalor and despair: the teenage daughters of the drunken men have taken over the running of the place. And it’s working. A self-titled “young girls’ club” has fixed the street lights, completed a health audit of the village and ensured that mobile clinics visit Thennamadevi. A library is being built where well-thumbed books promote the virtues of learning and independence. The phenomenon of teenage female self-help has made aid agencies and politicians across the state sit up and take notice. In the communal building, beneath the glow of a single lightbulb, the girls assembled earlier this month for a debate on further improvements. A petition urging better transport links – no buses pass near the village – has been drafted to be put to the local council. Debate is earnest, each discussion ending in a show of hands. Only when consensus is reached does the committee move to the next issue. “We are trying to transform our village by this process. We are empowered to be leaders,” said Says Sowmya, 16, president of the club. Others are focused on more intimate issues, such as shepherding peers through adolescence. “I teach my friends on life skills such as personal hygiene, self-discipline and menstrual issues,” said Rajendhiran Sridevi, a 16-year-old “trainer”. Sathiya Babu, deputy project director of  Scope India , which helps deliver opportunities for the poor, said the gap between the ambitions of the young and the expectations of parents was widening. “The youngsters know that somebody has to do these things for the community. These girls are taking control of running the village. They want change.” There is another incentive for the young women’s intervention. A sense of hopelessness had taken hold among Thennamadevi’s teenagers, prompting a number to flee in search of a better life. Sridevi and Sowmya have frequently discovered that friends have disappeared, heading towards cities such as Chennai and never heard of again. Local records reveal that at least 150 children from the area have attempted to run away. Six kilometres from the village, via a labyrinthine network of tracks, lies the town of Villupuram and one of the most crucial rail stations in southern India. Built under the British, five major lines converge at Villupuram junction, connecting the  country’s southern tip  with Chennai and the east coast. When Babu began investigating the Thennamadevi runaways, one common thread emerged: every one of them had passed through Villupuram station. He heard reports of other minors wandering platforms alone, their clothing torn and grubby. Some were naked. Scope’s international partner, the charity  Railway Children , began encouraging the station’s 40 cleaners to report children travelling alone. Days before the  Observer  visited, a malnourishd eight-year-girl was found on platform six wearing only a T-shirt. More than 1,000 unaccompanied minors were found at the station in the two years to June 2017. When questioned, most explained they just wanted to see more of the world, although 49 said they were fleeing abuse and another 90 said they were seeking relatives. One such was Magelier Kural, a shy 16-year-old from Thennamadevi. Kural had wanted to visit Pondicherry, 30km away on the coast. When cleaners found him on platform five, he was in tears and calling for his family. “I wanted to have new experiences and see some sights.” Kannan Jeevanantham, 16, was spotted on platform one hoping to catch the train north to Chennai to escape his father’s drinking. “I had no plan, no money. I needed to escape,” said Jeevanantham, who is now studying at a technical institute and is among those delighted that the “young girls’ club” has assumed responsibility of his village. Yet problems endure. Calls to Villupuram’s Childline in the year to this May illustrate the perils facing Thennamadevi’s children. Of almost 4,000 reported incidents, 3,016 involved petty crimes, 552 concerned children forced to beg, and 193 described cases of forced marriage, one documenting a 15-year-old being made to marry a man of 45. A further 39 calls heard claims of sexual abuse and 84 detailed children who had disappeared without trace. Despite the best efforts of Railway Children, minors still vanish, sometimes taken by traffickers who use India’s vast rail network to  move their human cargo . Villupuram’s platform cleaners are instructed to keep a particular lookout for groups of children led by one or maybe two adults. Navin Sellaraju, Railway Children’s director for India, said: “These interventions are vital to protecting vulnerable children from trafficking and child labour.” Speaking at the police station in Villupuram, the town’s anti-human trafficking officer, Chinnamariappan Padmashree, sifts through updates on criminals passing through the region. “Lots of children are being kidnapped and going missing,” she said. “We have many cases of sexual crimes, forced labour and kidnapping, crimes against women and children.” All the children rescued belong to a lower caste, a factor that some believe makes children vulnerable to traffickers. Interviews found 70% belonged to the Sadhu caste, a fifth came from the “most backward” caste and 10% from the “backward” caste. Yet the biggest blight remains alcoholism, with entire families fleeing to the station. One such family is the Managattis who lived beside platform 1 for years. It was a fraught existence. Amudha Managatti describes struggling to keep her son and eight daughters safe. Her eldest, then aged 15, was targeted by abusers. “They took advantage of her, many people in the town were involved,” said Babu. A deserted home was renovated for the family and the children given school places. Her eldest daughter is now married with her own family, a journey that proves that narratives can be amended. For the teenagers running Thennamadevi it is the possibility of change that inspires them. Senior club member Gowsalya Radhakrishnan said: “By not accepting our fate we will give others the knowledge they can shape the future.”
Guatemala mine's ex-security chief convicted of Indigenous leader's murder:	A judge in  Guatemala  has accepted a guilty plea by the former head of security at Central America’s largest nickel mine who was on trial for killing an Indigenous leader, in a rare conviction over human rights violations allegedly linked to Canadian-owned mining companies in the region. Mynor Padilla was found guilty on Wednesday of homicide for the 2009 fatal shooting of Adolfo Ich, a Maya Q’eqchi’ teacher and community leader who opposed the Fenix mine outside the town of El Estor. “We have spent a long time seeking justice,” Angélica Choc, Ich’s widow, told the Guardian outside the courthouse, in Puerto Barrios, a port city 185 miles east of Guatemala City, following the ruling. “It is not going to bring my husband back, but I feel satisfied.” Transnational mining corporations, most of them Canadian, their personnel, and state security forces have been accused by human rights groups of a litany of abuses in Central America, including the killings of mine opponents. Prosecutions are rare, and criminal convictions of mining company personnel are almost unheard of in the region. Patricia Quinto, who represented Choc, a joint plaintiff in the trial, said that the verdict set an important precedent in the country.  “The judge noted mining companies have generated conflicts,” said Quinto. At the time of the killing, the Fenix mining project was owned by Toronto-based Hudbay Minerals, which faced opposition from local Indigenous communities to plans to reopen the mine. The company faces  ongoing civil lawsuits in Canada  related to violence against Indigenous residents, including Ich’s killing. “We will review the court’s written decision once it is released. Any agreements made in the Guatemalan court do not affect our view of the facts or Hudbay’s liability in relation to civil matters currently before the Ontario court,” a Hudbay Minerals spokesperson told the Guardian in a statement. The nickel mine had previously operated under other Canadian ownership during the country’s 1960–96 civil war between the military and leftist guerrillas. An estimated 200,000 people were killed during the war, most of them Indigenous Maya civilians killed by the military. Corporate land and mining rights acquired under military rule sparked decades of conflict and opposition from local Indigenous communities. The Fenix mine is located on the country’s largest lake, in a predominantly Maya Q’eqchi’ region in eastern Guatemala. The mine has been linked to violence for decades, including extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances during the civil war, according to a United Nations back truth commission. The mine reopened amid violent clashes  with local protestors in 2014, and it is now owned by the Solway Group, a Russian conglomerate. In 2019, Guatemala’s constitutional court  upheld a petition to suspend operations at the mine  pending consultation with affected Indigenous communities. “There are many brothers and sisters in this struggle,” said German Chub, who was shot and paralysed by mine security personnel on September 27, 2009, the same day Ich was killed. A former army lieutenant colonel, Padilla was also found guilty on three counts of culpable injury for his role in Chub’s shooting and assaults on two other Indigenous men from a nearby village. Padilla spent four and a half years in prison prior to an initial 2017 acquittal, overturned in appeals. He pleaded guilty in December 2020 following a sentencing and reparations agreement between the prosecution and defense. He will not face further jail time. Padilla and his defense lawyers declined comment following the ruling Wednesday. The full sentence will be formally issued on 13 January. “For me it is a relief and at the same time it brings sadness,” Chub told the Guardian. “It took us so long to be heard.”
Covid used as pretext to curtail civil rights around the world, finds report:	The state of civil liberties around the world is bleak, according to a new study which found that 87% of the global population were living in nations deemed “closed”, “repressed” or “obstructed”. The figure is a 4% increase on last year’s, as civil rights were found to have deteriorated in almost every country in the world during Covid-19. A number of governments have used the pandemic as an excuse to curtail rights such as free speech, peaceful assembly and freedom of association, according to  Civicus Monitor , an alliance of civil society groups which assessed 196 countries. By using methods such as detention of protesters, excessive use of force, censorship, attacks on journalists, and harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders, many governments have used Covid-19 to “introduce or implement additional restrictions on civic freedoms”, the report said. The group categorised fundamental freedoms of association, peaceful assembly and expression as either “closed”, “repressed”, “obstructed”, “narrowed” or “open”, based on a  methodology  which combines several data sources. More than a quarter live in the worst rated countries – “closed” – where state and non-state actors routinely imprison, injure and kill people for attempting to exercise their rights. China, Saudi Arabia and Turkmenistan are among the countries in this category. “The use of detention as the main tactic to restrict protests only shows the hypocrisy of governments using Covid-19 as a pretence to crack down on protests, [as] the virus is more likely to spread in confined spaces like prisons,” said Civicus Monitor’s research lead Marianna Belalba Barreto. “Our research reflects a deepening civic space crisis across the globe and highlights how governments are using the pandemic as an excuse to further curtail rights, including by passing legislation to criminalise speech.” Of the 196 countries assessed for the study, just two – the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sudan – improved their rating, moving from “closed” to “repressed”. Eleven countries were downgraded, among them the US, Costa Rica, Ivory Coast, Iraq, the Philippines and Slovenia. Overall, the report says, the outlook for people’s civil liberties is bleak. In the US, as millions of protesters took part in the  Black Lives Matter  movement, the Trump administration responded with excessive force, police violence and mass detentions, the study found. In recent years, several states have enacted restrictive laws which limit people’s right to peacefully protest, while across the US, reporters were increasingly detained or injured while conducting interviews or covering protests, researchers found. Chile, Costa Rica and Ecuador were also downgraded in the study. In Europe, “authoritarian” moves by governments using the pandemic “as a pretext to curtail freedoms” have restricted civil rights in Hungary, Poland, Slovenia and Serbia. In west Africa, four countries – Ivory Coast, Guinea, Niger and Togo – were downgraded from “obstructed” to “repressed”. Another trend noted by the research group was the direct targeting of excluded groups such as LGBT+ people, immigrants or refugees, said Civicus Monitor researcher Josef Benedict. “In Uganda, we saw  LGBT people targeted  under the pretext of Covid-19 … while in India, informal migrants, who have already been  negatively impacted by government policies , faced further violations by the state,” said Benedict. “The expansion of surveillance is also of concern. China, which already had an extensive surveillance industry,  used the pandemic to expand that technology , and in Armenia and Israel, the governments took monitoring measures far beyond what is acceptable under international human rights law.” Civicus Monitor is calling for governments to work with civil society and human rights defenders “to halt this downward spiral and push back against the authoritarian forces at work”.
Bob Grose obituary:	For some people, the work they do and the life they lead are in perfect alignment. My friend and colleague Bob Grose, who has died aged 71, was one of those people. He did historically important work on HIV/Aids for the World  Health  Organization (WHO) in Africa, and for polio, HIV and leprosy for the Overseas Development Administration (ODA, later DfID) in India. Writing for War on Want in the mid-1980s, Bob was one of the first to predict that truckers would be high-risk vectors for the HIV epidemic in Africa. He was quickly snapped up by the WHO’s Global Programme on Aids (later UNAids) in Geneva, where he worked from 1987 to 1992 as a technical adviser. He was ahead of his time, mobilising community groups in Africa to raise awareness of the epidemic: a focus of UNAids to this day. As the ODA’s senior health and population adviser (1992-99), he oversaw several huge projects: the eradication of polio (every year more than 100 million children were immunised in a single day); the launch of India’s efforts to combat the HIV epidemic; and the elimination of leprosy. All of these stories have happy endings: polio has been eradicated in India, HIV is well controlled and 200,000 people were cured of leprosy on his watch. Bob is remembered by his colleagues there as a consummate professional, kind, wickedly funny, with a complete absence of ego. Bob was born in his grandmother’s nursing home in Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, to Nicholas, an auctioneer, and Kathleen (nee Rushworth), a physiotherapist, although the family lived in Fowey, Cornwall. He attended Truro school before qualifying as a chartered surveyor at the College of Estate Management in Kensington, London. He travelled a good deal before doing a master’s in international administration at Cornell. It was in 1983, during an early posting to Yemen, that Bob met Jane Springham, who was working as a nurse at a small clinic on the Red Sea coast. They married in 1988. Bob was determined to raise his young family near the Cornish countryside where he grew up, so in 1999 they moved from India to a farmhouse in Brownston in the South Hams, Devon. Bob spent the final decade of his career at HLSP, an international health consulting firm. When he retired in 2014, he became deeply committed to climate activism, and was arrested as part of Extinction Rebellion’s demonstrations in April 2019. The couple moved to Totnes when Jane retired three years ago. Bob was fearsomely fit. He performed a seven-minute plank during a family lockdown competition and thought nothing of a 20-mile kayaking trip. In Jane’s words, “he died as he lived, cycling up a hill on a mountain bike, covered in mud, with a smile on his face. He wouldn’t have wanted it any other way.” His family remember him as “the most extraordinary man to live with”, a devoted father who woke up every morning interested in something new. He is survived by Jane and their daughters, Catherine and Eleanor, and by his brothers, Timothy and Richard.
US Capitol attack: Trump at bay as first Republican senator calls for resignation:	Donald Trump’s grip on the US presidency appeared increasingly tenuous on Saturday as Democrats advanced plans to impeach him for a second time, political allies continued to abandon him and Twitter  banned  his account, removing his most powerful way to spread lies and incite violence. Adding to the pressure in the aftermath of Wednesday’s deadly riot in the US Capitol building by Trump supporters, one Republican senator, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, openly called for the president’s removal. “I want him to resign. I want him out. He has caused enough damage,” she said, punctuating the wave of disgust that followed Trump’s goading of a mob seeking to overturn his election defeat by Joe Biden. Five people died , including a police officer who confronted rioters and  a rioter shot  by law enforcement.  Multiple arrests have been made , among them a Florida resident  photographed walking off  with the lectern of the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. The US attorney’s office said a 70-year-old Alabama man  was charged  with possession of molotov cocktails and assault weapons after his pickup truck was discovered  packed with homemade bombs and guns . Articles of  impeachment  charging Trump with inciting an insurrection and having “gravely endangered the security of the United States” and its institutions, were set to be introduced in the US House of Representatives as early as Monday, Pelosi said. The move is part of a multi-pronged approach by  Democrats  pressing for Trump’s removal ahead of Biden’s inauguration on 20 January. Pelosi, who  spoke to the leader of the US military  seeking to ensure Trump cannot launch a nuclear attack in his remaining days in office, has also called for his removal via the 25th amendment, which provides for the ejection of a president deemed unable to fulfil his duties. The treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, was  reportedly  among officials to discuss such a course. But it seems unlikely, particularly as cabinet members who would participate in the process have  resigned . White House sources have asserted  Trump will not resign  or turn over power to Vice-President Mike Pence to seek a pardon, so a second and high-speed impeachment looms. In his first impeachment, over approaches to Ukraine for dirt on political rivals,  Trump was acquitted  by a Republican-held Senate. This time, more Republican senators are indicating support. Murkowski became the first, telling  the Anchorage Daily News : “I think he should leave. “He’s not going to appear at the inauguration. He hasn’t been focused on what is going on with Covid. He’s either been golfing or he’s been inside the Oval Office fuming and throwing every single person who has been loyal and faithful to him under the bus, starting with the vice-president. “He only wants to stay there for the title. He only wants to stay there for his ego. He needs to get out. He needs to do the good thing, but I don’t think he’s capable of doing a good thing.” Murkowski’s intervention was dramatic, echoing the delegation of  Republicans  who went to Richard Nixon and told him to resign before he was impeached over Watergate in 1974. Ben Sasse, Republican senator for Nebraska, was also critical, accusing Trump of a “dereliction of duty” and indicating he was  open to impeachment . Many more Republicans would have to turn for the president to be convicted and removed, however, even if a trial could be held before inauguration day. A House impeachment vote later this week would send the case for trial, but Mitch McConnell, the Republican Senate leader, has indicated the chamber would  not consider proceedings  until after the inauguration. Several  Republicans  have said they would not support impeachment. Jeff Flake, a Trump critic and former senator for Arizona, told CNN on Saturday it would be better if Trump “just went away”. Trump will be vulnerable to prosecution, either state or federal, after leaving the White House. If he was successfully impeached he  would also lose all benefits  of life after the Oval Office, including pension and Secret Service protection, and the option of running for office again. Twitter’s decision to  permanently suspend Trump’s account , meanwhile, separates the president from a megaphone he has manipulated to spread lies and misinformation. Since Wednesday, he has called for calm and promised to respect the transfer of power but he has also continued to falsely claim the election was stolen by means of massive electoral fraud. The company, which had previously removed Trump tweets, cited repeated violations of rules and risks including the “further incitement of violence”. Twitter  said  two tweets sent on Friday were “highly likely to encourage and inspire people to replicate the criminal acts that took place at the US Capitol”. Plans for “future armed protests” were spreading, the company warned, “including a proposed secondary attack on the US Capitol and state capitol buildings on 17 January”. A 7ft “non-scalable” fence was being erected around the Capitol, where it was set to remain for at least 30 days. A state of emergency was declared in Washington until the day after the inauguration. More than 6,200 national guard personnel would be in the city over the weekend, mayor Muriel Bowser said. The backlash against Trump also extended to two rightwing Republican senators, Ted Cruz of Texas, and Josh Hawley of Missouri, who led failed efforts to object to Biden’s election on the same day as the riot. Cruz’s hometown newspaper, the Houston Chronicle, said his lies had cost lives and  called for his resignation . Publisher Simon and Schuster  cancelled Hawley’s book deal , accusing him of “a dangerous threat to our democracy and freedom”. Following Democratic victories in  Senate races in Georgia , the Republicans have lost control of both the White House and Congress, prompting introspection in party ranks. Murkowski said she was considering leaving. “If the Republican party has become nothing more than the party of Trump, I sincerely question whether this is the party for me,” she said.
Boeing 737 carrying 62 people feared to have crashed into sea near Jakarta:	An Indonesian passenger plane carrying 62 people that went missing on Saturday is feared to have crashed, after suspected debris was found in the sea north of Jakarta. The Boeing 737-500, which departed from Jakarta’s international airport at about 2.36pm, lost contact four minutes later. Data from the flight tracker FlightRadar24 said Sriwijaya Air flight SJ182 had reached an altitude of nearly 11,000ft (3,350 metres) before dropping to 250ft. The plane was carrying 50 passengers, including seven children, among them three infants, and 12 crew members, according to the transport ministry. It was scheduled to make a 90-minute journey over the Java Sea to Pontianak, the capital of West Kalimantan province on Borneo island. A local fisherman reported that he had seen possible debris at 3.30pm, when an explosion was first heard, according to Deby Riana Sumanthi, the head of maritime agriculture and food security for the sub-department of Thousand Island-Jakarta. Footage of suspected wreckage was also broadcast on Indonesian TV. “We found some cables, a piece of jeans, and pieces of metal on the water,” a security official told CNNIndonesia.com. It has not been confirmed that the debris came from the flight. Agus Haryono, a rescue agency official, told Reuters that 50 people were searching for the aircraft and would continue working into the night. Indonesia’s transport ministry said it was investigating the incident. “A Sriwijaya plane from Jakarta to Pontianak with call sign SJY182 has lost contact,” said ministry spokesman Adita Irawati. “It last made contact at 2:40 pm (0740 GMT).” The president director of Sriwijaya Air, Jefferson Irwin Jauwena, said the airline was coordinating with Basarnas, the National Search and Rescue Agency and the National Transport Safety Committee. The airline, which was founded in 2003, mostly flies within  Indonesia  and has an otherwise solid safety record. The plane, a Boeing 737-500, does not use the same software system as those involved in two crashes that killed hundreds of people and left Boeing in crisis, according to Reuters. In October 2018,  189 people were killed  when a Lion Air Boeing 737 Max jet crashed into the sea minutes after taking off from Jakarta for a domestic flight. Months later, a Boeing 737 Max 8 crashed in Ethiopia,  killing all 157 people onboard . The US justice department fined Boeing $2.5bn last week after the company was charged with fraud and conspiracy in connection with two crashes. A Boeing spokeswoman said: “We are aware of media reports from Jakarta, and are closely monitoring the situation. We are working to gather more information.” Indonesia, the world’s largest archipelago nation, has also been criticised for poor safety standards in its aviation industry, which has been plagued by accidents. An AirAsia plane crashed in 2014 with the loss of 162 lives.
Donald Trump fans cry betrayal as he rebukes Capitol violence:	Donald Trump’s belated “concession” to a peaceful and orderly transition of power after  the storming of the US Capitol  has provoked anger and conspiracy theories among some of his most ardent followers. On social media channels and chatrooms like Parler and 4chan, where far-right Trumpists have gravitated as other social media sites have increasingly shut out the president, there were complaints of betrayal. Trump claimed on Thursday  that he was “outraged by the violence, lawlessness and mayhem” of the Capitol siege that he had incited, and said those who “broke the law will pay” – comments that perhaps reflected concern over mounting legal and political hazard rather than a newfound sense of contrition and integrity. Nevertheless they prompted an outpouring of anger, grief and denial from his hardline acolytes. “A punch in the gut,” said one. “A stab in the back,” another railed. From a third: “I feel like puking.” A widely shared screengrab summed up the sentiment: “He says it’s going to be wild and when it gets wild he calls it a heinous attack and middle-fingers to his supporters he told to be there.” Others turned to conspiracy theories, not least in the dark corners of 4chan and Parler, where the cult of  QAnon  holds sway. Many here saw not a Trump concession but either a “deep fake” video concocted by Trump’s enemies, or secret messages that indicated Trump was still on track to deliver on QAnon’s deranged promises. “FAK fake fake He’s been locked out of his  Twitter  he can’t get into it he couldn’t get into it he couldn’t get into today it’s been closed out for ever,” opined someone called Magafree. “He has a plan here President Trump would not back down that easily,” wrote Brenda. “We need to stand strong, keep watch and pray. Something big is coming and Gid [God] is going to see it through.” The reactions of the more mainstream elements of the Trump-era echo chamber have been more instructive. Sites such as Breitbart and the Daily Caller appear to have swung behind an emerging Republican consensus that has become increasingly hostile to Trump, blaming him not only for the storming of the Capitol, but also for delivering the presidency, the  House of Representatives , and, earlier this week,  the Senate  to the Democrats. Breitbart’s main story on Trump’s concession video was delivered in a relatively straight way, although the site tried to spin it as a Trump “change of tone”, suggesting all he had done was “return to his campaign theme of law and order”. The comments below were, however, rather less mannered and careful. “There will NEVER be ‘reconciliation’,” wrote Freedomring17. “We have irreconcilable differences, and the fight has just begun. We need to disown the RNC until they support the Patriot party.” For “NMP” the consequence was obvious and Trump part of the problem. “He could have declared martial law, like [Michael] Flynn said, instead he got patroits [sic] to show their face and they did and now they know who they are looking for.” For the bitter-enders, like TrumpSupporterLTD, the sentiments were of a piece with the QAnon crowd over on 4chan – an almost metaphysical belief that Trump, despite the wealth of evidence, continues to move in mysterious ways “Trump did not concede. He used language to buy a little extra time because the senators and congressmen who support him are being threatened with dirty bombs and their families’ lives by the Deep State and/or communist Chinese … I have it on good grounds that Trump will be moving with the military And regarding the transition to a new administration, means Trump with a new VP Pence is obviously a traitor and is ‘fired’.”
Capitol mob member who lounged at Nancy Pelosi's desk is arrested:	A man  photographed lounging  with his foot on the desk in House speaker Nancy Pelosi’s office in Washington as part of a pro-Trump mob that breached security and rampaged through the US Capitol was arrested on Friday. Richard Barnett, 60, of Gravette, Arkansas, was taken into custody in that state and, along with the West Virginia state representative Derrick Evans, who was also arrested, faces federal charges stemming from the siege of the Capitol on Wednesday, federal prosecutors said. Barnett was arrested on federal charges of entering and remaining on restricted grounds, violent entry and theft of public property, according to a Department of Justice official,  NBC reported . In addition, the acting US attorney general, Jeffrey Rosen, announced that the FBI would team up with Washington DC’s metropolitan police department to investigate jointly  the death  of the Capitol police officer Brian Sicknick, a military veteran from New Jersey. He died from injuries sustained while defending the Capitol, where he was  reportedly hit  in the head with a fire extinguisher. The FBI has issued appeals for the public’s help in identifying those who took part in the riot, who face  arrest and court . “Just because you’ve left the DC region, you can still expect a knock on the door if we find out you were part of the criminal activity at the Capitol,” said Steven D’Antuono, the FBI Washington field office’s assistant director in charge, at a telephone news briefing on Friday. Barnett spoke to a New York Times reporter shortly after storming Congress, where  thin security was breached  on Wednesday afternoon as hundreds  charged the building  after attending a rally where Donald Trump encouraged the group to go to the Capitol in an attempt to overturn the election that he  lost to Joe Biden . Barnett recounted stealing an envelope from the Democratic House speaker’s desk. “I didn’t steal it,” Barnett told the reporter. “I put a quarter [25c] on her desk, even though she ain’t fucking worth it, and I left her a note on her desk that says, ‘Nancy, Bigo [his nickname] was here, you bitch.’” Here’s Mr. Barnett, who goes by “Bigo,” telling the story in his own words  pic.twitter.com/oSyKiCDXgy Barnett leads a pro-gun rights group in Arkansas and according to  the Washington Post  had identified as a white nationalist in a Facebook post days before the riot took place. Derrick Evans, a newly elected Republican member of the West Virginia house of delegates, part of the state legislature, was taken into federal custody, with a reporter for the local NBC affiliate WSAZ  sharing a video  of the event. #BREAKING  WV Delegate Derrick Evans has been taken into federal custody.  He’s charged after allegedly entering a restricted area of the US Capitol with rioters Wednesday.  A woman saying he was his grandmother came out telling us to leave as he was put in a car.  #WSAZ   pic.twitter.com/wK2RqFcaF7 On Wednesday, Evans reportedly filmed himself storming the Capitol, shouting: “We’re in! Keep it moving, baby!” Ken Kohl, a federal prosecutor, said Evans faces criminal charges after he apparently “recorded himself storming the Capitol”.
Theodore Lumpkin Jr, Tuskegee Airman, dies from coronavirus:	Theodore Lumpkin Jr, one of the famed Tuskegee Airmen of the second world war, has died from complications of the coronavirus, days before his 101st birthday. The Tuskegee Airmen were the first black pilots in the segregated US military and among the most respected fighter pilots of the second world war. Lumpkin, a Los Angeles native, died on 26 December, according to a statement from  Los Angeles  City College, which he attended from 1938 to 1940. California has been particularly hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic, which has infected nearly 22 million in the US  and killed 368,599 . Lumpkin was drafted in 1942 and assigned to the 100th Fighter Squadron in Tuskegee, Alabama, which later helped escorted bombers in Europe. Lumpkin’s eyesight wasn’t good enough to be a pilot but he was an intelligence officer who briefed pilots on missions, according to the Los Angeles Times, which confirmed his death through his son, Theodore Lumpkin III. Lumpkin’s wife, Georgia, told the Times that he didn’t talk much about his experiences with the airmen. “We were married for a number of years until I heard about them,” she said. “When I realized who these guys were and what they’d done, I was just overcome at how much they persevered. They did not bow down. They achieved things that detractors said they couldn’t, weren’t capable of doing.” After the war, Lumpkin earned an undergraduate sociology degree at the University of Southern  California , became a social worker with Los Angeles county and after retiring went into a second career in real estate. In 2007, the Tuskegee Airmen were collectively awarded the congressional gold medal. Lumpkin also was among the surviving airmen invited to attend the presidential inauguration of Barack Obama in 2009. Lumpkin is survived by his wife, two sons, a daughter, several grandchildren and a great-grandchild.
Woman believed to be last remaining widow of US civil war soldier dies:	Helen Viola Jackson’s 1936 marriage to James Bolin was unusual to say the least: he was 93 and in declining health, and she was a 17-year-old schoolgirl. Bolin was also a civil war veteran who fought for the Union in the border state of Missouri. Jackson was almost certainly the last remaining widow of a civil war soldier when she died on 16 December at a nursing home in Marshfield,  Missouri . She was 101. Several civil war heritage organizations have recognized Jackson’s quiet role in history, one that she hid for all but the final three years of her life, said Nicholas Inman, her pastor and longtime friend. Yet in those final years, Inman said, Jackson embraced the recognition that included a spot on the Missouri Walk of Fame and countless cards and letters from well-wishers. “It was sort of a healing process for Helen: that something she thought would be kind of a scarlet letter would be celebrated in her later years,” Inman said. Jackson grew up one of 10 children in the tiny south-western Missouri town of Niangua, near Marshfield. Bolin, a widower who had served as a private in the 14th Missouri Cavalry during the civil war seven decades earlier, lived nearby.  Jackson’s father volunteered his teenage daughter to stop by Bolin’s home each day to provide care and help with chores. To pay back her kindness, Bolin offered to marry Jackson, which would allow her to receive his soldier’s pension after his death, a compelling offer in the context of the Great Depression.  Jackson agreed in large part because “she felt her daily care was prolonging his life,” Inman said.  They wed on 4 September 1936, at his home. Throughout their three years of marriage there was no intimacy and she never lived with him. She never told her parents, her siblings or anyone else about the wedding. She never remarried, spending decades “harboring this secret that had to be eating her alive,” Inman said.  After Bolin’s death in 1939, she did not seek his pension.  She also realized the stigma and potential scandal of a teenager wedding a man in his 90s, regardless of her reason. In an oral history recording in 2018, Jackson said she never spoke of the wedding to protect Bolin’s reputation as well as her own.  “I had great respect for Mr Bolin, and I did not want him to be hurt by the scorn of wagging tongues,” she said.  Inman and Jackson were longtime friends. She was a charter member of the Methodist church where he serves as pastor. One day in December 2017, she told Inman about her secret marriage to a much older man. She mentioned in passing that he fought in the civil war.  “I said, ‘What? Back up about that. What do you mean he was in the civil war?”’ Inman said.  Inman checked into her story and found that everything she told him was “spot on”. Officials at Wilson’s Creek National Battlefield sent him copies of Bolin’s service information. She identified where he was buried, in Niangua.  She also kept a Bible that he gave her, in which he wrote about their marriage. Those written words were good enough for the Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War and other heritage organizations to recognize Jackson’s place in history.  After a lifetime of avoiding her past, Jackson embraced it in her final years, Inman said. She spoke to schoolchildren and had a Facebook page dedicated to her. She enjoyed getting cards and letters.  She also found new peace. A stoic nature that kept her from shedding tears at her own siblings’ funerals seemed to evaporate.  After Bolin’s relatives found out about Jackson’s role in his life, they went to the nursing home and presented her with a framed photo of him.  “She broke down and cried,” Inman recalled. “She kept touching the frame and said, ‘This is the only man who ever loved me.”’ 
22 disasters, 262 dead, $95bn in damages: US saw record year for climate-driven catastrophes:	The US was battered by a record number of weather and climate-driven disasters in 2020 as extensive wildfires scorched the west, hurricanes in quick succession pummeled the east and extreme heat swept across the heart of the country, a new federal government report has shown. A total of 22 major disasters, defined as each causing at least $1bn in damage, swept the US last year, six more than the previous record,  according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (Noaa) . At least 262 people died, with $95bn in total damages recorded, the federal agency reported on Friday. The year was marked by punishing extremes on both the east and west coasts. It was the most active wildfire year on record in the US west, with California recording five of the six biggest fires in its history, an outbreak that destroyed thousands of homes and caused the sky to turn an apocalyptic orange over the San Francisco Bay Area. A total of 10.3m acres burned in wildfires in 2020 across the US west, an area larger than Maryland and well above this century’s average. On the eastern seaboard and Gulf of Mexico, a record 12 tropical storms made landfall during a year when forecasters had to turn to the Greek alphabet for storms’ names because the sheer number of events had exhausted the planned list of names. Seven of these caused more than $1bn in damage, including hurricanes  Laura  and  Sally , which hit the US south in quick succession in August and September. Three hurricanes and two tropical storms hit Louisiana alone. A major drought and heatwave blasted the US west last year, there were three major tornado-related disasters and a highly destructive derecho, which is an event driven by fast-moving thunderstorms, that downed power lines, damaged houses and  flattened crops in the midwest . Noaa reported that last year was the fifth hottest on record across the contiguous US, which follows a longer-term pattern of national and global heating – all of the five warmest years on record in the US have occurred since 2012. While hurricanes and wildfires have always hit the US, scientists  have found  that the strength of storms is increasing as the atmosphere and ocean heats up, while the area eaten up by fire  has grown as  rising temperatures dry out soils and vegetation. “The record number of climate change-exacerbated weather disasters this year drives home the fact that, as I like to say, the impacts of climate change are no longer subtle,” said Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Penn State. “We’re seeing them play out in real time. Hopefully this is the year where we finally see the sort of action, by the US and the rest of the world, that is necessary to prevent things from getting worse.”
Now the Swedish model has failed, it's time to ask who was pushing it:	W hen future historians come to write the story of Britain’s chaotic pandemic response, one question in particular will surely puzzle them: why, as the UK experienced one of the world’s worst Covid outbreaks, did so many prominent public figures spend so much of 2020 talking about  Sweden ? Almost as soon as Boris Johnson announced a national lockdown in late March, British newspaper columnists and professional contrarians demanded that the prime minister adopt “the Swedish model” – and they were still urging the same in  September . We now know with certainty what public health experts have long predicted: a light-touch coronavirus approach does not work. Sweden has recorded far higher death rates than its Nordic neighbours, while suffering a similar economic hit. Even the country’s  king thinks it has “failed” . And yet, through the late autumn, as the Covid virus was mutating in England, Sweden was still being cited as an example to follow. In mid-October, the Tory MP Christopher Chope was in parliament extolling the virtues of what he previously called Sweden’s “clear and simple” approach. Just last month, the Telegraph columnist  Allison Pearson tweeted  that she “admired Sweden’s handling of the pandemic”. Of course, the full-throated cries of “Sweden” from sections of the conservative press were less about the birthplace of Abba, and more about fostering the idea that  Britain could just “open up” , if only politicians were brave enough to do so. Self-styled lockdown sceptics promised – and  still promise  – that “herd immunity” would save us all, and routinely pointed to Sweden’s adoption of this approach as proof. Our future historians will doubtless wonder, too, just how, in the imagination of many on the British right, Sweden went from  gang violence-riddled dystopia  to exemplar in a few months. The answer is quite simple: the same small group of people who talked so fervently about Sweden’s libertarian refusal to lock down – newspaper columnists, backbench MPs, anonymously funded thinktanks – have massively outsized access to British public debate. All of this is very familiar. In  my latest book , I chart how a cadre of backbench Tory MPs, anonymously funded thinktanks and ubiquitous media commentators turned “no-deal Brexit” from an outlandish notion to “nothing to fear”. During the pandemic, the same strategies were employed – often by the same people. Having held up Norway as a model during the Brexit referendum, Daniel ( soon to be lord ) Hannan said we could all be like Sweden. Christopher Snowdon of the Institute of Economic Affairs  declared that Sweden  had demonstrated “a more sensible way to balance risk, liberty and the economy”. After so successfully mobilising the European Research Group of Tory MPs to push for a hard Brexit, Steve Baker even started up a tribute act: the Covid Recovery Group, or CRG for short. All this talk of Sweden appears to have influenced the decision-making in Downing Street. A recent report in the Sunday Times suggested Johnson chose not to impose a circuit-breaker lockdown in September after  a meeting with chancellor Rishi Sunak and three proponents of a herd immunity strategy : Sunetra Gupta and Carl Heneghan of the University of Oxford and Anders Tegnell, the epidemiologist behind Sweden’s laissez-faire approach to the pandemic. (When openDemocracy asked for details of Tegnell’s correspondence with the prime minister’s office, it was told that any release could compromise the formulation of government policy.) The ubiquity of contrarian voices on Covid played into Boris Johnson’s well-documented  tendency for indecision . As anyone looking to influence the prime minister knows, when faced with an array of choices, he will often do nothing. The delay in imposing restrictions in England after September’s meeting with Tegnell and co led to an estimated 1.3m extra Covid infections. The rhetoric around the Swedish model – and herd immunity – set the stage for Britain to loosen restrictions faster than scientists, or even the public, wanted. We were even offered a financial incentive to do the one thing we have always known spreads the virus: mix indoors. The image of a maskless Rishi Sunak serving meals in a London Wagamama to launch August’s “eat out to help out” initiative has not aged well. ( Research suggests  that the scheme directly contributed to a rise in infections.) Sunak is part of the growing  libertarian trend  among Conservative MPs, many of whom have been vociferous in their opposition to renewed lockdown measures. Lockdown sceptics have had financial support, too: the much-discussed   Great Barrington declaration , which advocated herd immunity, was coordinated by a US thinktank that has  received funding  from the billionaire Koch brothers, who pumped huge sums into the Republican party and its fringes. All of this has shaped Britain’s haphazard pandemic response. Faced with pressure from lockdown sceptics in the media and inside his own party, Johnson dithered, time and again. When the prime minister’s chief scientists were urging greater restrictions in December, the prime minister’s transport secretary  Grant Shapps was announcing  a £3m scheme to bus people to visit their family at Christmas. Less than a week later, most of England went into tier 4. Meanwhile, lockdown sceptics are still  cherrypicking data  to suggest that Covid is overhyped ,  even as  hospital cases surge  to new highs. The British government is now facing 2021 with a Covid infection rate that the health secretary admits is out of control, but with many of its own MPs firmly opposed to further restrictions. Maybe we shouldn’t wait for the historians’ verdict before we ask ourselves whether it is a good idea to allow a handful of pundits, thinktanks and backbenchers to exert such a pull on British public life. Peter Geoghegan is investigations editor of openDemocracy. His book, Democracy for Sale, is published in an updated paperback on 7 January
Pioneering Observer columnist Katharine Whitehorn dies aged 92:	Katharine Whitehorn , the pioneering newspaper columnist and author, has died aged 92. The Cambridge graduate worked briefly as a model before embarking on a celebrated writing career, working for publications including the Observer, Picture Post and Saga magazine, where she was agony aunt for 19 years. She joined the Observer in 1960, at a time when national newspapers were overwhelmingly dominated by men, and was known for her tongue-in-cheek pieces. Whitehorn was the first woman to have her own column in the Observer, and was the star columnist at the newspaper for almost 40 years. An  infamous article that defended domestic “sluts”  challenged attitudes to working women. Under the headline Sisters Under the Coat, Whitehorn asked women whether they had changed stockings in a taxi, cleaned their nails or “ever taken anything out of the dirty-clothes basket because it had become, relatively, the cleaner thing?” Her conclusion was that “the only way a slut can really get things done is to get someone else to do them”. Whitehorn worked for the Observer until 1996 and returned to write  regular columns for the Observer magazine  until 2017. She lived in Hampstead, north  London , before moving to a nearby care home after being diagnosed with advanced Alzheimer’s disease. Bernard Lyall, the elder son of Whitehorn and her late husband, the crime novelist Gavin Lyall, paid tribute to his mother. He said: “She was held in a lot of high esteem, part of the whole vanguard of feminist journalism at that time. She always worked from home. She was very loyal and deeply in love with my father, they were together for over 40 years until he died in 2003.” Lyall said that, along with his younger brother, Jake, his parents made up a “tight family”. He said: “They both had a liberal attitude to a lot of things. They had both strived to be well educated.” Whitehorn also wrote the totemic 1961 handbook Cooking in a Bedsitter and was a contributor to BBC Radio 4’s A Point of View. Her book  was adapted into a Radio 4 comedy drama in 2016  starring Beattie Edmondson as a lonely girl in London rescued by recipes, and Nikesh Patel as a young Indian medical student who lived across the landing. In October last year,  her large wooden desk that she had worked on, designed by Kai Kristiansen , was donated to an auction to raise money for a charity that cares for people with Alzheimer’s disease. The newspaper veteran was awarded a CBE for services to journalism in 2013, half a century after she first turned down an honour.
Sturgeon acted 'honourably' over Salmond assault claims, says Blackford:	The Scottish National party’s Westminster leader, Ian Blackford, has said  Nicola Sturgeon  “acted in an honourable way” after Alex Salmond reportedly claimed she breached the ministerial code by misleading the Scottish parliament. Former first minister Salmond’s submissions to an inquiry into sexual assault claims against him have been obtained by national newspapers, in which he claims Sturgeon’s evidence over when she knew about the allegations was “simply untrue”. Sturgeon said she entirely rejected Salmond’s claims. Sturgeon, who took over as first minister and SNP leader in late 2014, initially told Holyrood she first heard of complaints of sexual misconduct against her predecessor at a meeting with him at her home on 2 April 2018. In Salmond’s subsequent criminal trial, however, it was revealed Sturgeon had been made aware of the allegations in an informal meeting with his former chief of staff Geoff Aberdein on 29 March that year – four days earlier. Sturgeon later told the inquiry she had forgotten about the encounter. Blackford said he did not believe the allegations about Sturgeon were correct. He told BBC Radio 4’s Any Questions programme: “I believe that the first minister has acted in an honourable way; she’s someone that I’ve every faith and trust in. “I can tell you that the approval ratings for the first minister, the respect that she has right up and down the country of  Scotland , is enormous and this is something that will pass – when she appears in front of the committee, these matters will be dealt with.” In his inquiry submission, Salmond said the March meeting had been arranged after Aberdein was told of two allegations made under a new complaints procedure set up in light of the MeToo movement. According to The Herald, Salmond said: “This (preliminary) meeting was for the purpose of discussing the complaints and thereafter arranging a direct meeting between myself and the first minister. “There was never the slightest doubt what the meeting was about. Any suggestion by the first minister to the Scottish parliament that the meeting was ‘fleeting or opportunistic’ is simply untrue. “Most seriously, parliament has been repeatedly misled on a number of occasions about the nature of the meeting of 2 April 2018. “The first minister told parliament (see official report of 8, 10 & 17 January 2019) that she first learned of the complaints against me when I visited her home on 2 April 2018. “That is untrue and is a breach of the ministerial code.” Salmond, who was cleared of 13 charges at the high court in Edinburgh last March, also confirmed to the Times that he had submitted the evidence to James Hamilton, the independent adviser on the ministerial code who is conducting a separate investigation into Sturgeon. A spokesperson for the Scottish government said: “The first minister and the permanent secretary stand by what has been said to parliament and in written evidence to the committee. “The permanent secretary has also already provided detailed answers in person to the committee and will provide further oral evidence on Tuesday. “The first minister looks forward to answering questions when she appears later this month. “In relation to the ministerial code referral, Mr Hamilton has the freedom to investigate as he feels is appropriate and we will not prejudge that process.” A spokesperson for Sturgeon said: “The first minister entirely rejects Mr Salmond’s claims about the ministerial code. “We should always remember that the roots of this issue lie in complaints made by women about Alex Salmond’s behaviour whilst he was first minister, aspects of which he has conceded. “It is not surprising therefore that he continues to try to divert focus from that by seeking to malign the reputation of the first minister and by spinning false conspiracy theories. “The first minister is concentrating on fighting the pandemic, stands by what she has said, and will address these matters in full when she appears at committee in the coming weeks.”
Robot wars: 100 years on, it's time to reboot Karel Čapek's RUR:	N ot many plays introduce a new word to the language. One that did was Karel Čapek’s RUR: Rossum’s Universal Robots that had its premiere in Prague 100 years ago this month. Every time we use the word “ robot ” to denote a humanoid machine, it derives from Čapek’s play, which coined the term from the Czech “robota” meaning forced labour. But a play that was hugely popular in its time – its Broadway premiere in 1922 had a cast that included Spencer Tracy and Pat O’Brien as robots – has now fallen into neglect. Given our fascination with artificial intelligence, it’s high time we gave it another look. But what kind of play is it exactly? A dystopian drama attacking science and technology? Up to a point, but it’s much more than that. It starts almost as a Shavian comedy with a do-gooding visitor, Lady Helen Glory, turning up on an island where robots are manufactured out of synthetic matter. She is amazed to discover that a plausibly human secretary is a machine and is equally astonished when the factory’s directors turn out to be flesh and blood creatures rather than robots. With time, the play gets darker as the robots prove to be stronger and more intelligent than their creators and eventually wipe out virtually all humankind. Only a single engineer survives who, a touch improbably, shows two robots transformed by love. The late, great critic  Eric Bentley  called Čapek’s play “a museum-piece”. And it is true that it belongs to a 1920s genre of expressionist drama about the threat of dehumanising technology: in 1923 Elmer Rice wrote The Adding Machine about a repressed clerk who, when replaced by the instrument of the title, murders his employer. Kirsten Shepherd-Barr, in her excellent book Science on Stage also implies RUR may have had its day in that theatre now eagerly embraces science and technology. But I don’t see Čapek’s play as anti-science: initially it suggests robots can relieve humanity of demeaning drudgery. What the play is actually attacking is capitalist greed in that overproduction precipitates the crisis. “Do you know what has caused this calamity? Sheer volume!” cries the marketing manager in the most recent translation by Peter Majer and Cathy Porter. The point is reinforced when the idealistic engineer claims: “Dividends will be the ruin of humanity.” Čapek’s target is not technology as such but its commercial exploitation. Look up artificial intelligence online today and you will find it being promoted with the revealing phrase “future-proof your competitive advantage”. Karel Čapek – who worked closely with his brother, Josef – was a witty journalist, poet and playwright who had a prophetic vision. RUR has had a big influence on popular culture through movies such as Blade Runner and Westworld and TV series like The Outer Limits. Intriguingly, it was also produced on BBC TV in 1948 starring Patrick Troughton who went on to play Doctor Who. But, aside from a 1998 radio production, the play itself is ignored today. We could do a lot worse than revive it – if and when theatre returns – since Čapek nails precisely and satirically the danger of allowing new technology to become enslaved by the profit motive.
Serena Williams' husband condemns Ion Tiriac as 'sexist clown' for swipe over her age and weight:	 Serena Williams’ husband and fans have denounced billionaire Ion Tiriac’s “racist and sexist” suggestion that the superstar have the “decency” to step down from the sport due to her age and weight. Tiriac, an 81-year-old former Olympic tennis player and director of the Madrid Open, made the widely-condemned comments during a recent interview on Romanian television, saying: “At this age and the weight she is now, she does not move as easily as she did 15 years ago … Serena was a sensational player. If she had a little decency, she would retire.” The comment drew immediate condemnation from fans of Williams, an undisputed and enduring champion of the game, who has won 23 Grand Slam singles titles – the most by any player in the Open era. Williams’ husband, Alexis Ohanian Sr, a co-founder of digital giant Reddit, quickly hit back, tweeting: “Safe to say no one gives a damn what Ion Țiriac thinks.” Had to Google it... turns out my 3 year old has more Grand Slam victories than this 🤡🤡  pic.twitter.com/Q2pgsNWFAj He later tweeted there was “no holding back” when a “sexist clown” came for his family. 2021 and no holding back when a racist/sexist clown with a platform comes for my family. Ohanian’s response was shared by Williams’ fans. One of them, DG, pointed out that Williams was in four finals in 2018-19, more than any other player. Williams is still ranked 11th in the world and made it to a Grand Slam final in September, and is widely considered the greatest women’s tennis player in the history of the game. “People have been telling Rafa and Federer they should retire,” DG wrote. “Even Venus who still has an awesome 2017 year … My opinion; champions decide when and how they leave.” Another Twitter user, Loy Rab, called Tiriac “disgusting”. It is not the first time Tiriac has made such comments about Williams. In 2018, he was again widely condemned for comments about Williams’ weight. Williams was asked about it at the time and said she would have words with him. “It’s an ignorant comment, and it’s a sexist comment, and maybe he’s an ignorant man,” she said Williams is set to compete at the Australian Open in February, a tournament she has won seven times.
I won’t make the same mistakes again: Milan mayor on his green Covid recovery plan:	M ilan’s mayor, Beppe Sala, admits he made mistakes. In late February 2020, a week after the first locally transmitted coronavirus case was confirmed in  Italy , he shared a promotional video on his Facebook page with the slogan “Milan does not stop”. The clip contained images of people hugging, eating in restaurants, walking in parks and waiting at train stations. It was not Sala’s finest hour. The city was not under lockdown at the time but it had quickly come to a  standstill as tourists fled  and commuters began working from home. Sala was not alone in his assessment of the risk of the virus and several scientists and politicians were giving mixed messages, but by the time the wider Lombardy region went into lockdown on 8 March, he was rigorously urging citizens to stay at home. He says he has learned from his experiences. “At the beginning of the pandemic, and even still a little bit today, the scientific world was really divided,” Sala said in an interview with the Guardian. “In Milan, two health experts in February gave different opinions. One said coronavirus was only a little bit worse than the flu and the other said it was really serious. “One thing I have learned is that faced with an unexpected and unusual situation, it’s OK to try to interpret things with good sense. But you also need to be more formal, turn to the government and ask for formal instructions on how to manage the situation. This is an error I made, as did many others, and that I wouldn’t make again.” Other than lessons learned, Sala said the experience reconfirmed the city’s generosity and values to him. Many young people joined Milan Helps, a vast network that has assisted people over 65 and those at high risk of infection at home, and an emergency fund collected €14m (£13m) within a few weeks. Navigating a city with a population of 1.4 million through a pandemic is no easy task. Milan and its wider province were at the centre of Italy’s second wave. The city is also Italy’s economic engine. It hosts every sector from finance to fashion, and responsibility for the country’s recovery rests largely on its shoulders. So as he continues to manage the pandemic, Sala is also charting Milan’s future. He leads the C40, a taskforce of mayors from cities around the world formed in May to coordinate efforts to support a low-carbon, sustainable recovery from the pandemic. “It’s not a rhetorical organisation, but a true one in which we meet a lot and spend a lot of time defining a common strategy,” he said. “Faced with this pandemic, we should take the opportunity to speed up [sustainable] policies.” Sala, a politician with the centre-left Democratic party who was elected mayor in 2016, has made some bold moves to cope with the city’s high pollution. In early 2019, the authorities introduced Area B, a restricted traffic zone that covers 70% of the city. Heavily polluting cars are barred from entering Italy’s largest low-emission zone between 7.30am and 7.30pm from Monday to Friday.  Other plans include a ban on diesel heating systems in public and private office buildings from October 2023 – the same year by which all petrol stations will have to have charging stations for electric cars – and having a full fleet of electric buses within the next eight years. Working out how people could move around safely was one of the biggest challenges the city’s authorities had to tackle early in the pandemic, but it was also an opportunity to promote cycling. There are 51 cars for every 100 inhabitants in Milan. “Cities that are really advanced have managed to get to 40 for every 100 inhabitants,” Sala said. One of the city’s most ambitious initiatives is the gradual creation of 300km (185 miles) of cycle paths. During the spring lockdown, 35km of streets were transformed for cycling and walking as part of the initial phase. “It’s true that this has created some division, not everyone is in favour, but this is the direction all cities are going in,” he said. “Milan is not a massive city, and it is flat.” A proportion of the €209bn that Italy is poised to receive from the European recovery fund is expected to be invested in the green economy. Green policies adopted in Milan had also created jobs, Sala said, and startups that incorporate sustainable elements, especially those in areas beyond the city centre, had been given incentives. Before the pandemic, there were enough bars, restaurants and taxis in central Milan to support a population that included many thousands of tourists and commuters a day as well as its inhabitants. Now with people still working from home and tourism not expected to recover for some time, the city has to adapt. In this respect, Covid-19 has given impetus to the “15-minute city”, a concept first unveiled by  Parisian authorities in February  whereby everything a resident needs – be it shops, schools or gyms – can be reached within 15 minutes of their homes by foot, bike or public transport. The concept is one of the strategies Sala and his C40 counterparts are developing as they visualise their post-Covid cities, and he is determined that Milan will set the example. “There are cities in Italy that are more beautiful,” he said. “But Milan is the only city that offers a lot of history and also a window into the future.”
'He's a risk-taker': Germans divided over Elon Musk's new GigaFactory:	For the past 10 months, Silas Heineken has been flying a drone over one of Germany’s biggest building sites  and posting the images on YouTube . The 14-year-old self-named “ Tesla Kid ” has built a significant following, as tens of thousands tune in each week to see the latest developments in Elon Musk’s GigaFactory as it emerges at speed from the sandy ground of Brandenburg, south-east of Berlin. “He is a huge visionary who has great ideas, which he has managed to realise,” Heineken said in an interview. Having hung out on his bicycle to see Musk when he recently visited, the schoolboy sees an electric car factory close to his home in the sleepy town of Grünheide as a huge opportunity for the region. It is by far the biggest industrial settlement in the area in a century and Brandenburg’s economics minister, Jörg Steinbach, has called it a chance for the region “to become a leading energy revolution location in  Germany  and Europe”. Musk has promised to create 10,000 jobs and turn out about 500,000 cars a year, starting with its Model Y, and construct the world’s largest battery plant at the site. His vision will put the region on the map. Politicians talk off the record of their debt towards Musk, who they say could have easily gone to Asia instead, where labour costs are lower and environmental controls and construction standards less stringent. But while landowners are among those rubbing their hands with glee, having seen land prices increase tenfold since Musk made public his intentions in November 2019, there are many opponents. Most of them say they like the bosky backwater of Grünheide precisely because it is not on the map, and are horrified when they see – particularly on Heineken’s videos, depicting the emergence of the foundry, the pressing plant, the paint shop and the assembly plant – the speed at which the project is coming along, and the extent of the woodland it has already swallowed up. “Grünheide is just a small place of 9,000 souls, bordering a conservation area. Musk’s plans will turn it into a town of 40,000 – it will become like Wolfsburg,” says Werner Klink, referring to the city west of Berlin purpose-built in the 1930s around the production of the VW motorcar. Klink is a member of the  Grünheide’s citizens’ initiative , a group of locals who are campaigning to stop the project. Construction projects in Germany, he says, usually take time “due to all the permits you need and regulations you must abide by before you even put a shovel in the ground”. Musk has instead chosen the very un-German route of starting the work first and then securing the permits. “Even if they told him he would not be allowed to continue, he will have already caused so much damage there’s no way he can take the site back to its original state,” Klink argues. “Immense, irreversible harm has been done to the nature, potentially to the groundwater, to the forest, the flora, fauna.” One hundred hectares of pine trees (the equivalent of approximately 26 football fields) have already been felled, and a further 86 hectares are likely to follow, after a court ruling last month. The barriers to  Tesla  come in the form of the sand lizard and European smooth snake, species that live in the woodland, Germany’s Nature Protection Union (NABU) has pointed out, and are at the heart of the legal battle to stop the project. There is also the matter of an outstanding downpayment to the local environment agency of €100m to cover possible remediation costs, which a court also ruled on 18 December was reason to halt the project. Lawyers for Tesla have filed to extend the deadline for payment, the  German newspaper Der Tagesspiegel has reported . Despite 360 objections to the project having been lodged, authorities have effectively allowed it to go ahead by telling Musk he does so at his own risk. The practice is not so unusual in Germany, though on this scale it is unprecedented. “Musk is a risk-taker, that’s what he does, and he’s banked on the fact they’ll never tell him to demolish his building, particularly when so many jobs are at stake,” says Klink, a retired geophysicist. He says the speed with which the site has sprung up has left no time to properly inspect the site. “There’s a considerable danger that the digging will contaminate the groundwater. Just one metre below the surface there is salt water and there are signs it’s rising. If it mixes with the fresh water we’ll have a huge problem on our hands.” A protest in December in front of Axel Springer House in Berlin over the German publisher’s tribute to Musk’s “ambition to make the world a better place” with its eponymous award drew climate activists and environmentalists, including NABU, the Society for Species Protection and the Grüne Liga (green league). Norbert Heß, the Brandenburg spokesman of the Ecological Democrats (ÖDP), a small political party, has accused the larger Green party of “violating their oath of office” by helping to accelerate the project. Heß says many aspects of the project have been poorly thought through. Why was consideration not given to the brown coal mining area of Lausitz in the south of Brandenburg, looking for a new raison d’etre after Germany’s planned brown coal phase-out, he asks. “The land where the opencast mines are is already stripped of nature,” Heß says. The Greens, in government in Brandenburg, say they welcome the project because it offers a viable alternative to the diesel motor, as well as creating much-needed local jobs.  Tesla shies away from talking to the media. It has tried to express that it is well-intentioned in the form of projects such as pledging to plant three times as many trees as it fells, and building fences to protect the lizards and snakes. It also set up an information kiosk in the town, but that has been sparsely staffed. The coronavirus has reduced communication further. Most statements come in the form of succinct tweets from Musk himself, such as one in the run-up to Christmas, which simply said: “Thank you Brandenburg and Grünheide” after the mayor doubled his commitment to the project by signing off plans to create a transport system around the plant, which is also to include a park-and-ride facility to transfer workers to and from the factory. Klink said he has not yet met Musk, who occasionally turns up to see the progress of his project. “I don’t have any need or desire to meet him,” he said. But he does have a nickname for the Musk sycophants and flunkeys: “‘SchließMuskelkriecher’, a play on Musk’s name, mixed with the German both for sphincter and brown-noser. “At least that’s how our initiative sees it, even if I admit it’s rather rude,” he said.
Donald Trump's parting gift to the world? It may be war with Iran:	P resident Trump’s incitement of criminal mob violence and occupation of the Capitol makes clear there is no limitation whatever on the abuse of power he may commit in the next two weeks he remains in office. Outrageous as his incendiary performance was on Wednesday, I fear he may incite something far more dangerous in the next few days: his long-desired war with  Iran . Could he possibly be so delusional as to imagine that such a war would be in the interests of the nation or region or even his own short-term interests? His behavior and evident state of mind this week and over the last two months answers that question. The dispatch this week of B-52’s nonstop round-trip from North Dakota to the Iranian coast – the fourth such flight in seven weeks, one at year’s end – along with his build-up of US forces in the area, is a warning not only to Iran but to us. In mid-November, as these flights began, the president had to be dissuaded at the highest levels from directing an unprovoked attack on Iran nuclear facilities. But an attack “provoked” by Iran (or by militias in Iraq aligned with Iran) was not ruled out. US military and intelligence agencies have frequently, as in Vietnam and Iraq, provided presidents with false information that offered pretexts to attack our perceived adversaries. Or they’ve suggested covert actions that could provoke the adversaries to some response that justifies a US “retaliation”. The assassination of Mohsen Fakhrizadeh, Iran’s top nuclear scientist, in November was probably intended to be such a provocation. If so, it has failed so far, as did the assassination exactly a year ago of General Suleimani. But time is now short to generate an exchange of violent actions and reactions that will serve to block resumption of the Iran nuclear deal by the incoming Biden administration: a pre-eminent goal not only of  Donald Trump  but of the allies he has helped bring together in recent months, Israel, Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Evidently it would take more than individual murders to induce Iran to risk responses justifying a large-scale air attack before Trump leaves office. But US military and covert planning staffs are up to the task of attempting to meet that challenge, on schedule. I was a participant-observer of such planning myself, with respect to Vietnam half a century ago. On 3 September 1964 – just a month after I had become special assistant to the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, John T McNaughton – a memo came across my desk in the Pentagon written by my boss. He was recommending actions “likely at some point to   provoke a military DRV [North Vietnam] response … likely to provide good grounds for us to escalate if we wished”. Such actions “that would tend deliberately to provoke a DRV reaction” (sic), as spelled out five days later by McNaughton’s counterpart at the state department, the assistant secretary of state William Bundy, might include “running US naval patrols increasingly close to the North Vietnamese coast” – ie running them within the 12-mile coastal waters the North Vietnamese claimed: as close to the beach as necessary, to get a response that might justify what McNaughton called “a full-fledged squeeze on North Vietnam [a progressively all-out bombing campaign]”, which would follow “especially if a US ship were sunk”. I have little doubt that such contingency planning, directed by the Oval Office, for provoking, if necessary, an excuse for attacking Iran while this administration is still in office exists right now, in safes and computers in the Pentagon, CIA and the White House. That means there are officials in those agencies – perhaps one sitting at my old desk in the Pentagon – who have seen on their secure computer screens highly classified recommendations exactly like the McNaughton and Bundy memos that came across my desk in September 1964. I regret I did not copy and convey those memos to the foreign relations committee in 1964, rather than five years later I will always regret that I did not copy and convey those memos – along with many other files in the top-secret safe in my office at that time, all giving the lie to the president’s false campaign promises that same fall that “we seek no wider war” – to Senator Fulbright’s foreign relations committee in September 1964 rather than five years later in 1969, or to the press in 1971. A war’s worth of lives might have been saved. Current documents or digital files that contemplate provoking or “retaliating to” Iranian actions covertly provoked by us should not remain secret another moment from the US Congress and the American public, lest we be presented with a disastrous  fait accompli  before January 20, instigating a war potentially worse than Vietnam plus all the wars of the Middle East combined. It is neither too late for such plans to be carried out by this deranged president nor for an informed public and Congress to block him from doing so. I am urging courageous whistleblowing today, this week, not months or years from now, after bombs have begun falling. It could be the most patriotic act of a lifetime. Daniel Ellsberg was the whistleblower who leaked the Pentagon Papers, which revealed the US government had lied to the American public about the Vietnam war
How FarmVille and Facebook helped to cultivate a new audience for gaming:	T wo deaths you may have missed last week – for the simple reason that you have better things to do with your time than monitoring the tech industry. One was the end of  FarmVille , a simplistic, time-wasting online game that consumed the attention of millions of Facebook users over the years; the other was the much-delayed execution of  Flash , the animation tool that powered countless games and assorted website tricks for two decades, but which will no longer be supported by most web browsers or by its maker, Adobe. As it happens, both deaths are related, because one application used the other, but both were ubiquitous for different reasons. The  FarmVille  story is about human nature and the dynamics of addiction, social media and surveillance capitalism, whereas Flash is really just about tech and the evolution of the web. FarmVille  was an agriculture-simulation game created by the San Francisco developer Zynga. It was launched on  Facebook  in 2009 and for two years was the most popular game on the site. At its peak in 2010, it had 34.5 million daily active users. Ponder that number for a moment while we contemplate what was involved in playing the game. You started with a virtual farm and a fixed amount of the virtual currency, Farm Coins, which you could add to by harvesting crops or visiting your neighbours. Your virtual farming career involved ploughing land, planting seeds and harvesting. If you were not diligent your crops would wither and die after a given time, depending on how long it took to grow each one. In that dire eventuality, redemption was available by buying Farm Cash (using your own real money) to obtain an “unwither” to revive the crops or to pay for a biplane to spray them with “instant grow”. (I am not making this up.) The intriguing thing is that at one time more than 34 million sentient beings were doing this stuff every day. “We thought of it as this new dimension in your social, not just a way to get games to people,” Mark Pincus, the original chief executive of Zynga,  told the  New York Times . “I thought, ‘People are just hanging out on these social networks like Facebook and I want to give them something to do together.’” If you’re a psychologist (or in marketing) the features of this virtual farming are immediately obvious. The idea is to draw people into cycles from which it is difficult to escape. If you didn’t check your farm every day, then your crops would wither and die. If you needed help, you could buy easy fixes with Farm Cash or ask for help from your friends. And given that all this meant “user engagement” – the holy grail of surveillance capitalism – you can see why Facebook loved  FarmVille . While Flash turned out to have been a dead end, FarmVille can be seen as a harbinger of what was to come So did a lot of other entrepreneurs, who spotted the ingenuity of the Zynga developers in exploiting human predilections and borrowed their ideas. It also attracted the attention of astute perceptive observers such as Ian Bogost, a professor at Georgia Tech, who saw that the behaviour  FarmVille  encouraged made it “a pace car for the internet economy of the 2010s”. Bogost, a distinguished game developer as well as an academic, created a lovely satirical game,  Cow Clicker , to make his point. The goal of the game was to earn “clicks” by clicking on a sprite of a cow every six hours. The addition of friends’ cows to the player’s pasture allowed the user to also receive “clicks” whenever his or her cow was clicked. A premium currency known as “Mooney” allowed the user to purchase different cow designs and skip the six-hour gap between clicks. But all good (and bad) things come to an end.  FarmVille  was based on Flash and since Flash was for the chop, its time had come. In any event, the app had done its job: to make Zynga and Facebook tons of money. Pincus, now the chairman of Zynga, published a  nice Twitter thread  to mark its passing. Flash’s fate was sealed by Steve Jobs many years ago ( in 2010 to be precise ) when he announced that Apple would no longer approve its use on iOS devices because of the software’s security vulnerabilities. So it’s effectively been on death row for a decade. It had started in 2000 as an ingenious hack for overcoming some of the shortcomings of HTML and for a long time provided a convenient way of doing lively web pages and playing video content. When YouTube was founded in 2005, for example, it used Flash Player as a way of displaying compressed video content on the web. But the arrival of  HTML5  in 2014 confirmed Jobs’s death sentence. And now all that remains are its obituaries. In a way, though, while Flash turned out to have been a dead end,  FarmVille  can be seen as a harbinger of what was to come. In its heyday, it was despised by the gaming industry, focused as it was on expensive, specialised gaming consoles and DVD franchises. Pincus saw  FarmVille  as a relaxing activity that would appeal to a general audience, especially adults and women who would never have spent serious money on a PlayStation or an Xbox 360 and yet might enjoy playing a game. Now that most gaming seems to be moving online, you could say that he saw the future before the industry did. Value added Economics With a Moral Compass is a  terrific transcript  of a conversation between two Nobel laureates (Amartya Sen and Angus Deaton) on the moral dimensions of economic theory. It’s very long, but worth it. Takeover bid Monopoly Versus Democracy: How to End a Gilded Age is a  sobering essay  in  Foreign Affairs  by Zephyr Teachout on lessons from earlier progressive movements. Influential thinking The Master and the Prodigy. Bill Janeway’s  review essay  on biographies of John Maynard Keynes and Frank Ramsey.
Protect tenants by banning all evictions:	The country is back in lockdown and Covid-19 cases are at an all-time high. With a new variant rapidly spreading, once again, we have all been asked to stay at home. It is unthinkable that renters could be forced out of their homes, but the government has not yet protected renters from eviction. From Monday, bailiffs will once again be able to remove renters from their homes, and courts remain open to process evictions. The government must do all that it can to keep renters in their homes. For the first national lockdown, the government did the right thing. It paused all court proceedings, meaning no evictions could take place. But landlords could still issue eviction notices, which have been dropping through the letterboxes of renters who have struggled to keep up with payments. Since the first lockdown, one in three renters have lost income, and an estimated 840,000 are in arrears, meaning many more people could be at risk of eviction now than in March 2020. The government must now ban evictions for the duration of any lockdown measures, to keep renters safe. A full eviction ban means pausing all court proceedings, as well as bailiff action. Renters should not be forced to attend proceedings that may put their health at risk. Online proceedings can put renters, especially the many affected by vulnerabilities and inequalities, at a serious disadvantage. And to prevent evictions when restrictions lift, we also need a targeted package of measures to address rent arrears now. The government has done the right thing before. We call on ministers to act swiftly to protect the health of renters and the wider public in the midst of this crisis. Bridget Young  On behalf of the Renters Reform Coalition
Which way does the wind blow?:	It’s not just happening in the milder south. In Manchester, our red camellia tree had three blooms before Christmas – a first ( Letters , 3 January). It grows next to a holly tree that was lacking any red berries, so the Christmas decorations went to pot. This week, in the same trees, I’ve spotted pairs of robins and tits getting quite frisky. A nice little pick-me-up for lockdown mark 2. No social distancing for the birds. Susan Treagus Didsbury, Manchester •  It looks like the patients were taking over the asylum in the US Capitol ( Report , 7 January). Regretfully, some of them are likely to become patients, given the lack of social distancing and masks. Chris Jeffries Stockport, Greater Manchester •  Matt Atkinson    ( Letters , 7 January) may have succeeded in confusing his students and Guardian readers, but could he now turn his attention to the following conundrum: if you travel north, you will eventually end up travelling south, yet if you travel west, you will always travel west. David Smith Accra, Ghana •  I wonder if Matt Atkinson   also teaches his students that the arrow on a weather vane points in the opposite direction to the direction of the wind. Richard Bull Woodbridge, Suffolk •  You become sprightly at the same age as when you stop falling over and start having falls ( Letters , 6 January). Rachel David Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands •  Please can we chant “Pay them more” as we clap ( Woman behind UK ‘clap for carers’ announces its return , 6 January). Elizabeth Paul London
Danger lies ahead after violence in Washington:	Donald Trump tells the rioters: “Remember this day forever!” ( American carnage: how Trump’s footsoldiers ran riot in the Capitol , 7 January). That’s exactly the danger. America’s 6 January 2021 recalls France’s 6 February 1934. That day, rightwing crowds, fuelled by antisemitic fantasies and fascist myths, tried to storm the Assemblée Nationale and overthrow parliamentary democracy. They were beaten off (16 people died), but they remembered that day as a moment of patriotic sacrifice, and the boast that “I was there on 6 February” inspired the ultra-right collaborators in the murderous Milice, who hunted down resisters and Jews during the Nazi occupation a few years later. Now the “veterans” of 6 January in Washington will treasure their memories and wait for their hour to return. Trumpism goes underground, distilling its venom. Neal Ascherson   London •  In 1935, the Nobel literature prize winner Sinclair Lewis published It Can’t Happen Here in response to the fascist threats he saw in the US and elsewhere at that time. This week’s horrifying events at the US Capitol and the conduct of  Donald Trump  over the past four years are chillingly similar to what Lewis describes in his novel about what happens to the US when a populist candidate is elected president. It is well worth a read: it considers different responses to the growing threat as well as the unwillingness of some individuals to acknowledge what is happening all around them, and the terrible cost to people and society when a blind eye is turned to thuggery and bullying. Stephanie Garrett Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire •  Following the mob violence in  Washington DC , it is welcome to read the almost universal condemnation from around the world. I would like to suggest a practical way for organisations, politicians and individuals in the UK to further express their disgust at Donald Trump’s behaviour. All elected politicians and interested lawyers should explore every legal means of preventing him from travelling to the UK to visit his golf courses. Rose Harvie Dumbarton, West Dunbartonshire •  Commentators are asking if this is finally the end of Trumpism. I predict the opposite. Having deliberately split the Republican party, Trump will form his own. That it will split opposition to the Democratic party matters not a jot to him. He knows he can’t be president again. But he can command sufficient support to keep his ego massaged for the rest of his life. Patrick Cosgrove Bucknell, Shropshire •  Donald Trump has no understanding of abstract concepts such as democracy or even truth; he only ever thinks of his own interests. So I imagine his shocking, inflammatory provocation of the crowd at the Capitol on Wednesday was a deliberate attempt to make federal and state prosecutors fearful of the possible consequences of bringing him to trial, after 20 January, for any of his alleged legal or financial misdemeanours. Matthew Taylor Hove, East Sussex •  It’s been a good year for Russia and China. Europe has been fragmented and weakened, and the US is a laughing stock and appears to be drifting into anarchy. Russia and China will undoubtedly now claim that autocracy is clearly the only successful form of government, as democracy doesn’t work. Roy Barratt Burton-on-Trent, Staffordshire
Letter: Sir Brian Urquhart and the UN:	Today there is little discussion of the United Nations, and in many foreign policy circles a sincere interest in it is a mark of naivety. But  Brian Urquhart  gave his life to it, becoming one of its most eminent officials and best critics. In an age which exalted selfishness,  Urquhart lived by an ethic of service , and was well accustomed to danger. In a time of technocratic expertise, he embodied practical wisdom. As language fell into decadence, he wrote with restraint. At the UN, where the usual approach is to do the bidding of governments or to retreat into passive neutrality, Urquhart, together with  Dag Hammarskjöld  and  Ralph Bunche , established the idea of the impartial international public servant.  Urquhart represented the best of the Atlantic age.
North and south are not poles apart:	Your claim that “at least north is still north” ( Terrawatch , 6 January) sounds as reassuring as it is wrong. I’ve always taught my students that opposite poles attract. The north pole of a free magnet will point north. Therefore the earth’s north pole must be a south pole. Historically, north has sometimes been north, but currently it is south. Oddly, my students found my teaching methods confusing.  Matt Atkinson  CEO, Lighthouse Learning Multi-Academy Trust , Southampton •  As a participant in the Oxford University/ONS Covid-19 infection survey, I provided a mouth and nose swab on 14 December. On 6 January I received a letter, dated 4 January, informing me three-plus weeks later that I do not have a “current” infection.  Graeme Innes-Johnstone Elland, West Yorkshire •  Rather than keeping artificial decorations ( Light brigade: the Christmas holdouts keeping their decorations up , 6 January), I added two bunches of daffodils and tulips to my shopping basket yesterday – for hope and cheer to come.  Monika Butler  Skipton, North Yorkshire •  Surely John Stones’s goal for Manchester City against Manchester United that deflected off his “inner thigh” ( Report , 6 January) should have been ruled “off-thighed”?  Steve Tompkins   Stanton in Peak, Derbyshire •  In a bid to end the correspondence about naming the Severn Bridge ( Letters , 4 January), may I suggest Bridgey McBridgeface, which I’m sure will get the popular vote.  John Stockting Gatley, Greater Manchester
'It was just a free-for-all': my day photographing the Capitol attack:	On the morning that the US Capitol was stormed by Trump supporters, I knew it was going to be a pretty big day. Agence France-Presse (AFP) had photographers all over the city and my job was to be inside the Capitol, photographing the joint session where the vote counting would occur. But I had no idea what was coming our way. I have been working in Washington for almost 14 years and this is definitely the craziest day I have ever worked. Never in a million years could you imagine that the US Capitol would be overrun with protesters. It’s completely unprecedented territory. I had started the day photographing the session for 20 minutes and when it was adjourned, I went back to my laptop in another room.   Suddenly, an announcement warned us of a “security situation” inside the building, urging us to shelter in place. Being a photographer, the last place you want to be is stuck inside a room when everything’s going on outside. So a group of us went down towards the commotion on the second floor, right outside the door to the Senate chamber. It’s a very inner part of the Capitol – normally a very secured area – so it’s highly unusual to see one protester, let alone the 12–15 that were there. That’s when I got my first big shot. Some of the protesters had face paint and body paint on, and were wearing costumes. One had a Viking hat on; a bunch were carrying Trump flags. Another had a Confederate flag.   They were clearly Trump supporters there to disrupt things. They were shouting at police, who were trying their best to defuse the situation. About 12 officers were forming a line trying to prevent them from going any further into the building. For the most part they were trying to engage with them, saying, “How can we resolve this peacefully? How can we get you out of the building?” I thought, this is an area of the Capitol that never has protesters. This is going to be a big story of the day. Little did I know this was just the tip of the iceberg. Usually in a situation like this, the police act very quickly. They will tackle individuals to the ground, cuff them and take them out but that’s not what was happening. All these people had broken in somehow, and it wasn’t clear whether they had weapons, or what their intentions were. I heard commotion elsewhere and turned towards the Rotunda, underneath the dome. Hundreds of protesters were streaming in. That’s when I realized this was a much bigger deal than I could have ever imagined.People put Maga hats on the statues and had them hold their Trump flags, it was almost like a circus atmosphere. I was scared of the police clearing everyone out and getting stuck with them so I went down the tunnel towards the Senate and saw thick smoke in the air. People were retreating. People were running out coughing and there was a general craziness. That’s when we saw people going into the offices of Nancy Pelosi. Normally this is a very secure part of the building; she’s the speaker of the House, second in line from the presidency – nobody can just wander in. But there was no staff, no police. It was just a free-for-all. The protesters were sitting at desks, taking selfies and rummaging through the office. It was just a bizarre scene. I kept moving through the office and saw a guy with his feet up on the desk, looking through the mail and making himself at home. The staff had left in such a hurry that the computers were still on, with emails still up on the screens.  I chatted with the guy with his feet up at the desk. I think everyone was just astonished. This is one of the most secure buildings in Washington and here it is with protesters who seemed to have complete control over the second floor of the US Capitol. It was just mind-boggling. You’re always worried people won’t want to be photographed, and you don’t want anyone to become violent towards you. But they either didn’t notice or didn’t care I was there. No one tried to hide their face, no one tried to discourage me from taking photos. Soon the crowd started to get larger and more volatile, so we went through another narrow hallway, turned a corner and came across a police Swat team who had their rifles like you see in the movies – sweeping the area, going room to room and immediately they say, “Hands up! Who are you?” It was definitely startling. I think it’s the first time I’ve ever had a gun pointed at me.  They let us through and told us to find shelter. Three of us barricaded ourselves in an office on the third floor where I could charge and check my phone. My wife knew I was at the Capitol and was very worried. At some point she texted saying shots had been fired inside the building, but that’s the only news I got about that. When you’re photographing, you’re on autopilot and don’t have time to think about what’s actually happening. I don’t know how what happened was made possible. During political conventions, inaugurations, even the State of the Union, they set up huge metal fencing around the building. During the Black Lives Matter protests, they set that up around the White House for maybe as much as a month. But that just wasn’t there that morning.  During an event like this, it’s human nature to run away from it. But for better or for worse, we have to run towards it. No photographs are going to come from inside a locked office. By 8pm, we got word that the Senate and the House would reconvene to count the electoral votes. Sure, the windows were still broken, the floors were still slippery from the teargas, and there were broken things all over the place – doors, windows and desks in disarray. But Congress was going back to its business. Even then, just five hours after they cleared the building, things were returning to normal. I think that’s what members of Congress wanted to show: that the work of the government will continue. – As told to Poppy Noor
'You can’t lose a single vote': can Biden navigate the 50-50 Senate?:	D emocrats may have reclaimed control of the Senate with two victories in Georgia but their majority is slim and will herald an era where every senator wields an inordinate amount of power over the vital upper chamber. In other words, every senator will be the deciding vote in a situation that has happened only a few other times in the chamber’s history and is likely to prove a tricky challenge for the incoming president,  Joe Biden  – albeit one preferable to dealing with continued Republican control. That dynamic is a shift from recent years in which control of the chamber has been more concretely with Republicans or Democrats. But the addition of the incoming senators Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock of Georgia means that the Senate will be split evenly 50-50, a divide that’s happened  only three times  in American history. Democrats  control the chamber only through Vice-President-elect Kamala Harris who will act as the tie-breaking vote when she is sworn in on 20 January. Her replacement in her California senate seat, Alex Padilla, will join the chamber quickly after that so Democratic control starts on 21 January. The split means any senator can gum up legislation making its way through the chamber by withholding a vote, possibly until other tweaks have been made. “It only takes one senator to object and that doesn’t mean that you’re going to have the power to ultimately stop something, but being in control of how much time something takes gives you enormous power,” said Joe Britton, a former Senate Democratic chief of staff. “Especially at 1pm on a Thursday afternoon.” For Democrats, that’s the best outcome after disappointing results in a handful of Senate races they had thought they would win in the November elections. It means, though, that two separate groups of Republican and Democratic “moderates” are likely to command significant attention. Looming over the chamber’s business will be elections in 2022 in which two senators, Mark Kelly of Arizona and Raphael Warnock of Georgia are up for re-election after just two years as they are completing their predecessors’ term. Because they will have to run in conservative-leaning states early in their Senate careers they are likely to steer clear of supporting very liberal legislation making its way through the chamber. Both are expected to fall among the more moderate wing of the party alongside Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Joe Manchin of West Virginia. If any senator gained influence from the even Senate split it’s Manchin, the most conservative member of the Democratic caucus. Manchin offered a preview of how he planned to navigate the Senate. “For the sake of the country we all love, we must commit to solving the serious problems facing our nation,” the West Virginia senator said in a statement on Wednesday. “Above all, we must avoid the extreme and polarizing rhetoric that only further divides the American people – I will work tirelessly to make sure we do. It is time for Americans to move closer together.” Besides Warnock and Ossoff, the incoming senator John Hickenlooper of Colorado styled himself as a moderate Democrat during his short-lived 2020 presidential campaign and his time as governor before that. Biden’s incoming administration has also indicated plans to focus initially on a Covid relief bill and a large bipartisan infrastructure bill – not non-starters for liberals but hardly proposals from a progressive wishlist. “You’re not going to see the [supreme] court expanded. You’re probably won’t see the legislative filibuster ended and those kind of things,” said former senator Evan Bayh of Indiana, who represented the moderate wing of the Democratic party during his time in the Senate. All legislation in the Senate except for reconciliation bills – which are meant to deal with tax and spending issues – need a filibuster-proof 60 votes to pass. So the question for most legislation is how many more additional senators beyond 50 can a proposal get. Defections and bipartisan support have become rare in Congress and usually only a few senators are even willing to openly discuss bucking their party. With his slight majority, the incoming majority leader, Chuck Schumer, of New York will still have to keep all or most of his caucus in line and win over a few Republicans. “I think Chuck Schumer has the capacity to be the savviest legislative leader since [Lyndon Baines Johnson],” Bayh added. “But even LBJ had more than a 50-50 split to work with so if anyone can make it work it’s Chuck. It’s going to be really difficult when you have the left pushing the envelope, but in a world where the Republicans are unlikely to give you any votes for what the left wants, you can’t lose a single vote.” And then there’s the next presidential election in 2024. Senators and their staffs are bracing for 2024 Republican presidential hopefuls in the chamber to try to position themselves to run in a large and unwieldy Republican primary. Democrats could also have a divided primary contest in the next presidential election cycle if Biden decides not to run, although Harris would be the heavy favorite in that scenario. After the Republican senators Ted Cruz of Texas and Josh Hawley of Missouri led a revolt against certifying Biden’s victory, it’s unclear if either of them will be able to position themselves as frontrunners in a Republican primary. Both have been mentioned as potential candidates. The revolt resulted in a swath of rioters breaking into the Capitol. “You’re going to have all these people that are just posturing and maneuvering and each one of them is either a dealbreaker or an arsonist in the mode of Ted Cruz when Obama was president,” said a former Republican chief of staff. “And so you’re going to have all these little arsonists asking ‘how can I make a name for myself?’ and there’s going to be less Lindsey Grahams from the Obama time. There’s no John McCains. Mitt Romney will try. There’s going to be less of those guys.”
Share a story with the Guardian:	Get in touch with your news tips and stories by filling in our encrypted form below.  Click here for other ways to contact the Guardian securely . If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . We will contact you if one of our journalists is interested in following up on your story.
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Tell us about your return to the UK from countries on the quarantine list:	We would like to hear from people about their experiences arriving at UK airports, ports and train stations from countries on the quarantine list, such as  Croatia , France, Spain and Luxembourg. Were you required to fill out a test and trace form? Was your temperature taken? Were you given a QR code for scanning? Did anyone check your passport? Was there any information indicating you needed to isolate for 14 days?  We are also interested in hearing from people who have been contacted to ensure they have been quarantining. You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click  here . Read terms of service  here .
'Glum future for the platypus': why the elusive mammal is disappearing under our noses:	It is dusk beside a creek and we are instructed to look for a trail of bubbles, under which could be one of the world’s weirdest mammals. When you’re desperate to see a platypus in the fading light, everything looks like one. Floating logs from bank-side paperbark trees, gyrating leaves caught in a dance with the wind, and what was probably a water-rat dashing from rocks – they all make the heart briefly skip. But there’s no sign of the egg-laying, duck-billed, flat-tailed and venomous monotreme. We did not hack through tropical undergrowth or trek for hours to get here. We turned left at a tile shop and pub in the suburbs of northern Brisbane and parked 40 metres away from Kedron Brook on a side road. There are joggers and cyclists everywhere. Like many of Brisbane’s waterways, platypuses were once regularly seen here, but new research has found platypuses have likely gone from Kedron Brook and four other greater Brisbane waterways: the Bremer River, Scrubby Creek, Slacks Creek and Enoggera Creek. The last confirmed sighting at this exact spot was in 2002. A new  study , in the journal  Australian Mammalogy , is further evidence the once widespread mammal is in trouble in Australia – it’s only home on the planet. “It’s scary to think that we have already had these populations disappear under our noses,” Tamielle Brunt, lead author and a researcher at the University of Queensland, says. Brunt runs the Wildlife Preservation Society of Queensland’s PlatypusWatch network. In November, researchers at the  University of New South Wales  found the habitat for platypus had shrunk by almost a quarter in the past 30 years. The researchers joined conservationists to nominate the platypus for threatened species status. Platypuses are elusive. They’re nocturnal, skittish and tend not to make a literal splash. That makes them not only hard to see, but difficult to monitor. Brunt and her colleagues used a new environmental DNA sampling technique to check 28 rivers and creeks for platypuses. In 21 of the waterways, they had records of platypus sightings between 1990 and 2016. By analysing water samples for the DNA of platypuses (excreted mainly in poo and wee), researchers can tell if the animal is in the water without having to see them. “Because of how elusive they are, we could be losing them without knowing because we’re just not regularly monitoring them,” says Brunt. A lack of long-term platypus monitoring means that as land-clearing and regulation of rivers has altered their habitat, any decline could be going unnoticed. Australian coastal cities have grown relatively rapidly and in places such as Brisbane, platypus habitats of creek banks and waterways are now surrounded by busy suburbs. “Historically there [are] articles describing platypus as being quite prolific in some waterways [in greater Brisbane],” says Brunt. “The fact that in a 10 or 20-year timeframe they’ve gone out of some of these systems and that we’re seeing things only get worse with urbanisation and climate change – with all these impacts getting worse, it’s a glum future for the platypus.” Once gone from these suburban waterways, Brunt says it’s unlikely platypus could find their way back in. Dr Gilad Bino, a platypus researcher at the University of New South Wales Centre for Ecosystem Science, helped compile research that went to the Australian federal government to ask the platypus be listed as a vulnerable species. He says there are historic newspaper reports of people describing seeing “platypus migrations”, with dozens seen at once. “These days you’ll see one or two. Most Australians have never seen one,” he says. “That’s sad in a sense.” The platypus is known to exist from far north Queensland to Tasmania – a distance of about 2,900km (1,800 miles) – in freshwater rivers across a range of habitats from tropical to semi-arid, temperate and alpine areas. They’re a monotreme – an egg-laying mammal – and have an evolutionary history going back at least 120m years. Gilad says its modern-day threats are compounding. Water extraction from rivers and creeks, the building of dams and weirs that create obstacles, and river bank erosion from land clearing all have an impact. Platypuses need intact riverbanks, says Gilad, because it’s where they burrow and nest (platypuses don’t have a pouch, so the female will curl herself around the egg to keep it warm). Droughts that could be worsened by climate change affect the freshwater habitats, as waterways dry out or become too shallow. There’s also evidence, Gilad says, that the feral cats and foxes that litter Australia’s landscape can target platypus if their creeks become too dry and they have to move around above the water to find new places. He does think humans can “co-exist” with the platypus, and says there are still peri-urban areas in Melbourne – a city of five million people – where they are hanging on. The platypus is listed as endangered in South Australia and is recommended to threatened status in Victoria, as well as being nominated for a nationwide listing. Gilad hopes those attempts to get the platypus on threatened lists will prompt more widespread efforts to protect their waterways, and also promote greater levels of research and monitoring. He says the environmental DNA technique used for the Brisbane study is useful to say where platypuses exist, but it can’t say how healthy the population is. The future is challenging, but the game is certainly far from over for the species. “I don’t think the platypus is on the brink of extinction,” he says. “But as climate change progresses and all the other threats continue, it probably does mean the risk for local extinctions is increasing. “In some areas, platypus will go. That’s really unfortunate.”
UK residents: how will you be impacted by Brexit?:	With the Brexit deal  signed into law  on Thursday morning, the UK’s relationship with the EU is set to change dramatically on 1 January. We’d like to hear how you will be impacted by Britain’s departure from the EU, particularly those working in industries which will be directly impacted, such as farming, pharmaceuticals and haulage. We’d also like to hear from people working in small businesses, and those who travel often. You can get in touch by filling in the form below or  via WhatsApp  by  clicking here  or adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click  here . Read terms of service  here .
'Why is it such a scandalous thing?': the women who have to fight for their right to be child-free:	Q ueensland dance instructor Sue knew she wanted to be child free from the age of 15. It’s a decision she has never regretted. At 24, she saw a gynaecologist and requested tubal ligation for the first time, having had unwelcome side-effects from hormonal contraception. Her experience made her reluctant to ever see a medical professional again. “He refused to even entertain the idea, treated me very condescendingly, and then insisted on administering an internal examination I didn’t need,” says Sue, not her real name. “I now recognise that the combination of his disrespect for me with violation for which I wasn’t prepared has caused me lasting trauma.” An article published in April in the Journal of Medical Law by lawyer Joshua Taylor described how Australian women may desire access to procedures such as tubal ligation and hysterectomy “for family planning purposes; medical concerns, such as alleviating pain; or for comfort reasons, such as no longer wanting to menstruate”. “Women are routinely denied access to these procedures on the basis of their age, especially when they have yet to bear children,”  he wrote . “This decision is largely defended on the grounds that women will come to regret such decisions.” But he argued that “such decisions are generally unethical and may constitute discrimination under Australian laws”. Concern that people may regret permanent procedures like vasectomy or tubal ligation and change their mind about having children is a reason some medical professionals are reluctant to perform them, especially on younger people. But a  study published in the journal Obstetrics and Gynecology  found “most couples who choose sterilisation … are satisfied with their decision and do not experience regret”. At age 25, Sue fell pregnant, and had a termination. It took more than a decade of trying different forms of contraception, including the IUD which caused her side-effects, before she was finally granted a tubal ligation at the age of 37. “It wasn’t until they were about to anaesthetise me that one of the medical team said, ‘How many children do you have Sue?’ and when I said ‘none,’ there was this complete pause in the whole room. “It never occurred to me that people would see this as problematic for a 37-year-old woman who’d never wanted children. An otherwise very progressive friend expressed at length how appalled she was with my decision. I learned right away not to share it with people.” Sue says her life is full enough without children. “All my career I’ve been a teacher and a mentor,” she says. “I’ve lectured in university, I now run a ballroom dance studio and it’s all about developing people’s confidence. I looked at parenthood and I thought, ‘Well I can have that. Or I can have everything else’.” If a 23-year-old is adamant that they don’t want children and they’ve never wanted children, it is very, very difficult to access tubal ligation services She says people still struggle to speak openly about choosing to be child-free and their reasons for it. But she believes as more people have been forced to put their lives on pause during the pandemic, they will have time to think about the future, what they want, and whether children are a part of that. She hopes for those that choose not to, the process of choosing their contraception of choice, whether vasectomy, long-acting reversible contraceptives (Larc), or tubal ligation, will be easier than it was for her. “If you’re old enough to make the decision to have children, then surely you’re old enough to be permitted to make the decision not to,” she says. “I don’t understand why it’s such a scandalous thing. People have to think much more about being sterilised than they think about having children, I mean people can fall pregnant by accident for God’s sake. But you can’t have a medical procedure by accident, there’s a lot of hoop jumping you have to go through, and I find it absurd that a more permanent choice can still be so frowned upon.” Sue is just one of many women who have been refused access to permanent sterilisation procedures such as hysterectomy, or tubal ligation, where the fallopian tubes are cut, tied or blocked to permanently prevent pregnancy. Larcs, which include intrauterine devices and Implanon, and can provide protection against pregnancy for years, are giving women more options, especially those denied permanent procedures. But it is only in recent years that information about Larcs has become more widespread in Australia. In 2017, the  Royal Australasian College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists said low uptake of Larcs   “may be related to Australia’s prevailing cultural norm of oral contraception, and practitioner and patient misperceptions of the safety and efficacy of Larc, which have been dispelled in recent years”. The World Health Organization now recommends Larcs as a first-line contraception method for young women. The business manager for clinical services and operations for Queensland family planning provider True Relationships & Reproductive  Health , Sharon Stokell, says Larc use is on the rise. “Especially for young people, and if a 23-year-old is adamant that they don’t want children and they’ve never wanted children, it is very, very difficult to access tubal ligation services,” Stokell says. “So certainly I think there’s a particular population who are using Larc instead of having that tubal ligation, for example because they just can’t get it. There’s no one that will provide it.” Attitudes towards having children and reproductive health are also changing because of the Covid-19 pandemic and recession, she adds. And it’s not just women; inquiries into vasectomies have also increased, especially in 2020. “Covid in particular has seen an increase in the amount of people that have been ringing about vasectomy,” Stokell says. “The interest has been particularly strong this year.”  Stokell says there are a few reasons for that, one of them being that the pandemic and other pressing issues such as climate change have made people reluctant to have more children, or to have any children at all, so they are seeking out a more permanent contraceptive option. It has also given people time to think about their health and their future, she says. “For some people it’s a fear, the pandemic has brought about a lot of fear for people around life.”. Dr Philip Goldstone, the medical director of national family planning organisation Marie Stopes Australia, agreed that “the increasing awareness and availability of highly effective Long Acting Reversible Contraceptive methods has contributed to the steady decline in demand for tubal ligation”. “Provision of Larc methods is simple, with some methods lasting 10 years, with effectiveness equal to that of tubal ligation,” Goldstone says. A spokeswoman for Marie Stopes says decision making around planning for pregnancy seems to be changing, alongside broader life plans, “due to the pandemic and recession”. “Some people with planned pregnancies have decided to access abortion due to unforeseen financial insecurity and other emerging stressors. Some people want to change to more efficient methods of contraception, knowing that abortion access could be difficult.” She says in counselling sessions, staff were increasingly hearing from people choosing not to parent, “and particularly young women who choose to be child-free”. “Their reasons are diverse and deeply personal,” she says. “The hashtag #ChildFree is increasingly used in online conversations among some communities as a political term to decide not to parent.” Marie Stopes Australia managing director, Jamal Hakim, says: “Every person has the right to bodily autonomy. “Access to tubal ligation and vasectomy services as permanent forms of contraception form part of the options available,” he says. “This however does not always translate in practice with system barriers, particularly for people who are choosing to be child free.” Anecdotally, there are still barriers when it comes to choice, she says. In the public system, there can be inflexible restrictions, such as age or number of children. In many health and hospital regions, it can take a great deal of referrals and time to seek a tubal ligation consultation, after which some patients are denied their choice. In May 2019, Marie Stopes Australia ran a social media campaign requesting that those who had faced difficulty accessing tubal ligation send a private message to discuss their experiences. Women reported having tried alternative contraceptive methods which caused side-effects. Some had numerous unplanned and unwanted pregnancies as a result of method failure, or the inability to find a suitable contraceptive method. “Those who choose to continue with an unplanned pregnancy have an increased risk of delayed initiation of prenatal care, low birth weight, reduced rates of breastfeeding, developmental delays and increased rates of infant mortality,” a Marie Stopes spokeswoman said. “Therefore, it is important that all people have access to the contraceptive methods that suit their needs.” Anna is another woman who doesn’t want children and has chosen permanent sterilisation. She says she and her husband have still not told some members of her husband’s family that they are child free by choice, or that she underwent the medical procedure. Despite she and her husband using contraception, Anna fell pregnant twice before undergoing tubal ligation, and got an abortion each time. “We had had our contraception fail twice,” she says. “I didn’t feel confident that anything other than something permanent would offer me safety. I think I’m quite aware of the impact a child has on your lifestyle, on your body and on your sleep habits. And both my husband and I had periods in our life where we’ve suffered depression, and I’m prone to anxiety and I just would imagine that adding a small child and sleep deprivation to the mix would make that so much worse.” Anna says she hopes there comes a time where she and her husband can speak more openly about their child free choice with members of her husband’s family. “I think we should talk about it as a society more,” she says.
What can Biden do to reverse Trump's assault on labor rights?:	S oon after Joe Biden is inaugurated as the next US president, he is expected to take several strong steps on the labor front aimed at reversing or remedying the policies of  Donald Trump  – who promised workers a lot and delivered little. But Biden’s number one priority will be to tackle the issues left in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. Biden’s nominee for Secretary of Labor, Marty Walsh – the Mayor of Boston and before that a labor leader for decades – is likely to help advance Biden’s promises to help unions expand. Walsh, who had headed Boston’s federation of building trades unions, is expected to support increased spending on infrastructure to upgrade roads and bridges, strengthen the economy and create good-paying jobs. As mayor, he pushed for construction contractors to hire more workers of color. With Covid-19 still raging across the US, many job safety experts say it’s urgent for Biden to do something that the Trump administration has failed to do: issue nationwide regulations directing businesses to take specific steps to protect their workers from the coronavirus, whether retail, restaurant, factory or construction workers. Trump’s business-friendly Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) repeatedly rejected labor unions’ pleas to adopt such safety standards. “Clearly priority one is an emergency standard for Osha dealing with Covid and equally a focused, full-on press on inspections, enforcement and guidance. It means doing everything Osha hasn’t been doing,” said David Weil, a top labor department official under Barack Obama. “Ultimately the only way we’ll get public safety and reopening is if we get worker safety.” Weil, now the dean at Brandeis University’s Heller School for Social Policy, said Osha under Biden should get far tougher than Trump’s Osha in holding employers accountable for failing to take steps to minimize Covid. Many worker advocates were dismayed by the modest fines that Trump’s Osha assessed, for instance, a  $13,494 penalty against Smithfield’s pork-processing plant in Sioux Falls , South Dakota, where at least 1,294 workers contracted Covid. Smithfield’s parent company had revenues of $24.1bn last year. Biden has signaled he will take many other pro-worker actions. Although Trump held himself out as a champion of workers, he did nothing to raise the minimum wage or enact paid leave, while Biden has repeatedly called for a $15 minimum wage and guaranteeing workers 12 weeks’ paid family and medical leave. Biden has also backed far-reaching legislation that would make it easier to unionize, and his appointees to the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) are likely to reverse many Trump labor board decisions that made it harder for workers to join unions. Steven Pitts, a longtime labor economist at the University of California, Berkeley, said Biden should pursue two sets of labor policies. “One is try to raise and protect labor standards like a higher minimum wage and tougher safety rules,” he said. “Second is to build worker power into policy. Too often we focus on the former and not the latter.” Biden has indicated he will seek to build worker power by strengthening unions. On election day eve, campaigning in western Pennsylvania, he promised to be “ the most pro-union president you’ve ever seen ”. In  his campaign platform , Biden endorsed the  Protecting the Right to Organize Act (Pro Act)  which would make it easier for unions to organize workers by, among other things, greatly increasing penalties on corporations that break the law in battling to keep out unions. Solid Republican opposition, along with a filibuster, blocked efforts by Barack Obama and Bill Clinton to enact pro-union legislation, and it will be similarly difficult for Biden to enact the Pro Act unless he musters 60 votes to overcome a filibuster.  Because Senate Republicans so often vote in line with corporate America’s wishes, it might also be difficult for Biden to get a $15 minimum wage or paid family and medical leave through the Senate. William Samuel, director of government affairs at AFL-CIO, the largest federation of unions in the US, acknowledges that passing the Pro Act – a huge goal of labor – won’t be easy. He recommends that Biden, in addition to pushing to pass the Pro Act, pursue a parallel strategy: “He should use his bully pulpit to support the right of workers to organize and to shame employers who trample on those rights” – for example, by criticizing Amazon for firing the worker who led a New York walkout over Covid-19 safety. “There will be lots of obstacles in his [Biden’s] way and we can hope and pray he can use his executive authority and the bully pulpit to advance the cause of workers,” Samuel said. Because the Senate might be a formidable barrier to pro-union or pro-worker legislation, Samuel says Biden should use federal procurement policy to raise standards for workers. Many worker advocates want Biden to require federal contractors to pay their workers a minimum of $15 an hour and guarantee them two-weeks’ paid medical and family leave. Biden and his running mate, Kamala Harris, opposed a California ballot initiative in which voters – swayed in part by a $200m campaign financed by Uber and other app-based companies – approved a measure that categorizes Uber and  Lyft  drivers and DoorDash delivery workers as independent contractors rather than employees. By defining them as independent contractors, the ballot initiative, known as Proposition 22, means these workers won’t receive state minimum wage or overtime protections, won’t receive paid sick days or unemployment compensation and won’t have their companies reimburse their expenses, like gasoline. Uber  has said it hopes to pass Prop 22-like laws or ballot initiatives to other states. But Pitts said: “How do we find a way to stop the spread of Prop 22 around the country – that’s an important thing.” It’s going to be a slog to undo all the damage that’s been done the past four years by the Trump majority on the board Worker advocates hope Biden’s labor department will issue guidance that goes far to trump Prop 22 by saying that under federal minimum wage and overtime laws, Uber and Lyft drivers should be considered employees, not independent contractors, because they are not truly independent: Uber and Lyft have great control over the work the drivers do, and the drivers are not really independently in business for themselves. Weil, who headed the labor department’s wage and hour administration, said Prop 22’s definition of independent contractors contradicts the definition under the federal Fair Labor Standards Act, a 1938 law that creates nationwide minimum wage and overtime protections. “You just can’t decide, ‘I can treat them as independent contractors if that’s counter to what our Fair Labor Standards Act says,’” Weil said. The Trump administration recently  awarded an $810m contract to Uber and Lyft  to provide rides to public agencies. Worker advocates say the General Services Administration should use its power to set contract conditions to insist that Uber and Lyft pay their drivers $15 an hour and treat them as employees. Labor leaders say they hope Biden’s NLRB will reverse many of the anti-union actions taken by Trump’s NLRB – for instance, making it harder for workers at franchises like McDonald’s to unionize, making it harder for small groups of workers at larger establishments to unionize, letting employers prohibit workers from using the company email system to discuss union matters, letting companies bar union organizers from spaces open to the public, like corporate cafeterias. “It’s going to be a slog to undo all the damage that’s been done the past four years by the Trump majority on the board,” said Wilma Liebman, who was NLRB chair during Obama’s first term. “Their overruling of precedent has been so sweeping. They’ve overruled precedents that went back decades.” Liebman said the Trump board’s reversals of precedent twisted a pro-worker law, the National Labor Relations Act, in ways that always favored employers. But Republicans say the Trump board was merely undoing what they saw as the unduly pro-union tilt of the Obama board.
Budgeting apps: the best options for tracking your money on the go:	L auren Burrows, a senior consumer writer at the website Money to the Masses, has tried and tested budgeting apps. These link up to your bank accounts, credit cards and investments, and pull in information about your balances and transactions. You don’t need to input your passwords, and will have to confirm every 90 days that you are still happy with the app to access your details. Here are her favourites. Emma analyses your savings and current accounts as well as credit cards, and categorises your spending so you can easily see where your money is going each month. It lists your  subscriptions , allowing you to see if there are things you are paying for and not using, and any bank fees you have been charged. A premium account, Emma Pro, has additional features such as personalised categories and extra cashback. Good for:  Beginners and managing subscriptions. Cost : Emma – free; Emma Pro – £59.99 a year, with the first seven days free. Pros : Very easy to set up and use. Cashback and rewards for spending with certain retailers such as the Body Shop, B&Q, Gousto, Boots and more. Cons : A bit gamified and the push to subscribe to Emma Pro can become annoying. Offers most of the same features as Emma Pro but at no cost. These include customisable categories for your spending – for example, you may want to group together all payments for presents around Christmas – and the option to add accounts manually. Money Dashboard also graphs your  projected monthly spending  with a predicted balance at the end of the month. The level of customisation in the app is ideal for those with accounts and investments across a range of providers. Good for:  More complex finances. Cost : Free. Pros : In-depth budgeting analysis with personalised categories based on your individual spending. Desktop version also available. Cons : Takes time to set up and its automatic spending categorisation could be better. Yolt allows you to organise all of your accounts in one place and you can take things one step further by using its prepaid debit card for everyday spending. Once you have connected your accounts, Yolt allows you to track your spending, see upcoming transactions, create budgets and set saving goals. Good for:  Controlling spending. Cost:  Free. Pros : Encourages you to set spending budgets. Features such as rounding up your spare change and scheduled payments mean you can maximise your saving. Cons : Yolt does not allow for weekly paydays. There is  no Financial Services Compensation Scheme protection  for any money you hold on the prepaid account. Plum takes budgeting one step further and does the hard work for you as it uses artificial intelligence to automatically calculate an affordable amount to save based on your spending pattern. It lets you know if you could be overpaying on your regular bills and suggests ways to save money. Plum offers more than one plan and its premium options also offer the opportunity to invest your money as well as earn cashback, set savings goals and create saving spaces to separate your money. Good for:  Automated saving. Cost : Plum Basic – free; Plum Plus – £1 a month; Plum Pro   – £2.99 a month (free 30-day trial with both). Pros : Helps you to save with little effort, also allows you to round up your spare change and earn interest on your savings. Cons : Have to pay to get some features that other apps offer for free, such as goal setting and cashback. Monthly £1 fee if you want to invest your money. App-only banks such as Starling Bank and Monzo combine the logistics of a current account with the addition of handy budgeting features such as personalised spending analytics, the ability to separate your money into savings pots or spaces and automatic saving with spare change roundups as you spend.
‘It’s better than worrying about the state of the world’: how to get politically active this year:	T here has been a lot of research on the  “double-benefit” of civic activism , the economic rewards it can store up for the people who do it as much as those it’s done for. But I’m not really interested in the economy; I’m interested in what makes a person feel alive. And getting involved with a campaign, no matter how big, can make you feel much better, much more engaged – even energised – than just sitting and worrying about the state of the world. How does an effective campaigner get started? I asked Alena Ivanova, 33, because I think she embodies the activist life well lived. She came to the UK eight years ago from Bulgaria, where there are very few entry points to activism: no developed student movement, little spontaneous campaigning. “It was living in London that radicalised me. I thought things would be different, but better. Actually they were different, but the same: people were just as devoid of real power to make decisions about their lives, and it was so expensive that everyone was too busy working to think about it. You either have to make a retreat into yourself, or you have to commit to trying to make it better for everyone.” Ivanova found groups through word-of-mouth. A guy she met on Tinder suggested a left-wing reading group; from there she joined the  Women’s Strike  and  Sisters Uncut ; and then got involved with the Labour party. She’s since battled everything from the closure of a community language programme to Britain exiting the EU. “National campaigns, which were epic failures, local campaigns, which were small failures. My only experience of  success  was getting the freedom of movement motion past the Labour conference.”   This was in 2019, when an overwhelming number of motions forced the party not only to uphold freedom of movement – which their 2017 manifesto had promised to end – but to extend it. Ivanova ruefully points out that there’s little mention of this motion now. But if you think political action seems worth it only when it succeeds, going in a straight line from raising awareness, through fundraising, to getting parliamentary attention, to changing the law, well, you have to ditch all that. It’s not couch to 5k: you can’t put your civic identity through a set of key performance indicators. This is why activism and voluntary work are different from the usual run of happiness-booster suggestions: because you can’t control the outcome simply by working harder, you almost certainly won’t always succeed and there will be moments where, if you care, it is very painful. That’s the joy, I suppose: it’s more like life than yoga is. But just like yoga, you have to find an approach that works for you. To decide which, ask yourself these key questions: The assumption about altruism is that you have to want to interact the whole time – in an activist context, to be in constant debate or always at a protest;   and in charity work, be dealing directly with someone in need. But there are roles for all personality types. Sophie Livingstone, 43, runs  Trustees Unlimited  (a company that matches charities with trustees, and that aims, among other things, to improve diversity among trustee bodies). She is shortly to take over at Little Village, a baby bank (like a food bank but for baby-related gear), and says, “We have volunteers who interact directly with families, but there are other people who just want to sort babygrows.” Both are useful.  The same is true politically: if canvassing is your idea of hell, you might help behind the scenes, with organising or planning. Perhaps you could devise a map of food poverty like  All Of Us Together , which was inspired by Marcus Rashford’s campaign; or if you can code, join the R adical Engineers  and be matched with a project that needs a developer. Once you have a passion for a cause, such as migrant rights, there are a near infinite number of entry points, from  housing a refugee yourself  to  resisting racism locally . Zoe Gardner, 32, is policy adviser at the  Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants . She describes grassroots initiatives, which always need more support: “Befriending services, legal advice, talking to people, handing out food and donations.” Be realistic about how much time you can commit and it will help focus your efforts. In 2015, Gardner realised she wanted to go all in, and spent two months on the Greek island of Lesbos at the height of the refugee crisis. Together with an anarchist group, she helped with “bringing in boats, giving people a hot drink and dry clothes, directing them to the official refugee camp”. The scene was very mixed, politically – anarchists working with  Islamic Relief , and maverick Kent mothers who had never done campaign work before. It was disorganised and imperfect: some people used these groups as a symbol of how useless the EU was. But in a way, part of the ad hoc movement’s success was that, in its spontaneous internationalism, it made plain what European institutions wouldn’t admit: this wasn’t a Greek problem, it was an us-problem. Besides, Gardner says, “How many more people would have just felt unwelcome, if we hadn’t done that?” This experience seeded Gardner’s attitude today, in her professional life: that however adverse the political context, the work she does never feels pointless. There is no such thing as wasted human connection. People often think in binaries: are you political or altruistic? Are you a person in need or a volunteer? When truthfully, we are all of these things. It’s time to collapse the distinction between the helper and the helped, something addiction and prison services have known for years: there is no more effective support than that which comes from someone who’s been there. Danny O’Donoghue, 53, is area manager of the  Richmond Fellowship , a mental health charity, and describes some volunteers who previously suffered severe mental illness, and who now run a  Hearing Voices  group. “If you ever want to know total isolation, try hearing voices. Nothing is more alienating than something you can’t share. When clinicians ran these groups, they were poorly attended – sometimes the staff outnumbered the people. That never happens with volunteers with experience. I was struck by one saying, ‘The voices have always been the thing I hide, that I find some way to bury. The pleasure in this instance is being able to wear it as a uniquely qualifying asset, to apply it in support of someone else’s recovery.’” “Join a political party” is like the bromide of activism, not in the sense that it’s soothing, in the sense that it’s just so boring, a fire blanket over the spirit – especially the endless meetings. I never heard this as plainly expressed as by the Bernie Sanders campaigner Claire Sandberg, whose motto was, “Never have groups: it creates a tyranny of the annoying”; and her sub-motto, “Never have a meeting whose action is another meeting.” If you want to see those principles in action, look at the most momentous movements of the recent past: Black Lives Matter and Extinction Rebellion. Rupert Read, a co-founder, describes XR as “nothing like the Green party, it’s not a membership organisation. Anyone can act in the name of XR, provided they adhere to its values, principally nonviolence.” This has led to some “very unpopular actions – with XR, let alone with the public. But it shifted the conversation. Power conceded something to all of XR’s demands. I was there when we met Michael Gove, and the next day parliament put through a symbolic  emergency climate motion unopposed . The last two years have been the best years of my life, finally being involved with something that was successful. But it’s not just about success. The really striking thing is how joyful, satisfying, meaningful and regenerative this has been.” Compass A campaigning group for a more equal, democratic and sustainable society. Sign up to be part of its citizens’ special assembly. Global Justice   A membership organisation running solidarity campaigns for trade justice. It shares activist resources and runs several local groups. Extinction Rebellion   An environmentalist collective. The website has resources, a list of local groups, a calendar of events, and a directory of volunteering opportunities. Black Lives Matter ,  facebook.com/BLMUK/   An anti-racist collective with chapters in the US, UK and Canada. Check its website for resources for talking about and fighting racism. The Trussell Trust   A volunteer organisation to alleviate and fight food poverty in the UK. Donate goods, time or money to your local food bank. Samaritans Volunteering here can bring life-changing insights. You can train to become a listener in one of its 201 branches in the UK and Ireland, or to be a support volunteer, helping with marketing, fundraising and organising. Engage with government From becoming a school governor to starting a petition, to giving your views in open consultations. Citizens Advice Support witnesses in court, or help at your local centre.
On my radar: Chantal Joffe's cultural highlights:	Chantal Joffe  is an American-born British painter. She completed an MA at the Royal College of Art in 1994 and her work has been shown at the National Portrait Gallery and Saatchi Gallery in London, and the Jewish Museum in New York. Joffe’s large-scale paintings mainly depict women and children, and includes many self-portraits. In 2018, she painted herself each day as she went through a divorce and, in 2019, she created the series Pictures of What I Did Not See, which captured a traumatic illness. Her latest show,  Story , focuses on ageing and motherhood and will open at Victoria Miro Gallery, London N1, when restrictions are lifted. Tate Britain winter commission Remembering a  Brave  New  World   by Chila Kumari Singh Burman cheered me up when I saw it on a grey December morning. It’s great to see the dour facade of  Tate Britain  covered in bright lights, eyes, an elephant and an ice-cream truck – eclectic, electric gaiety shining out. It’s beautiful and original, and so much more exciting than a stodgy Christmas tree. Go and see it if you live in London – it’s truly a festival of light and can still be enjoyed in our new lockdown reality. Towpath Cafe , London This restaurant on the canal near the Kingsland Road bridge in east London managed to be open for a bit this autumn. It’s in a lockup that opens on to the canal, with green metal tables in the open air. It’s my favourite restaurant. The food changes but in the morning you can always have porridge with walnuts or fried eggs on toast. It’s run by Lori and the chef is Laura and it’s the most beautiful place to eat food like you wish you could make at home yourself, only much better. Great Women Artists Art historian Katy Hessel’s  Great Wom en Artists  podcast about the sculptor  Alina Szapocznikow  was great. She had a conversation with art historian Griselda Pollock, who spoke with such a passion, I had to see the work. Szapocznikow makes strange body casts, sections of torsos, and when Pollock made me aware of her history as a Holocaust survivor, the trauma in the work made so much sense. The work is somewhere between Eva Hesse and Louise Bourgeois. We Are Who We Are  (BBC Three) We Are Who We Are  took me a while to get into: the pace is slow and I had to concentrate quite hard to understand what was happening. It’s set on an American army base in northern Italy and is mainly about the teenagers that live there and how they interact with the Italian teenagers. In a funny way it does for a new generation what  A Room With a View  did for mine: it romanticises what it is to be a young visitor in Italy. Even though it’s a much more modern view, there’s something about Italy itself that steals the show for me: glimpses of Venice, the small coffee bars, even the buses – maybe an attitude to love and relationships. Anyway, I’m completely gripped. Everybody by Olivia Laing The new book,  Everybody , by my friend  Olivia Laing  is out this April. It’s a ride through the history of protest and change in the 20th century with Wilhelm Reich as the guide. I love how Laing presents the movements, and the writers, artists and thinkers who were involved in them, and brings them to life without ever judging them. Andrea Dworkin, Sontag, Malcolm X, Freud – they speak to us and come alive again, but we aren’t asked to decide if they are good or bad; we can listen to their thoughts and ideas. It’s a revelation in an age when we seem endlessly to judge and condemn our artists and thinkers. Artemisia Gentileschi, National Gallery, London   For my final choice I am torn between two exhibitions that I loved – Artemisia Gentileschi and  Lynette Yiadom-Boakye  at Tate Britain, both of which felt radical and exciting. The Artemisia reduced me almost to tears. The sense of her courage, those extraordinary  Judith of Holofernes  paintings where she seems almost to be cutting off his head while giving birth to him. Art school memories of always being taught an all-male canon came back to me. The self-portraits where she literally paints herself into art history made me want to cry and shout and scream. Yiadom-Boakye’s show was exhilarating. Large, paintings gleaming on the walls, full of energy and mystery – they made me excited to see them.
The Reason I Jump: behind a groundbreaking film on autism:	T he cinematic language of The Reason I Jump, an ambitious documentary which attempts to simulate the sensory experience of non-verbal autism, is elemental, building up one isolated detail at a time. A living room, for example, emerges from the cascading, metallic tide of an electric fan, from the frisson of sizzling oil in a frying pan, from the wafting glow of sunlight refracted through a plastic water bottle. The scene is an act of double translation: Naoki Higashida’s book of the same name, written when he was 13 years old to map his experience of non-verbal autism, reimagined by film-maker Jerry Rothwell into a cinematic approximation of autistic perception – the sensory overwhelm, the hyper-intensity of details, the destabilizing fluidity of memory – for a neuro-typical audience. The intention of The Reason I Jump, as both a book (originally published in Japanese in 2007 and translated into English six years later by a team including the Cloud Atlas novelist David Mitchell) and a film (which won an audience award at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival) is explicitly didactic, a missive to explain one person’s neuro-divergent experience and a broader call to expand one’s imagination of human cognition. “My big hope is that by writing this book, I can explain in my own way what goes on in my mind,” wrote Higashida, his words recited in voiceover by Jordan O’Donegan as a young Japanese-British child (Jim Fujiwara) runs through a field. Between a quarter to half of people with autism spectrum disorder experience some limitation of spoken language, from fully non-verbal to utterances. Rothwell’s film, with the help of sound designer Nick Ryan and cinematographer Ruben Woodin Dechamps, ambitiously transmutes Higashida’s words into an evocative, conscientious portal into a world without speech, through the daily experience of five people with non-verbal autism. Mitchell, also the film’s co-screenwriter and father to a son who is on the spectrum, describes Higashida’s writing in the film as “cartography” for a neural experience he has witnessed but struggled to understand. The book “turned on its head, really, a lot of understanding about non-speaking autism that has grown up over the last few decades”, Rothwell said. “The idea that Naoki doesn’t possess a theory of mind is pretty blown out of the water.” A project seven years in the making, Rothwell first envisioned focusing the film on Higashida, whom he met at the author’s home in Japan. But the writer did not want to appear on-screen, leading Rothwell to connect Higashida’s words to the lives of five different non-verbal autistic people in four different countries. “How do these words that this 12-year-old in a Tokyo suburb has written, how do they relate to other non-speaking autistic people around the world?” he wondered. “Can they help immerse us in different people’s lives?” The five participants “represent a constellation of different takes on an experience of autism”, said Rothwell, “but they have massively different skills and challenges, the same as any other group of human beings”. Amrit, a young woman in Noida, India, channels the accumulation and arrangement of details, expressions and chaotic scenes from her mind into a seemingly prolific array of abstract paintings. Joss, whose parents Stevie Lee and Jeremy Dear co-produced the film, evinces both the joy and terror of sensory overwhelm, whether from lights (soothing) or adolescent emotions (derailing). Joss’s hyper-specific recollection – he has limited verbal communication and can recall details from as early as age two – overlays Higashida’s description of autistic memory: “Time is a continuous thing with no clear boundaries, which is why it’s so confusing … I imagine other people’s memories are arranged continuously like a line. My memory is more like a pool of dots – memories are all scattershot and never connected in the right order.” The film rapidly splices home video with Joss’s present, awaiting pizza with his parents, evoking his experience of continuous, destabilizing jolts in time and emotion. In Arlington, Virginia, childhood best friends Ben and Emma attend progressive home-schooling facilitated by pointing to alphabet letter-boards (the widespread efficacy of this communication method, known as the  rapid prompting method , remains  controversial  in autism research circles, but the film emphasizes neuro-typical people’s misguided proclivity to conflate non-speaking with lack of comprehension, and demonstrates the benefit of the method in Ben and Emma’s cases). The pair demonstrate a more concrete demand for neuro-divergent recognition and inclusion, be that in education or the basic assumption of competence. “I think we can change the conversation around autism by being part of the conversation,” says Ben through the letter-board. The film concludes in Sierra Leone, where Jestina and her parents confront superstition, demonization and lack of understanding metastasized into fear as they work to open the country’s first special needs school. In each case, the film’s more liminal, experimental elements – the heightened sound, the slideshows of closeups – occasionally cede to the perspective of the parents, whose ability to articulate experience and emotions often, in stories of non-verbal autism, inadvertently steers the story in their direction. “The parents have definitely had a huge experience — they’ve had a child, the child’s been diagnosed with autism, they’ve come to try and understand that,” said Rothwell. “That’s a big journey, but it’s not the autistic person’s journey.” One of the biggest challenges in making the film, he added, was balancing the primacy of the non-verbal experience with the useful and grounding context provided by neuro-typical parents. “I do think that there are things about context that are very helpful in watching the film and in understanding the people you’re seeing, and what their historical experience has been,” he said. “It was a balance and a bit of a struggle in how much to do that.” A trickier balance still is tempering the film’s broad call for recognition and empathy, and the general language written by a young teenager, with the innumerable individual experiences of autism and speech limitations. “I’m really wary of even saying the film is about autism,” Rothwell said. “I feel like it’s about these five people that you meet, and [Higashida], and it tries to kind of immerse you inside of this larger perspective for an hour and a half. Beyond that, it certainly doesn’t speak for all autistic people.” Still, Rothwell said he ultimately hopes the film will crack open the imaginations of neuro-typical people, unlink the assumption of non-speaking with non-thinking, and upend “the cultural recognition of the fact that non-speaking doesn’t mean you’re non-understanding, that you’re stupid or that you can’t learn.” If the film could point people to Higashida’s books, to the writing of other non-verbal autistic people, to a voice “so generally disregarded,” he said, “that would be exciting”. The Reason I Jump is now available at virtual cinemas in the US and in the UK at a later date
'Let's get rid of friggin' cows' says creator of plant-based 'bleeding burger':	P atrick Brown is on a mission: to eradicate the meat and fish industries by 2035. The CEO of  Impossible Foods , a California-based company that makes genetically engineered plant-based meat, is deadly serious. No more commercial livestock farming or fishing. No more steak, fish and chips or roast dinners, at least not as you know them. In their place, his company’s scientists and food technicians will create plant-based substitutes for every animal product used today in every region of the world, he promises. “I want to put the animal agriculture industry out of business. It’s that simple. The goal is not because I have any ill will toward the people who work in that industry, but because it is the most destructive industry on Earth,” Brown says. The former Stanford University biochemistry professor started Impossible Foods in 2011 after a sabbatical researching intensive farming. The company has since attracted nearly $1.3bn (£960m) in investment. Jay Z, Katy Perry, Serena Williams and Trevor Noah all took part in the most  recent $500m fundraising round  in March last year, alongside leading financial institutions. The Silicon Valley firm’s flagship Impossible Burger is on sale at thousands of restaurants in the US, Hong Kong and Singapore, including around 7,000 Burger King chains, and the company has branched out into supermarkets during the pandemic. I want to put the animal agriculture industry out of business. It's that simple The products are not cheap –  a 5lb (2.25kg) family pack  of Impossible Burger ground beef in the US costs about $65 (£48) – but the company aims to lower cost as it grows and announced a  15% cut  in wholesale prices this week.  Impossible Pork  and Impossible Sausage were added to its portfolio of GMO plant-based meat substitutes in 2020 ,  part of the company’s “worst first” approach that targets the most environmentally damaging livestock consumed by humans.   Milk and fish equivalents are in development in its laboratories. “To the outside world, Impossible Foods is a food company – but at its heart [it] is an audacious yet realistic strategy to turn back the clock on climate change and stop the global collapse of biodiversity,” Brown wrote in the company’s 2020  impact report . As part of his vision of the future, the  45% of the land surface of the Earth  reserved for animal agriculture would be returned to nature. Deforestation, antibiotic resistance and overfishing could be overcome and reversed in some cases, Brown insists. Although attitudes are changing to plant-based diets and growing numbers of Americans are eating less meat, Brown still has a mountain to climb to make his vision a reality. A January 2020  YouGov survey  found more than two-thirds of US adults identify as meat eaters, while beef burgers were rated more highly than plant-based equivalents for taste. But there’s good reason to see the need for change. Millions of hectares of ecosystems are  projected to disappear  by the middle of the century to meet future demand for agriculture, animal feed and bioenergy. A  2018 study of life on Earth  found that farmed poultry makes up around 70% of the birds on the planet. More than half of mammals are livestock, mainly cattle and pigs, and just 4% are wild animals. “The entire cause of the catastrophic collapse of wildlife populations, which are less than a third of what they were 50 years ago, globally, is the use of animals as a food technology,” Brown claims, ahead of his talk at  Web Summit , a technology conference hosted virtually from Lisbon, during which he told the tech industry it was “game over” for traditional animal agriculture. “Cows outweigh every remaining wild vertebrate on land by more than a factor of 10. Just the cows. We’ve literally totally replaced biodiversity with cows. Let’s get rid of friggin’ cows and let nature recover,” he says. Processed food is a pejorative term because people are used to applying it to foods that are basically sugar and salt and garbage Brown’s vocabulary is infused with the lexicon of Silicon Valley. Livestock are a “prehistoric food production technology”. Meat production from animal cadavers is “not part of the value proposition” for consumers. He speaks with his body, fidgeting with the impatience of someone who is certain they are right. Did Brown ever eat meat? Yes, until his early 20s, but he stopped when he realised he was only doing it for pleasure. Does he really mean all meat and fish could be substituted? What about chorizo? “No problemo.” And what happens to livestock farmers? “They’re not going to be in that business any more. But there’s a lot of very reasonable solutions.” But the rise of Impossible Foods, which claims to have “cracked meat’s molecular code” and aims to to decouple “meat” from animals, has not been without controversy. Unlike the market leader Beyond Meat, Impossible Foods uses genetically modified ingredients to replicate the texture, taste and sensations of eating meat. Soy leghemoglobin – known as heme – produced by genetically modified yeast, is the key to replicating the “meaty” taste. The Impossible Burger even “bleeds” as it is cooked. Some  scientists say such GMO innovations  can save humanity, but the UK Food Standards Agency has not licensed the ingredient for sale in the UK and requires a pre-market safety assessment. Impossible Foods says it plans to meet and exceed food-safety regulations in all parts of the world, including the UK. In the US, the company has faced criticism from a number of organisations, including Friends of the Earth and the  US Center for Food Safety , over concerns that the process to produce heme has not been properly tested and that the products are “overprocessed”. Joe Rogan, the comedian and podcast host,  savaged the Impossible Burger  on his show, citing unproven claims about ingredients in the products. The US Food and Drug Administration has twice investigated soy leghemoglobin and found no questions about its safety. “It’s ridiculous,” says Brown. “Our foods are no more processed than the foods that people eat every day. Everything you eat, the little loaf of bread that maybe you baked in your own oven is processed in pretty much the exact same way as our food. “Processed food is a pejorative term because people are used to applying it to foods that are basically sugar and salt and garbage. OK. But that image does not apply to our project progress with our food, which is very, very thoughtfully put together from healthy ingredients.” In the UK, the debate about next generation foods is set to intensify amid calls by the chief scientist for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs for a  new public discussion  on biotechnology. By contrast, this interview takes place days after the first ever  regulatory approval of cultured meat  – no-kill, laboratory grown “chicken bites” – in Singapore by US company Eat Just. Brown, however, doesn’t see them as a rival to plant-based meat substitutes. “It is never going to be a thing. It misses the real opportunity when you’re thinking about replacing animals in the food system,” he says. “As we learn what consumers prefer in terms of flavours and textures, we can dial those up and down. You can’t do that when you’re stuck with whatever an animal cell can do.” Find more  age of extinction coverage here , and follow biodiversity reporters  Phoebe Weston  and  Patrick Greenfield  on Twitter for all the latest news and features
Climate crisis: 2020 was joint hottest year ever recorded:	The climate crisis continued unabated in 2020, with the the joint highest global temperatures on record, alarming  heat and record wildfires in the Arctic , and a  record 29 tropical storms in the Atlantic . Despite a  7% fall in fossil fuel burning  due to coronavirus lockdowns, heat-trapping carbon dioxide continued to build up in the atmosphere, also setting a new record. The average surface temperature across the planet in 2020 was 1.25C higher than in the pre-industrial period of 1850-1900, dangerously close to the 1.5C target set by the world’s nations  to avoid the worst impacts . Only 2016 matched the heat in 2020, but that year saw a natural  El Niño  climate event which boosts temperatures. Without that it is likely 2020 would have been the outright hottest year. Scientists have warned that without urgent action the future for many millions of people “looks black”. The temperature data released by the European Union’s  Copernicus Climate Change Service  (C3S) showed that the past six years have been the hottest six on record. They also showed that Europe saw its hottest year on record, 1.6C above the long-term average, with a searing  heatwave hitting western Europe  in late July and early August. The  Arctic  and  northern Siberia saw particularly extreme average temperatures  in 2020, with a large region 3C higher than the long-term average and some locations more than 6C higher. This resulted in  extensive wildfires , with a record 244m tonnes of CO 2  released within the Arctic Circle. Arctic sea ice was also  significantly lower , with July and October seeing the smallest extent on record for those months. “[The year] 2020 stands out for its exceptional warmth in the  Arctic ,” said Carlo Buontempo, director of C3S. “It is no surprise that the last decade was the warmest on record, and is yet another reminder of the urgency of ambitious emissions reductions to prevent adverse climate impacts.” “The extraordinary climate events of 2020 show us we have no time to lose,” said Matthias Petschke, at the European commission. “It will be difficult, but the cost of inaction is too great.” “Despite the absence of the cyclical boost of El Niño to global temperatures [we are] getting dangerously close to the 1.5C limit,” said Prof Dave Reay, at the University of Edinburgh. “Covid lockdowns around the world may have caused a slight dip in emissions, but the CO 2  accumulating in the atmosphere is still going up fast. Unless the global economic recovery from the nightmares of 2020 is a green one, the future of many millions of people around the world looks black indeed.” The level of CO 2  in the atmosphere reached a new record in 2020, with the cut in emissions due to Covid lockdowns described as a  “tiny blip” by the UN’s World Meteorological Organisation . Vincent-Henri Peuch, director of the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service, said: “Until the net global emissions reduce to zero, CO 2  will continue to accumulate in the atmosphere and drive further climate change.” The UK  Met Office  issued a forecast on Friday that CO 2  levels will pass a new milestone in 2021 – being 50% higher than before the Industrial Revolution. Its scientists said CO 2  will exceed 417 parts per million (ppm) for several weeks from April to June, which is 50% higher than the 278 ppm in the late 18th century when industrial activity began. This is despite the expectation that weather conditions brought by the counterpart of El Niño, La Niña, will see higher natural growth in tropical forests that will soak up some of humanity’s emissions. “The human-caused buildup of CO 2  in the atmosphere is accelerating,” said Prof Richard Betts at the Met Office. “It took over 200 years for levels to increase by 25%, but now just over 30 years later we are approaching a 50% increase. Global emissions will need to be brought down to net zero within about the next 30 years if global warming is to be limited to 1.5C.”
Why old news is something to treasure:	Reading the letters ( 4 ,  5  January) about old editions of the Guardian prompted me to write about my cousin Anne Duckworth. Early last year, Anne could no longer look after herself and was moved into a care home, where she sadly died in April. It fell on her family to sort her belongings and we found letters, birthday cards and old newspaper cuttings dating back to the 1930s. On opening an old envelope we discovered the holy grail: a first edition of the Manchester Guardian. A family discussion took place and we donated it in her name to John Rylands Library in Manchester. We hope to see it on display (Covid permitting) when the library holds an anniversary exhibition of 200 years of publication in March. Tony Evans Wilmslow, Cheshire •  I too hoard old copies of the Guardian. I kept the paper from the days that my sons were born (25 September 1988 and 27 November 1989), and have kept copies from every birthday – the Observer when the date is a Sunday. They make a fascinating history, which to my amazement neither of them seems too excited about taking off my hands. But I will continue to collect, perhaps as an heirloom for their children if and when they come along. Julia Morrison Newcastle upon Tyne •  The oldest Guardian that I have is from the day of the Apollo moon landing in 1969. But my family only took the Manchester Guardian after the News Chronicle ceased publication, and my mother kept the copies of that (which I still have) recording the death of Gandhi in 1948 and the great east coast flood of February 1953. Owen Wells Ilkley, West Yorkshire •  I still have the Guardian dated 23 November 1963, which had a front-page report of the assassination of President Kennedy. It cost fourpence in the era before decimalisation. On the back page, readers were informed that Fanny Hill by John Cleland would be available the following week at the extraordinary price of 45 shillings, presumably ensuring that only posh readers would be able to afford it.  Dr David Greene Harlow, Essex
With a heavy heart, Johnson will always remind us who the real victim is: him:	I t is one of the curiosities of this inside-out age that  Donald Trump  is loved by conspiracists, even though he is a leader – at last! – who embodies all their worst fears. He really does hate them, he really is plotting against them, and he really is lying to them, in multiple and increasingly wicked and baroque ways. Searching for the lesser ironies native to the UK, we might alight on the puzzle that  Boris Johnson  is beloved of many who can’t wait to point out that “facts don’t care about your feelings” – and yet is himself incapable of serving up difficult facts without endless reference to how it’s all making him feel. Is the prime minister in the business of making new year’s resolutions? If so he might consider trying to develop a stiff upper lip this year. It looks like we’re going to need it. Should Johnson fail to toughen up and take himself in hand – a locked-on certainty, given the form book – then we are condemned to endure what might well be the worst months of the pandemic thus far, led by someone whose first thought seems always to be for his own emotions. “I hate having to take these decisions …”, “I deeply regret having to do this …”, “I do this with a heavy heart …” Once you’ve noticed the tic you can’t stop hearing it. If only he’d take back control of himself. I can no longer remember any Boris Johnson podium address that wasn’t riven with subconscious invitations to consider the real victim in all this: him. No matter what you’ve been through, please do take more than a moment to consider the heartaches and ballaches visited upon a man who simply wanted to be world king, but would settle for being the kind of prime minister who smiled and  drove diggers through polystyrene walls  – yet now has to deal with all this shit in his in-tray instead. Of course, there is the odd bright spark. Johnson would have enjoyed  being told  by Bill Cash during Wednesday’s trade deal debate that he was like both Alexander the Great and Churchill. Even if that is like being told you make a lot of sense by  Mrs Rochester . But mainly, we are forever being subjected to  self-dramatising speeches about the latest virus measures he hates , to which the only dignified response is: I couldn’t care less how it all makes you feel. You’re the prime minister. The people listening are the ones you’re supposed to lead, not your psychotherapist. Was this the way with the PM’s noted idol and supposed political lodestar, Winston Churchill? I’m afraid I haven’t Johnson’s Churchill biography to hand – though of course, I never permit myself to be more than four feet away from  Sir Richard Evans’s majestic review  of it. (Sample blast: “The Germans did not capture Stalingrad, though this book claims they did.”) But even without this canonical text to check against, I think we can be sure that Churchill did not feel the need to deliver all his wartime announcements laced with frequent expressions of how he was handling the whole thing of having to deliver all these wartime announcements. “I hate having to be the one who suggests we shall fight them on the beaches … I deeply regret having to indicate we may be required to fight them on the landing grounds … Nobody likes being the one whose job it is to announce we shall never surrender …” It is fair to say that Churchill was not unburdened by self-regard, yet he seems to have realised that what the people really needed to hear in their hour of need was not how it was all making HIM feel. Inevitably, the prime minister’s needy vacillation has proved highly transmissible among his ministers. Gavin Williamson has spent much of the latter half of this week explaining his  chaotic and belated actions on schools  with the words “no one wants to be making these decisions”. And yet, I bet there  are  people who would quite want to be secretary of state for education, and to make those requisite decisions, so perhaps Gavin could stand aside for them? Perhaps Johnson will eventually steel himself to tell Williamson – with deep regret and a heavy heart, no doubt – that he is being moved on from a department he has turned into a full-spectrum clusterfuck for a year now. Until then, the self-dramatisation continues. As you may know, Williamson prominently displays  a bullwhip on his desk . This is the version of Indiana Jones where our hero never beats the boulder hurtling down the tunnel behind him, and the mere act of reaching back for his hat causes the loss of both his arm and the educational prospects of an entire generation of children. Speaking of touches of affectation, when the prime minister comes through the No 10 double doors to announce close to a thousand deaths, as he has twice this week, it can be seen that this 56-year-old man has nonetheless still taken the trouble to mess up his hair just before. What felt mildly excruciating in pre-corona times seems truly grotesque when persisted with today. The podium turns themselves betray even more weirdly skewed priorities. A couple of weeks ago, a shielding and frightened member of the public asked a question in which she said she had already lost two loved ones to Covid. Clearly incapable of feeling compassion for anyone other than himself, Johnson  declined to express any , and handed the question over to Chris Whitty. The reason all this is particularly important is because it tells us so much of why our pandemic story has unfolded the way it has. Time and again, Boris Johnson has so deeply regretted even the prospect of having to do difficult things that  he hasn’t done them , meaning he has had to do even more regrettable things later. He seems most comfortable casting himself as forever the passive victim of events as opposed to someone who should be out in front of them, shaping them as decisively as possible. A fascinating article by the pollster James Johnson  this week  charted the PM’s descent in the focus groups over the course of the past year. “As yet another inevitable decision was finally made,” he reported, “people came to think more and more that the man who was meant to lead them was following them instead.” Buck up, toughen up, show a stiff upper lip – I’m sure there’s some archive  Boris Johnson  column out there lamenting that these are now deemed inappropriate responses by “the PC brigade”. Either way, I am happy to oblige him by considering them easily the most suitable exhortations in this particular case. For God’s sake, prime minister – do man up. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist
Women's tennis stars cautious as 2021 season starts inside fragile bubble:	I n regular times, the first days of the tennis season are moments of unfiltered satisfaction as players embrace their colleagues again and arrive refreshed for the year ahead. But for Ons Jabeur in Abu Dhabi this week, her joy is accompanied with a hint of resignation. “I’m hoping that this bubble life will end very soon,” she said. “Even though I’m not sure when the Covid’s going to be over. But, I mean, we want our freedom. We are professionals and I think we can have the responsibility to be in the tournament and also be responsible at the same time. We don’t need those restrictions. But what can you do? You have to accept them after all.” As the 2021 tennis season marks its arrival this week, acceptance for professional tennis players means travelling to the Abu Dhabi WTA 500 event or the opening ATP 250 events in the Turkish city of Antalya and Delray Beach in Florida respectively. After Australian Open qualifying concludes next week, more than 300 players and some team members will fly to Australia on up to 18 chartered flights. They will desperately hope that their flight around the world is not ruined by a positive coronavirus test when they arrive. The reality is that last year’s difficult season was likely only a prelude to the many months of players travelling between hotel bubbles around the world. The arrangement produced divergent results in 2020 as some adapted and others struggled. The world No 5, Elina Svitolina, failed to reach her top level as she watched the strong pre-pandemic form of her boyfriend, Gaël Monfils , crumble. This year she has hired a coach to specifically help her mental health along the way. “During the difficult time right now, I think mentally it’s very important to stay strong, to stay fresh,” Svitolina said. “You have a different kind of pressure and also playing without people, without fans, it’s a different feeling. So after playing a few tournaments at the end of the last season, I was thinking to take the mental coach and I think this is the right decision for me right now.” Abu Dhabi stands as a reflection of the tour’s pandemic difficulties. Its total prize money is, like most ATP and WTA events, significantly lower than similar tournaments last year. However, the entire pot is provided by the WTA rather than sponsors, a reflection of the difficulty of erecting a completely new tournament with just four weeks’ notice in the middle of a pandemic. It also underlines the struggles of even the most successful women’s sport during these times. With the Australian Open looming on the horizon, it remains to be seen whether all will adhere to the strict rules. Few sports have come across as badly as tennis during the pandemic, with numerous players having failed to grasp its significance, especially within the men’s game. Most recently, Sam Querrey was handed a lenient suspended $20,000 fine by the ATP  after fleeing Russia by private jet  with his wife and seven-month old child following their positive coronavirus tests. In  an interview  with Sports Illustrated on Monday, Querrey revealed the European city that offered lax enough airport controls for him to cross the border while infected: London. Still, for most players this is just another opportunity to play tennis, even in conditions that are not ideal. The former No 1 Karolina Pliskova identified her simple goal for 2021 as not complaining about the rules, conditions and all that could upset her along the way. “For me it’s still better than to be home. My family is healthy, I can travel and I can still do what I love. I think there is no room for complaining.” Then she laughed to herself: “No matter how my results go.”
:	Born in Pennsylvania, Billy Porter, 51, studied drama and moved to New York in 1991 to appear in Miss Saigon. He went on to star in  Kinky Boots , winning the 2013 Tony award for best actor in a musical, and a Grammy for the soundtrack. In 2018, he was cast in  Netflix’s Pose , which will return for a third series. He is married and lives in New York state. What is your greatest fear? That I will be forgotten and my legacy won’t matter.  What is your earliest memory? Singing a solo at my Ascension Baptist church when I was five or six. There were already fears that I wasn’t masculine enough. When I sang, all of the fear in the adults’ eyes went away. What was your most embarrassing moment? I’m not embarrassed about anything. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve  bought? I bought my BMW in 2014 with cash, because I was bankrupt and had no credit. But I was in Kinky Boots, so I was finally making some money. Who would play you in the film of your life?  I don’t think we know that person yet. I am the first of the archetype. What is your most unappealing habit? Believe it or not, holding in my emotions in a relationship. Not talking as much as I should with my partner. What single thing would improve the quality of your life? A home. I just bought one on Long Island. My first piece of property. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?  James Baldwin  and  Bayard Rustin . What did you want to be when you were growing up? The male Whitney Houston. What is your guiltiest pleasure? RuPaul’s Drag Race . What is the worst thing anyone’s  said to you? When I was young, my church community said that I would never be blessed as long as I chose to be gay. And we all know it’s not a choice. What do you owe your parents? Forgiveness. [Porter was sexually abused by his stepfather from the age of seven to 12.] I’m pretty much there. My mother lives in a nursing home in New Jersey. She’s the love of my life, and it breaks my heart that she has a degenerative disability and can’t hang out with me in person during all the success I am having now. What does love feel like? I’m trying to figure out how to receive unconditional love. That’s hard to do when you’ve never really had it, so I’m trying to navigate that. What has been your biggest disappointment? The rejection that I have received from my own people. If you could go back in time, where would you go? The  Harlem renaissance  in the 20s. How often do you have sex? Not as often as I should. What do you consider your greatest achievement? Holding on to my sanity. What is the most important lesson life has taught you? That I don’t have control and should just be present. Tell us a secret . I am an open book.
With a Brexit deal that puts workers’ rights at risk, we need unions more than ever:	B ritain’s decision to leave the EU in 2016 was driven by many factors, but one is often overlooked: the dismantling of trade union power and workers’ rights. When Britain voted in a referendum which, for many, was asking them “Are you happy with the status quo?”, workers had suffered the longest squeeze in wages since the Battle of Waterloo. The  halving of trade union membership  since 1979 – a collapse particularly marked in the private sector, where membership is now little over 13% – contributed to this protracted stagnation. Workers, after all, had been stripped of bargaining power when it came to demanding higher wages. Simplistic generalisations often made about the triumph of leave should be avoided – most full-time and part-time workers  voted to remain , as did a majority of those whom pollsters classify as working class under the age of 35 – but that real wages had fallen or stagnated for so long fuelled the disillusionment that Brexit fed on. When rightwing Brexiteers argued that migrants were undercutting wages, they were redirecting blame away from the weakening of unions and the so-called “flexible labour market” – but they had a receptive audience. In many ex-industrial areas, the replacement of jobs that had security and prestige with ones lacking both fed that disenchantment: the ingenious slogan “take back control” appealed to many for a reason. How perverse, then, that the Brexit deal may only accelerate the justified grievances that helped drive the referendum result in the first place. According to new research by the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR), workers’ rights – along with environmental protections – are at  serious risk of degrading  because of the trade deal. The agreement specifies that if Britain fails to keep to a “level playing field” on social and environmental protections – designed to prevent a race to the bottom, where Britain slashes rights to attract businesses to its shores – then the EU could respond with tariffs. But the IPPR believes the burden of proof is so high that the government could easily water down protections. That would mean it was unscrupulous bosses who took back control, not their workers. This should set a challenge for Britain’s weakened labour movement. It is certainly up against it: as Tony Blair put it in 1997, even after Labour’s planned reforms the country would still have “the  most restrictive union laws  in the western world”, and David Cameron’s 2016 Trade Union Act made strike action even harder. The number of workers on zero-hours contracts has  sharply increased , and the  rising trend  of agency and temporary workers with precarious terms and conditions has been  accelerated by the pandemic . However, there are examples of unions successfully defying defeatism. The Communication Workers Union prides itself on using the power of mobilising people to defy the punitive thresholds needed to legally go on strike: in a ballot in 2019, more than  97% of postal workers  voted for industrial action. Two smaller unions – United Voices of the World and the Independent Workers of Great Britain – have shown that it is possible to organise insecure workers and to win. Last month, the IWGB won a 10-year battle to  end the outsourcing of cleaners  at the University of London, and won a high court victory over the government’s  failure to protect  gig economy and precarious workers in the pandemic; earlier this year, the UVW celebrated as a major NHS trust was forced to abandon its  use of private contractors . A fight for a new “normality” after the pandemic beckons: the danger is that, as with the aftermath of the financial crash, it becomes an excuse for businesses to attack workers’ terms and conditions – so they can unfairly extract more value out of their employees – and for the Conservatives to roll back the state, aided by a Brexit deal that permits the diluting of hard-won rights and protections. You would hope that Labour – the clue being in the name – would offer leadership here, too. But its decision to order its MPs to  vote for the Brexit trade deal  in its entirety means it will be hard to take its objections seriously. The argument here, of course, is that Labour is voting to stop no deal, but this is a nonsense – the deal will pass in parliament whatever the opposition chooses to do. The truth is Labour is trying to win back its leave voters angry at the party for having veered into a remain direction in the run-up to last year’s election. That is legitimate, but it was the same political calculation made by Jeremy Corbyn during his leadership, leading to his vilification as a Brexiteer by those who now cheer on or say nothing about Labour voting for the hardest possible Brexit deal. With the opposition party missing in action, it falls to the trade unions to make the case for workers’ rights, both in word and in deed. Britain’s political tumult did not land out of a clear blue sky: it was driven in large part by the social and economic consequences of the labour movement being brought to heel by Thatcherism. When the “war” is over, the government must not be left to define the “peace”: the trade unions must assert themselves in the struggles to come. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist
A golden year for sport? 2021 is already looking like 2020 – with a bitter twist:	D o you know how many days there are until the  Olympic Games  get under way? Precisely 200. Imagine it. The darkness of the Tokyo skyline. A lone runner scampering up a giant staircase, torch in hand. A roar from the 60,000 fans inside Japan’s National Stadium. Then raging illumination. It will be some sight … if it happens. Meanwhile this year’s other sporting mega-event, football’s European Championship, is barely five months away, but still there remains an expectation that millions of fans will be able to travel safely to 51 matches across 12 European cities. Back in the real world, Japan has shut its borders until the end of the month, the Tokyo metropolitan government has asked the central government to declare a state of emergency, and most of Europe is in ever-tighter lockdown. Increasingly it feels like an act of faith, rather than science, to expect the Olympics and Euros to take place with every familiar frill, as if the last 12 months were just a bad dream. Already there are echoes of the great shutdown of 2020. The World Athletics Indoor Championships, scheduled for China in March, have been pushed back again. The British Boxing Board of Control has cancelled all fights in January, while the English football fixture backlog is growing by the day. The Lions’ tour to South Africa  is also in doubt , with all parties agreeing that a tour without hordes of travelling fans is neither desirable nor commercially viable. In fact, as we slip into a new year it is time to confront another hard truth. The sporting landscape is looking a lot more 2020 than we were expecting a month or two ago – but with a brutal twist: it looks like it will be those at the grassroots and community level, and the poorest and most marginalised, who will suffer most of all. On the plus side, several sources inside the International Olympic Committee and British Olympic Association insist that the Tokyo Olympics will take place in some form in 2021, despite the challenges of 11,000 athletes from across the globe congregating in one place. There is simply too much money at stake for it not to happen. The same surely applies to the Euros. But both events are likely to be pared back and stripped of many of the peripheral joys that make major sporting events such fun to attend. But we should not be blind to the fact that Covid restrictions are hitting athletes from poorer countries hardest. In Papua New Guinea, for instance, there is only one high-performance training facility – which is currently a coronavirus isolation centre. It has meant that Dika Toua, a national hero who is hoping to become the first female weightlifter to compete at five Olympics, has had to train in a makeshift shipping container with no roof, during her country’s rainy season. The situation is even worse for the country’s best shooter Danny Wanma. He has been unable to get access to ammunition and so, for the best part of a year, he has been “dry firing” — practising the motions without actually shooting. Meanwhile when it comes to grassroots activity in Britain, the situation is also bleak. We all know the benefits of exercise and activity for people’s physical and mental health. Yet during the first lockdown, an Active Lives survey found that nearly 14 million people in England did less than 30 minutes’ exercise a week, a measure that includes everything from brisk walking to high intensity interval training. Worse still, that was a rise of three million compared with the same period a year before. That survey  also found that the pandemic had disproportionately affected certain marginalised parts of society, in particular Black, Asian and minority ethnic groups and lower socio-economic groups. With much of the country back in tier 4, the figures for this winter are likely to be even worse. Last week,  the Save Our Sports campaign  warned that much of the sport and activity sector – which employs nearly 600,000 people in the UK and contributes £16bn to the economy annually – was struggling. According to the Sport and Recreation Alliance and ukactive, there are thousands of swimming pools, leisure centres and gyms who fear they will not survive a prolonged period in tier 4 without government help. Of course the great unknown here is how quickly people can be vaccinated – although it hardly inspires confidence when the government repeatedly over-promises and under-delivers. The health secretary Matt Hancock has claimed life could get back to normal after Easter. But that would require around 2m vaccines a week, while at present about 300,000 are being provided. A final point. Just before Christmas, the government gave UK Sport £352m to help British athletes prepare for the 2024 Paris Olympics. You can understand why. UK Sport has been a rare success story, and politicians love basking in the reflective glow that comes when a nation wins medals. Yet even Olympians have to start somewhere, whether it is in poorly-lit pools or dingy sports halls. In October the government provided £100m to help publicly owned leisure facilities – many of which are in the poorest parts of the country – stay afloat. The fear is with national debt rising, and greater priorities elsewhere, it will not dip into its pockets again to help those most reliant on community provision – and thus will fail to reap significant social, physical and mental health return on investment that often flows from it.
Helping those who grieve feel less alone:	Chitra Ramaswamy’s description of her experience of grieving after her mother died ( Losing my mum in lockdown was a brutal lesson in the abject loneliness of grief , 21 December) should be given to everyone who has suffered a close bereavement. Both my parents died when I was in my 20s, and as far as I am concerned now, it is very old history. But when I read Chitra’s article, it brought back to me exactly how I felt. At the time, death was not discussed and people took trouble to avoid me. In my head it seemed as if I was on another planet and I was unable to put into words what it was like; in any case, no one would have wanted to hear it. I felt very lonely and, above all, that no one understood what I was going through. Chitra has written the words that I wanted to speak. Her ability to do this is a gift to those whose loved ones have died. Chitra, you are not alone and by sharing your inner thoughts so eloquently, you will be helping others to feel that they are not alone too. Caroline Piller Reading, Berkshire
Walking with giants, talking with stars: this sporting life is grand:	J ournalists of a certain era tend to embrace the perpendicular pronoun with all the enthusiasm of Scrooge hugging Tiny Tim. “I” might be the skinniest word but it punches its weight in vanity. Hugh McIlvanney famously would perform linguistic gymnastics in his perfectly crafted sentences so as to refer to himself as “this reporter”, thus diluting any suggestion it was the great man himself at the centre of the story – even though it often was. He understood the pleasant fact that we are regularly hurled into the orbit of the famous. It can be a perilous place, where the trick is to balance professional distance and disguised awe, then avoid the gentle chiding of envious colleagues, friends and family. In one oft-quoted instance, the photographer Andy Hall and myself pretended not to be the least bit starstruck for nearly four hours in a New York hotel room as Muhammad Ali interrupted his flow of anecdotes and tricks to chat with Will Smith on the phone, while Don King cackled in the background, sitting alongside one of Louis Farrakhan’s scowling lieutenants. Ali and King then collapsed on the sofa and sang a passable version of Frankie and Johnny, a song whose lyrics echoed a dark episode in the promoter’s past. It would be perverse not to cherish such surreal moments. Having a bit of a clearout, but don’t think I’ll part with this one. Truly crazy weekend in New York in 2001. I bet King he couldn’t stop the rush hour traffic on 7th Ave. I lost. Half an hour later we were sitting down with Muhammad Ali.  pic.twitter.com/nYPQ3clV7o What I (sorry) really wanted to do growing up was play saxophone for Duke Ellington but Johnny Hodges refused to die. I didn’t even own a saxophone. Having fallen short of that mountain top, it’s been untold fun writing about the doings of others, from political scallywags and criminals, arty types of varying pedigree (from Van Morrison to Barbara Carrera) and a few giants of sporting life, too. Without wishing to send you all to sleep, the journey began for this reporter on a local paper in Maitland, New South Wales, in 1970 and ended up in the Shangri-La of our business, Fleet Street, where nobody grows old, even if every hungover muscle and bone says otherwise. Fifty sun‑dappled summers on – as the darling Frank Keating might have said – and I’m the last man in and just an over or so left till stumps ... What an unexpected stagger to the finishing line it has been: banged up all year on Zoom in front of the compulsory bookcase pretending to be far closer to the action than the kitchen and the coffee. It’s been odd for all of us, of course, including the people we write about. The paradox is they live in a bubble most of the time anyway. Falling between name-dropping and a humble brag is an impossible task in this business, but those who have been generous enough to share their time all left an impression. Michael Schumacher was unexpectedly kind, vulnerable and utterly obsessed; Seve Ballesteros was boyish but imperious; Dave Mackay (with whom I spent most of a summer) was stern but welcoming; Richie Benaud (whom I knew away from the cameras) judged every utterance like a leg-break looking for a home; Don King was one long comedy act, especially during a mad week in Cairo, with underlying menace; and Jimmy Greaves, who finally has been awarded a gong he is possibly too ill to appreciate, was heartwarmingly human and very, very funny. Getting to know some of them has been an unexpected joy. It was in Cincinnati a few years ago that I (apologies) got my first full-throated laugh out of Andy Murray. It had been a while coming. “So, do you think you’ll retire before me?” this reporter asked as we chatted about air miles, rubbish restaurants, boxing and bad backs. He’d already won two grand slam titles and several Masters with a body that was knocking like an old banger. His draught-horse limp was in its early stages. But he was far from done. “You wish,” he said, allowing himself a wide grin as if he’d just won a bet. Privately, our little clique of travelling witnesses would wonder how many times Andy would say “tough” in a press conference. Thousands, probably. We never told him. Now he knows. Murray told me recently he’d like to believe in God but couldn’t because there was so much inexplicable suffering in the world. Of all the things he’d ever said, it was the most illuminating and, from now until he retires, it will most completely inform my understanding of him. What has been a privilege to witness is how champions differ from the rest of us in nearly every respect. They have no self-doubt. They’re ruthless, sometimes selfish and even cruel. They practise until they drop, and they can touch heights others dare not dream about. They are also usually way richer. Let’s face it, they are not normal. They do it because they love what they’re mysteriously more brilliant at than nearly anyone else alive – a gift they never properly understand. It’s like they had been vaccinated against mediocrity at birth. Sport is not only their job, it’s their drug, their destiny, they would say, and sometimes their curse. Yet, with the inevitability of a deadline, they all come to realise that one day the magic will leave them and then they’ll be like the rest of us. No overs left to bowl, no saxophone. When 47-year-old  Oscar De La Hoya confirmed this week that he intended to box again , he said it was because he missed it. Really, he is scared to walk away for good. They are meteors and we are earthbound. Few elite athletes last much longer than a decade while we’re still banging on until we have to turn to golf to squeeze into last year’s trousers. The pandemic also has given us time to reflect on how leisurely things once were, when the cricket and football seasons tripped over each other, when pitches were muddy, our heroes skinny and our bellies flat. There were long summer days when you could hear all the birds, smell all the flowers, take some of the wickets. This much I know: it’s been a hell of a ride so far. (More to come). 1)  The Australia dressing room at the Oval,  last day of the fifth Test of the Ashes, 2005 . I’d been ghosting  John Buchanan  all summer, and I’m standing among the vanquished, with Shane Warne (who seriously did not like Buchanan) grinning over my shoulder, as the coach now has to say nice things about him, when he would gladly have wrung his neck. Doesn’t get much weirder than that. 2)  Madison Square Garden, 1997. Chatting with Budd Schulberg, famous for writing the best line of any boxing movie: “I coulda been a contender.” We’d just watched Naseem Hamed get up three times to knock out Kevin Kelley. “He could be the biggest thing in boxing since Ali,” Budd says, “except he won’t be. His ego will stop him.” The frail, stuttering nonagenarian who once stared down Ernest Hemingway was right on both counts. 3)  Long past midnight in Jimmy’s Corner, New York’s best dive bar, half a block from Times Square, the tail end of summer, 2012. Unbeknown to me and my colleagues, Andy Murray was around the corner in a Japanese restaurant, picking up the $6,000-plus tab for family and friends to celebrate  winning his first grand slam title  – and drinking orange juice. He’d get drunk for the first time in years on the plane home. 4)  The Belfry, September, 2002  – even if the banners said “2001 Ryder Cup”, held over after 9/11 a year earlier. Curtis Strange’s clock was out, too, as the US captain mysteriously held back Tiger Woods until the end on day three – some say to hit primetime TV at home, and they could only listen from a distance as Paul McGinley drained his putt for a half against Jim Furyk on the 18th to win the first of seven tournaments out of nine for Europe.  5)  Has there been a more Shakespearian tennis match than  Naomi Osaka’s nerveless first grand slam title victory , as Serena Williams rides her emotions in the 2018 US Open final, doomed to be as misunderstood as Desdemona? The American, guilty in the eyes of Othello (umpire Carlos Ramos), cried at the skies and morphed into an emotional wreck. If she ever wins her elusive 24th grand slam title, it will be her greatest triumph.
Rooftop rallies, frisbee golf and alpacas: alternative clips of the year:	You want hard work? We’ll give you hard work.  The Dutch headwind cycling championships  in February. Frisbee golf: who knew? A magnificent  hole in one  by Kevin Jones from September. In May the Brazilian skateboarder Gui Khury became the first person to land a 1080-degree turn on a vertical ramp.  Not bad for an 11-year-old . On the other side of the world,  Isamu Yamamoto in Japan is more than worth watching too . And Katie Ledecky swam a length  with a glass of milk on her head  in August. Perhaps the rugby pass of the year as Teddy Iribaren of Racing 92  puts Teddy Thomas in  to score against Munster in January. Ronnie O’Sullivan clip of the year . There were plenty to choose from, as ever. Some amazing bowls as  Nick Brett finds the gap and puts it on a sixpence ; in the IPL, Nicholas Pooran produced some  stunning fielding  at the IPL and Sarah Fuller  made college football history . And some golfing spectaculars: here’s one-armed amateur golfer Laurent Hurtubise’s  hole in one  at the PGA American Express in January, Jon Rahm’s astonishing  skim across the water before the Masters  (they always go in in practice), and then there’s 84-year-old Mary Wakefield  sinking a putt across the length of a basketball court . A  canine goalline clearance  spares a keeper’s blushes in Argentina in January. But that was eclipsed by the  Carlton v Ilkley alpaca  pitch invasion.  A parrot decided to perch on Brazil defender Bruna Benties’ head  in a training session in September, too. A player uses a spare ball to  dispossess an opponent in North Macedonia  in February as a match between Makedonija Gjorce Petrov and Akademija Pandev descends into farce. And for dive of the year, take a bow (and tumble)  AFC Totton’s Stéphane Zubar . Footballers kept themselves busy. We had Trent Alexander-Arnold  chipping into a garden ornament , Angel Gomes  finding the top bin  and  Ben Chilwell’s tea break . And with getting hold of toilet rolls becoming a preoccupation,  some players inevitably showed off their keepy-uppy skills with them . Hats off to Elisha Nochomovitz for  running a marathon on his balcony , while this  rally across the rooftops  between 11-year-old Carola Pessina and Vittoria Oliveri, 13, in Italy caught the eye in April. On a similar theme badminton stars Lauren Smith and Marcus Ellis  kept themselves, and us, entertained , in June. With nothing else going on outside, how about the  thrills and spills of Marbula E ? And for a defining image of our time, here’s the US’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci  throwing the first pitch  at MLB’s opening day. Robot fans at a Japanese baseball game  in July. Be afraid. Go-karter Luca Corberi , and a dangerous one at that, in October. A shattering moment for Branislav Ivanovic as he  drops the trophy after Zenit St Petersburg’s Russian Cup final win over FC Khimki  – he ended the year at West Brom. A frightening MotoGP moment for Valentino Rossi as Franco Morbidelli’s bike  bounces over him at the Austrian GP . Thankfully and remarkably, no one was hurt. And here’s an in-car view of the  rallying escape of the year  for Ott Tänak and Martin Järveoja. An Atlanta school basketball  team manager makes the most of his big shot . And here’s the Harlem Globetrotters’  military family reunion surprise . 1) RIP dressage wonderhorse Totilas.  Here he is in his prime  with the Dutch rider Edward Gal. 2) More Maradona magic,  setting up a World Cup final winner . 3) The astonishing final three laps of the  1982 Monaco Grand Prix . 4) Gérard Houllier’s first title,  with PSG in 1986 . Spotters badges:  vsbain67, ronbarwick, whobroughtoranges, bf_silvertown Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy. •   Thanks for all your posts BTL throughout the year. We’ll be back on 7 January
What's the furthest from goal a player has seen red for a professional foul?:	“What is the furthest away from goal someone has been sent off for a professional foul?”  muses Robert Davies. Our thoughts immediately settled on Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s gloriously cynical  scything down of Newcastle’s Rob Lee  at Old Trafford in 1998 but by the time the Norwegian actually made contact with Lee’s shins, he was only around 30 yards from goal. How about  this shocking decision  from the 1991 League Cup quarter-finals then, when Southampton’s Jimmy Case was sent for an early bath after hauling down Bryan Robson – hardly known for his blistering pace – a good 40 yards from goal with two covering defenders for company? At the beginning of the season referees had been instructed to tighten up punishment for fouls that denied a clear goalscoring opportunity and, on this evidence, they had a loose understanding of what that meant. Another example from September 2018, in which Aberdeen’s Michael Devlin was given his marching orders  for a foul around 45 yards from goal , suggested officials were still struggling many years later. Aberdeen fail to overturn Michael Devlin's red card against Kilmarnock. Your thoughts? ➡️  https://t.co/Bsp8HyvWfS   pic.twitter.com/EeyiaKm9Gs Simon Kaplan has a potential winner. “I’d suggest Gary Cahill playing for Bolton against Tottenham in December 2011,” he writes. “He got a red card (rescinded on appeal) for denying Scott Parker a ‘clear goalscoring opportunity’ by taking him out about five yards inside the Bolton half.” Owen Coyle measured it for us in his post-match rant: If you understand the terminology it has to be a clear goalscoring opportunity. Now, Scott Parker is a fantastic player but he took a touch with his left foot, went out to the wing, 50 yards from goal. We had Zat Knight in the middle and other defenders coming back. However, if  this video evidence  is anything to go by, we reckon Mikel Arteta can match those 50 yards after bundling over Marouane Chamakh at Crystal Palace in 2013. “He was far from goal, it was an accidental foul, he was not the last man,” protested Arsène Wenger. Arsenal didn’t appeal, so the red card stood. “Has any club scored as many goals in the Champions League group stages as Manchester United this year (15) and not qualified for the knockouts? ” wonders Tim Leehan. While we’ve been polishing off the last few Quality Street, Yorben Geerinckx has done the hard yards for us. “If I’m correct, this only happened twice,” he suggests. “The first time was in 2012-13 when Chelsea scored 16 and amassed 10 points, as many as Shakhtar Donetsk. The Ukrainian side went through because they scored more away goals in the games between the two, with later-to-be-Chelsea player Willian scoring twice at Stamford Bridge in a 3-2 loss, which would prove sufficient to progress after a 2-1 home win. Juventus topped that group and Chelsea would go on to win the Europa League. “The second time was last season. RB Salzburg introduced Erling Braut Haaland to the world and also scored 16. Liverpool won that group and Salzburg finished five points behind runners-up Napoli, progressing to the Europa League, where they were eliminated by Eintracht Frankfurt in last 32.” Paul Moran unearthed the same examples and came up with some new ones. “In poring over 27 years of Champions League group stages, I found that Group D of the 2005-06 competition surprisingly only featured 12 goals across the 12 games. Two 2-1 results were the highest-scoring fixtures and, incredibly, Lille managed to secure six points and third place (transferring to the Uefa Cup) despite only scoring once – they were helped by an impressive defence which conceded just two goals.” Perhaps Jorge Valdano was right about  that particular era of European football . Anyway, back to Paul. “Has any other group stage in a competition (or even a whole competition) featured a goals-per-game figure of less than one? Or has any team in a group stage/competition had a lower figure of goals-per-game (scored + conceded) than Lille’s 0.5?” Send your answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU . “Portsmouth won 2-0 at Hull with only one shot on target and it didn’t come from Pompey (there were two own goals),”  writes Eddy Reynolds. “ Is this a record?” Nope. Burnley have gone one (none? – Knowledge Ed) better. “I watched Fulham lose 2-1 at Burnley in January 2019,” writes Jon Gundry. “That Fulham lost was not a surprise. We haven’t won at Turf Moor since 1951. Even in a desperately poor season ending in relegation from the Premier League, it was a surprise to lose when Burnley  did not have a shot on target . Fulham conceded two own goals by Joe Bryan and Denis Odoi. André Schürrle scored a cracker at the right end.” Worthy of note is this from Mike Dunford, who recalls Southampton’s  6-0 smash-and-grab win at Wolves  in 2007. “Memory serves that we had five shots on target. Mick McCarthy’s team were so unfortunate – and I speak as a Saints fan who saw it – that the home supporters  applauded  their team off. Has that ever happened in a bigger home defeat? And has anyone ever won by more goals in which every shot on target went in?” Patrick Brennan has one, at least. “ Luton beat Blackburn 3-2  on the last day of the 2019-20 season with one shot on target (a penalty) and two own goals,” he tweets. “If they hadn’t won they’d have gone down.” “Arsenal have been beaten home and away by Manchester United and Chelsea,”  noted Paul Brazier in March 2010.  “Has any side become champions of England despite losing all four games against the teams in second and third place?” In short, no. There have been a few examples of the champions losing three and drawing one, the most recent being Aston Villa in the 1980-81 season. They drew 1-1 at home to third-placed Arsenal, losing 2-0 at Highbury (the day they clinched the title), and lost both fixtures to second-placed Ipswich: 2-1 at Villa Park in mid-April and 1-0 at Portman Road. “Wikipedia reliably informs me there are five clubs that Sam Allardyce has played for and managed: Limerick, Preston, Bolton, Sunderland and West Brom. Can any manager beat that?” asks David Skinner. Has any other manager recovered from a huge loss (yes the 9-0!) and some as well as Hasenhuttl has? Or simply not been sacked. It’s an astonishing turnaround. @blzzrd   @OptaJoe   @guardian_sport  might know #SaintsFC   #Hasenhuttl “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,” reports Alex Crane. “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” @TheKnowledge_GU  Do you know the long and short of this question?  https://t.co/wLRqy70wXf “After an FA Cup tie on 1 February 1913, Burnley, then riding high in the Second Division, beat Midland League Gainsborough Trinity 4-1,” begins John Spooner. Trinity led until the last half hour, largely due to the efforts of goalkeeper Ronnie Sewell and his full-backs Cliff Jones and Sam Gunton. At full-time, Burnley made a bid to buy the trio  en bloc . The deal was sealed by 6.20pm that evening. Has a similar instance of players being signed by the opposition at the final whistle happened since?” Or similar bulk buys? @TheKnowledge_GU  Excluding one off huge wins, what's the highest goals-per-game ratio in a cup run?  For example, Newport County's 1988-89 Conference Cup involved 27 goals over three matches, ending in a 6-5 AET defeat. Barking.  pic.twitter.com/dSRdHmwzFP •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Football transfer rumours: Phil Jones and Jesse Lingard to join Newcastle?:	T he Mill was amazed to find out that Steve Bruce still has contacts at Manchester United, and that he intends to lean on them heavily to bolster his paper-thin  Newcastle  squad with a trio of loan deals. With his Magpies scoring, on average, a goal every leap year he’s decided to target his, erm, defence. The young left-back  Brandon Williams ’ rampaging runs up and down the flank for United in the Carabao Cup have got Bruce hot and bothered, so he’d like to slot him into his defence with a steady presence at centre-back beside him to coach him through games. The kind of cool-headed, controlled leader of men who could ensure Newcastle get the clean sheets they need to pick up the points required to spend another season treading water in the Premier League. So, why he thinks  Phil Jones  is the man to do that we don’t know. But there you go. He’ll also try to bring in  Jesse Lingard,  presumably to choreograph the celebrations on those rare occasions when they do score. In news not involving Manchester United fringe players, it says here that  Lionel Messi  has Whatsapped Neymar and told him to save him a seat in the  PSG  dressing room because he will be arriving in Paris this summer. Mauricio Pochettino may want to take a refresher course in ego-management if this is true.  Manchester City  haven’t given up on signing Messi but news that Kyle Walker has received a text from Messi is yet to arrive with us. And in any case, Pep Guardiola is more interested in signing “mini Messi”  Dario Sarmiento  from Estudiantes. Apparently, Juan Sebastián Verón has helped broker a deal for the 17-year-old, who will not be able to join until the summer, when he turns 18. Tottenham  have sprinted ahead of  Arsenal  in the race to sign crafty Leipzig midfielder  Marcel Sabitzer . José Mourinho has made the Austria international a key target, but the summer window is a more likely time to sign the £30m playmaker whose ability to pick a pass is almost as impressive as his man bun. Fabio Quagliarella  has turned his nose up at the chance to re-sign for Juventus as a back-up striker with a rousing, if rather confusing, declaration of his love for current club Sampdoria. “If you have given so much and received even more, if every time you feel the emotion beating in your chest, it means that the bonds are stronger than anything else, which go beyond flattering courtships, that put aside current reports and respect history,” he roared. “I think, live and play like this. Forza Samp.” And  Leeds  transfer guru Victor Orta has decided it might be good idea to sign a defensive midfielder to stop Marcelo Bielsa’s side getting torn apart on the counter-attack. The man they want is Fiorentina’s  Erick Pulgar  and they have had “concrete contact” about signing him. Diego Costa has been linked with a move to Elland Road, too, though can anyone in their right mind see the big man signing up for double January training sessions at Thorp Arch?
How one umpire's war on throwing hounded a bowler out via 16 no-balls:	I t was in this week in 1898 that Ernest Jones became the first bowler in Test history to be no-balled for throwing, an early skirmish in a one-man war waged by James, Jim or Jem Phillips, Anglo-Australian cricketer, umpire and fighter against the crooked elbow, who once went two full decades without experiencing a winter only to break that run in the most emphatic way possible by giving up cricket and moving to Canada. After his retirement Athletic News called Phillips a “zealot for purity” who “suffered from distorted vision, the result of prejudice and passion”. The Observer, however, described the no-ball call against Jones as “a courageous action [that] reverberated over two hemispheres”, and when news broke of his death in 1930 the Guardian wrote that he was “a man of fine physique, tall, broad, and powerful, most intelligent and fearless, as his career would suggest”. He was “the umpire who assisted so largely in stamping out throwing in first-class cricket” and “accomplished a really great work for the game”. The call had been coming, and not just because the same umpire had no-balled the same bowler during a tour match a couple of months earlier. “Did I go much over the line, Jim?” Jones had asked, upon hearing the call. “You delivered the ball more than a foot behind the crease,” answered the umpire, pointedly. “The law prohibiting no-balling was becoming obsolete,” WG Grace wrote of the late 1890s, “and the time had come when the interests of cricket demanded drastic measures to suppress throwing and discountenance anything like dubious delivery.” Those drastic measures took human form in the shape of Phillips, once a decent bowler for Victoria and for Middlesex, who was once described as “a big, thick-set Colonial, with red hair and red moustache, the incarnation of imperturbable obstinacy”, and later as a “self-constituted authority upon the art of fair bowling and maker of controversies”. A year before England’s second Test in Melbourne and Phillips’s infamous call,  Fred Spofforth  – the Australian fast bowler who had settled in England – wrote an article for Sporting Life in which he wondered if the MCC was “going to legalise throwing” altogether. “There is scarcely a first-class county which does not include a thrower amongst its cricketers,” he wrote, naming the Australian spinner Tom McKibbin and England’s Bobby Peel as notable chuckers (Grace was among those who had already cast doubt on Peel’s action). The article proved incendiary, nudging the debate forward a notch or two and preparing the ground for Phillips (perhaps ironically, given that when Jones’s action had been questioned during Australia’s tour of England in 1896 Spofforth had pointedly spoken out in his defence, going so far as to bet £50 that he could “strap Jones’s arm from the wrist to below the shoulder and he’ll bowl as fast as ever”, an offer which nobody took him up on). Overdue as it probably was, cricketers and journalists in Australia were outraged by the call, given that Jones had toured England without issue – even though Phillips had umpired some of his games there – and that several high-profile Englishmen had gone unpunished despite actions widely considered to be suspect – in addition to Peel, CB Fry, Dick Attewell and Arthur Mold were mentioned. They needn’t have worried: Phillips would come on to them. That summer Phillips no-balled Fry twice, two other umpires called the same player, and the English magazine  Cricket  reported on “the obvious determination of umpires to make themselves heard on the question of throwing”. This determination was not exactly unanimous – there was one match in which Somerset’s Ted Tyler was twice no-balled by Phillips from square leg only for the other official to disagree so vehemently he refused to allow extra balls to be bowled – but Phillips continued, and in 1901 his campaign reached an apotheosis when he got the chance to make an example of Mold. In December 1900 the county captains met to discuss the issue of throwing, and between them compiled a list of players who would not be allowed to bowl the following summer, with Mold and Fry among them. Lancashire’s captain, AN “Monkey” Hornby – who once scored an all-run 10 off a single ball – spoke out in his player’s defence. “If I can have my way,” he said, “we shall play Mold and let the umpires no-ball him if his delivery does not satisfy them of its fairness.” And after the blacklisted players were eventually reprieved, that is precisely what happened. There is no doubt that Arthur Mold was hounded out of first-class cricket For many months Lancashire kept Phillips and Mold apart, giving the bowler time off whenever the Australian officiated their matches, but for a match against Somerset at Old Trafford they included him in their team. In Lancashire’s first innings Phillips stood several yards behind his normal position when Mold was bowling, “to devote my whole attention to his delivery”, but did not see anything bad enough to force him to act. When the home side batted again he said: “It became apparent to me that there was a marked change in some deliveries, and as the innings proceeded this change became more pronounced and frequent.” Eventually he felt he had to intervene, and he called Mold for throwing. Then he did it again, and again, and again. By the time the innings ended Mold had been no-balled 16 times, and at the age of 38 it all but ended his career. The bowler protested his innocence, and that “it will be a bad day for English cricket if expert opinion is to come from the bush of Australia”, but the reputational damage had been done. “There is no doubt that he was hounded out of first-class cricket,” Athletic News wrote on his death in 1921, noting that Phillips’s intervention “was akin to kicking a man when he was about to depart this life”, coming “after 12 years during which no umpire had called him and no one had impugned his action to his face.” Perhaps, but they had impugned it pretty much everywhere else, and the age of the career chucker was at an end. That December the MCC wrote to the counties, informing them of their “hope that the county cricket executives will, in future, decline to play bowlers with doubtful deliveries”. The scourge of throwing had been calmed, and a battle that opened with Phillips’ call in January 1898 was over. This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe,  just visit this page and follow the instructions .
Fresh ideas in education blocked by stale thinking:	The headline for John Harris’s excellent article ( ‘Open all schools!’ ‘Close all schools!’ What England really needs is creative thinking , 3 January) is slightly misleading. There have been plenty of fresh ideas – for the past 60 years at least. The problem is that they almost inevitably clash with the stale ideas of government. Michael Gove, Dominic Cummings and Gavin Williamson are just three of the many neoliberals who have chosen to make education their battleground in a class war. In order to cement the position of private schools and Oxbridge, which are essential parts of the service industry for the ruling elite, it has been necessary to trash progressive thinking about classroom practice and starve state schools and further education of resources, and to corrupt the purpose of universities. By maintaining a system of exams that favours mere memorisation and the ability to regurgitate more suavely than others along any current bell curve, they have squeezed the creativity, spontaneity and joy from teaching and learning. Three examples illustrate the state to which education has been reduced. First, any attempt to move to online learning to keep staff and students safe is much more difficult since the coalition closed down the organisations (for example, the British Educational Communications and Technology Agency and the Learning and Skills Development Agency) that gave staff and parents advice and resources for the progressive use of technology. Second, the brilliant invention by the former Further Education Unit of a credit framework (to measure what students know, understand and can do) to replace the dreary system exemplified by A-levels has never been adopted comprehensively as it needed to be for every student in any setting on whatever course. And finally, the hopes of 16-plus working-class students were dashed by the coalition’s abolition of the education maintenance allowance, a lifeline for so many. This government will never give us the “something new” that Harris craves. Let’s hope that parents, teachers and their unions can keep the wealth of progressive ideas alive. Kevin Donovan Birkenhead, Merseyside •  Last year, I worked with headteachers across England and was shocked by how the government contributed to the challenges they faced during the pandemic. I was also moved by their compassion and commitment – and that of their staff – to children and young people. Two things are needed urgently. First, the government must let go of its grip on state schools. Let these headteachers, as their peers in the private sector, make the decisions needed on the ground, in discussion with their local communities. Second, let’s focus on “school belonging”. Research shows that pupils who have a sense of belonging are happier, more confident and perform better academically. What a welcome gift for our young people.  Kathryn Riley Professor of urban education, UCL Institute of Education •  Given the stop-go schooling that has become the norm during the ongoing Covid crisis, we urge the government to immediately introduce a “home learning maintenance allowance” for each child who has a right to free school meals. The HLMA should cover the cost of home-learning resources such as books, broadband, laptops and a well-resourced advisory service for parents. The HLMA would address home-schooling inequality by supporting the learning of many disadvantaged families and children.  Martin Large  Stroud, Gloucestershire  Anna Dusseau Cople, Bedfordshire
An exemplary piece of public relations, featuring Didier Lamkel Zé:	The Fiver can’t remember whether we ever got round to commissioning a Yaya Touré Award for Services to Diplomacy, but we’ve been meaning to do so ever since 2006. That was when the silver-tongued midfielder, then of Monaco, reacted to news that Laszlo Boloni had been sacked as the club’s manager by declaring: “Boloni’s departure gives me great satisfaction, I was more than fed up with him.” Boloni’s name has appeared in the world’s most tea-timely email several times since then, usually because for sausage-based puns it’s an absolute banger. But we bring it up again because the manager is involved in another exemplary piece of public relations, one for which Didier Lamkel Zé will always have a place in The Fiver’s heart. Antwerp supporters used to love the Cameroonian striker, too, because he scored lots of goals for them under the management of Boloni. But Lamkel Zé’s relationship with the club’s big cheeses turned sour at the end of last season when he demanded a pay rise, less than a year after signing an improved contract. In September Boloni was sacked over a style of play deemed unpalatable. The beef between Lamkel Zé and Antwerp continued, with the new manager, Ivan Leko, demoting him to the reserves in October. Since then the striker has used Social Media Disgrace Instachat to trumpet his determination to leave the club, regularly posting photos and videos of himself with other teams, including Panathinaikos, whose manager, a certain Boloni, is said to be keen on a reunion. With the transfer window having opened this week, and with Leko having surprised Antwerp by resigning in order to – well, whaddya know? – accept a massive pay rise in China, Lamkel Zé decided it was time to up the ante. So on Monday he sallied along to Antwerp’s training ground wearing a nonchalant expression and the shirt of rivals Anderlecht. Security staff reacted much like bouncers do when The Fiver rocks up in fashionably unwashed garb at The Discerning Publican, shutting the door and holding it closed despite attempts to gain entry. After a moment of unpleasantness, Lamkel Zé beat it. But he later promised on Instachat to return the next day in the shirt of another club, Beerschot. Sitting here this morning admiring the pettiness of Royal Antwerp forward Didier Lamkel Zé showing up to training in a rival Anderlecht shirt as he tries to force a move to Panathinaikos. Of course they didn't let him in.  pic.twitter.com/cp2mnHzIs8 Unlike The Fiver, Antwerp fans were not amused and impressed. On Wednesday, to our chagrin, Lamkel Zé opted for a radical change of strategy. “I sincerely apologise to the club and Antwerp supporters because they are magnificent and wonderful fans who have always supported me,” announced the 24-year-old on the club’s official Twitter abomination. “If I reacted like that, it is because my head was elsewhere with the transfer, it wasn’t easy for me. I’m so sorry for my actions. I’m available for the club if the new manager [Franky Vercauteren] needs me. I hope to be in front of the supporters very soon on the pitch.” The end? Maybe. But if a move to Panathinaikos doesn’t happen this month, and given who Antwerp face in the Big Vase next month, perhaps folks at the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers superstore should look out for an order from Belgium. “Above all else, in 2021 football needs to build on the statements of intent from 2020 and commit time, energy and resources to convert that intent into action” – Sanjay Bhandari  succinctly lays out  what football needs to do to combat discrimination in 2021. Football Weekly Extra  is right here for you . “Was  Wednesday’s 2.55 race at Wolverhampton  an omen for the Milk Cup final in April? Ridden by a jockey wearing sky blue silks, the favourite Cityzen Serg surged ahead of the field to win, leaving 50-1 shot Hotspur Harry in its wake. I should know, I was on at 4-1, which I reckon will be the score at Wembley. I am hoping to attend, although, being a senior ‘Cityzen’, this might well be jab-dependant” – Adrian Brodkin. “With Wednesday’s Rumbelows Cup outcome, Manchester United’s manager continued his repeated quest to emulate the lead actor from the Die Hard film series. The latter lost one Demi Moore, the former lost one more semi” – Leigh Tadeusz. “I don’t want to spoil everyone’s enjoyment with excessive pedantry, but I did raise an eyebrow at Alan Raybould’s mention of a Thai beer hall serving ‘German-style beer’ ( yesterday’s letters ). While I would guess it was probably a pilsner or lager labelled to be different from the very pale Thai beers that go well with spicy food, there are actually numerous distinct beer styles native to Germany. This is despite the Rheinheitsgebot permitting just four ingredients to be used in the production of beer (hops, malt, water, yeast). That said, an appreciation for the way an incredibly limiting range of things can be used over and over again to produce something slightly different is what keeps many of us reading The Fiver every day” – Ed Taylor. Send your letters to  the.boss@theguardian.com . And you can always tweet The Fiver via  @guardian_sport .  Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day prize is … Adrian Brodkin. Aston Villa’s FA Cup tie with Liverpool on Friday  has been plunged into doubt  after their first-team squad was forced into self-isolation by a Covid outbreak at the club. Shrewsbury face  having to forfeit  their place in the competition after a number of positive Covid tests forced the third-round tie against Southampton to be postponed. The WSL is counting the cost of Christmas trips to Dubai made by three Arsenal internationals and four Manchester City players, after the clubs’ games against Aston Villa and West Ham, respectively,  were forced off by positive tests . Arsenal, meanwhile, have taken out  a £120m loan  from the Bank of England in an effort to ease cashflow issues that have mounted during the pandemic. Eric Dier, Érik Lamela and former teammate Jan Vertonghen have all been prosecuted after being caught by new speed cameras on the A10 near Spurs’ training ground. And Ajax are close to completing a deal to sign Sébastien Haller  for £25m less  than West Ham shelled out for him last year. “Mauricio Pochettinooooo, he’s magic, you kn …” – PSG drew their first game under the Argentinian, so Adam White and Eric Devin  wrote this . Enrico Chiesa had a knack of scoring goals against Milan and it seems his son, Federico, has picked up the trick.  Nicky Bandini has more  on a Juventus win that could be seismic for the title race. “You can study all the data, watch all the videos, think and plot and cogitate, formulate your grand strategy, then it turns out the answer all along was John Stones.” Floating brain in a jar  Jonathan Wilson on Manchester City . Oh, and if it’s your thing …  you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace . And  INSTACHAT, TOO !
Casey Stoney apologises for Manchester United WSL players' Dubai trip:	Casey Stoney has apologised for a “poor error of judgment” in permitting some of her Manchester United players to join counterparts from Arsenal and Manchester City in flying to Dubai during the Christmas break. Although none of Stoney’s squad have since tested positive for Covid-19, United’s game at Everton on Sunday was postponed on Friday night due to an outbreak of the virus among Willie Kirk’s squad. Only eight hours earlier, Everton’s manager had reported “zero” positive tests, a situation Stoney described as “confusing”. With Arsenal’s game at Aston Villa and Manchester City’s home match with West Ham on Saturday also having fallen victim to Covid outbreaks, the WSL is facing a looming fixture backlog at a time when Arsenal and City are under scrutiny for failing to publicly address their players’ contentious trips to the United Arab Emirates. “It’s not great for the women’s game; there does obviously need to be a lot more transparency,” said Stoney, who has become the first WSL manager to speak openly about the issue. “I granted permission for my players to go away and see family at Christmas, or to go away on a break,” she said. “Everything we allowed them to do was within government guidelines, but it was a poor error from me. I am deeply, deeply sorry for that. “The buck stops with me and I am responsible. It was approved because of the need for player wellbeing. But it was a mistake and I take responsibility for it.” Stoney would not reveal how many of her squad had gone on the trip, but three Arsenal players and four from City made the journey for a break that combined commercial interests with leisure, and could be classified as being for business. While City’s quartet are understood to have subsequently tested positive, at least one of the Arsenal trio introduced the virus to Joe Montemurro’s squad, provoking considerable anger among teammates subsequently infected or forced to self-isolate. “I can understand the frustration in women’s football when we’re getting games called off,” said Stoney. “I can completely understand why people stuck at home who can’t see family are frustrated to see players going abroad on holiday.” She added that she was baffled at Kirk having said he had “zero positives” hours before the Everton v United game was postponed due to Everton not having 14 players available. “The FA have a difficult job,” Stoney said. “But I’m genuinely confused. I don’t see how that could happen. There has to be consistency. When we’re going to fit in all the postponed games I don’t know.”
Emile Smith Rowe's emergence adds new creative dimension for Arsenal:	E mile Smith Rowe might have been forgiven for thinking he was cursed.  Arsenal  were playing QPR in a friendly at their London Colney training ground, 11 days before the start of this season, and given the club had discouraged suitors for a loan spell it seemed time to stake his claim for a regular Premier League spot. He shone until, battling to win a header, he was caught in mid-air and came down nastily on a shoulder. The immediate worry was of a dislocation and that a career of rare promise would have to wait even longer to ignite. Four months on there is evidence to suggest Smith Rowe is the missing piece in Mikel Arteta’s jigsaw. Arsenal have always thought the world of their 20-year-old academy product and there was relief when his injury proved less serious than feared. He returned to action in November and, since Arteta trusted him in the No 10 position when Chelsea visited on Boxing Day, has changed the dimension of a previously stodgy attack. “I think the quality he is showing now is what we saw when he was developing in the younger age groups: very direct, always looked forward, had a lovely touch, very clever in possession,” says Steve Morrow, Arsenal’s former head of academy recruitment. “He was always full of energy and work rate, and came alive on the ball.” Arsenal’s second goal at West Brom last Saturday, which expedited a third win in three since Smith Rowe’s arrival in the starting lineup, was a case in point. Their buildup was circumspect until he received possession from Héctor Bellerín 20 yards inside the hosts’ half, facing away from goal. But a deft first-time pass to Bukayo Saka, accompanied by a rapid burst down the inside-right channel, offered clear instructions that it was time to go through the gears. Two passes and four seconds later the ball was back with Smith Rowe, who could square for Saka to tap in. It was a coruscating move and the kind of goal that, as recently as three weeks ago, Arteta’s side could simply not have scored. “Team looks good with a No 10 like Emile Smith Rowe – the difference maker,” tweeted the exiled Mesut Özil. Taken at face value he was right, although the identity of the No 10 was more important than the fact of fielding one. When Smith Rowe was replaced by Joe Willock he had covered more ground, about 10km, than anyone else on the pitch. It was a similar story against Chelsea and, three days afterwards, in the win at Brighton: Smith Rowe has the industry and physicality to convince Arteta that, unlike Özil, he is far from a luxury. It has been a long road here for Smith Rowe, even though nobody has seriously questioned his potential since he joined Arsenal aged 10. There have been ups, downs and doubts, such as the period when he was frustrated at a lack of starts – amid stiff competition from players such as Jadon Sancho and Phil Foden – for the England side that would later win the Under-17 World Cup and wondered whether a change of club would improve his fortunes. Arsenal worked hard to convince him to sign his scholarship; all parties were rewarded when morsels of senior action began to come his way and, since his debut in September 2018, the question has been how quickly he can make his mark consistently. “He’s probably missed up to a year with injuries, otherwise I do think he would have got there earlier,” Morrow says. Growing pains hindered what could have been a breakthrough loan at RB Leipzig, and Huddersfield managed him carefully during a more successful switch to the Championship. An extended lay-off in 2020-21 would have compounded the stop-start nature of his early career but he is now primed for a shot at matching his international teammates’ domestic achievements. “You have question marks of course, because he hasn’t done it at that level, in that calibre of game,” Arteta said about his feelings when pitching Smith Rowe into a side that had taken two points from its previous seven league matches. “But you see the potential and we really liked, as a coaching staff, what we were seeing. “He needs to establish himself here, he needs to be settled here, he needs to really find his role and position in the team and the club. He needs to have trust in himself, because we really believe in him, and go forward: no fear, go for it, because he has the quality.” Plenty of clubs would have happily taken Smith Rowe in January had his pathway remained uncertain, but there is a sense he will not let his chance at Arsenal slip now. “What you’re seeing now is a strong, energetic, robust player who can cope with the physical demands,” Morrow says. Smith Rowe’s mentality has always impressed, too: he is not the loudest or most demonstrative and maintains a relatively low public profile, but absorbs information rapidly and has been fuelled further by the clear confidence of Arteta and his staff. It means the pressure on Arteta to deliver a new playmaker in this transfer window is lessened, although they were always more than one creative player short and Smith Rowe cannot be expected to start twice a week between now and May. At least it no longer seems outlandish that the solution to their most nagging issue was in plain sight. From falling to the ground in September, Smith Rowe can now aim for the stars.
Olli Harder hopes to bring wonders of world tour to West Ham in WSL:	O lli Harder’s journey to West Ham has been unusually long, even discounting that he was born in New Zealand. After starting coaching aged 20, in 14 years Harder has manoeuvred his way to a managerial position in the Women’s Super League, a competition he believes will soon be the most prestigious in women’s football via stints coaching men, women and children in America, China and Norway, where he had success with Klepp, the women’s team he took to successive top-three finishes, while also working as assistant coach at the men’s second division side Sandnes Ulf. It is only eight years since Harder was  celebrating leading Wilton Blue Under-11s  to the Connecticut Junior Soccer Association Southwest District B Division title, his  appointment as replacement for Matt Beard  at the third-bottom club in the WSL continuing a remarkable rise from genuine obscurity. “It’s been a unique journey,” Harder says, “and this is something you’re starting to see more and more with managers coming into the game, which is this non-linear, not-traditional route. I’m not the only person who’s had a whirlwind, round-the-world management career and it shows that if you can get some success you can be presented with opportunities to work at a club like West Ham. “Without any doubt having the experiences from being in other countries and for lack of a better term subjected to other cultures is very helpful, and I’m coming back to speaking English again, which is great.” On making the appointment Jack Sullivan, managing director of West Ham Women, praised Harder for “his progressive coaching style and exceptional attention to detail”, a “track record of giving young players a chance”, and bringing “lots of new ideas that we are looking forward to implement”. The  postponement of this weekend’s match against Manchester City , after four City players contracted Covid-19, has given the 34-year-old a bit more time to implement these ideas on the training ground. “There’s things I can talk about and things I’d prefer not to talk about,” Harder says of the promised novelties. “It’s more about the approach, in the sense that I have a holistic approach, player-driven, player-development focused.” This will be Harder’s second spell in England, having first moved here eight years ago to “pursue a coaching career, relatively unsuccessfully” before cutting his losses and heading to China. “It’s all about experience,” he says. “I think I was 26 at the time. It was a fantastic experience and it planted the seed for me to be here today, to say I want to come back. Between that time and now I’ve been in China, I’ve been in the US, I’ve been in Norway, men, women, college. “I think the amazing part of the journey is to see football through other people’s eyes. In England there’s an amazing football culture; everything revolves around the game. In the US it’s not like that. In China there’s a very interesting culture when it comes to football, and the Premier League is huge. New Zealand is interesting because rugby’s No 1.” Harder credits his German parents with kindling his passion for a sport which remains a minority interest in New Zealand. “My father and I used to play in a social Sunday league, outside of my playing career,” he says. “A big, important piece of my childhood was playing football with my father. I didn’t watch a lot of English football – growing up there wasn’t too much on TV, and when there was it was at about four in the morning. I liked Blackburn because of Ryan Nelson, and more recently West Ham, because of Winston Reid. I’m a big Kiwi fan and a big fan of having Kiwis in the league. For me it’s good that I had a connection with West Ham before.” His itinerant background may help him to connect with a diverse squad whose regular starters include an Australian, a Norwegian, a German, a Frenchwoman, a Swiss, a Czech and a Canadian. “I’ve got some experience of how it is to be a foreigner,” he says. “I understand how some of these players feel, I understand how it is to not have your own language spoken. The experience I’ve gained up to this point in my young career has led me to be empathetic in a lot of situations when it comes to elite football players.”
Rooney-less Derby dent Chorley's Cup dreams but deliver upset chance:	L ife has changed a lot even in the handful of weeks since  Chorley  were drawn against Derby in the third round of the FA Cup. For Jamie Vermiglio, Saturday’s meeting with the Championship club had presented him with an opportunity to stand on the touchline as an equal with Wayne Rooney, a man he grew up a couple of miles apart from in Liverpool. Covid-19 has scuppered that dream for Vermiglio but the 38-year-old has not had too much time to dwell on that this week, let alone prepare for the biggest day of his football career when the National League North side play in the third round for the first time in their 138-year history. Vermiglio, who has served Chorley for almost a decade as player, coach and now manager, works as a headteacher in nearby Warrington. The surge in coronavirus cases has caused an outbreak at Derby that means  Rooney and his first-team squad will not travel to Lancashire , but Vermiglio has barely had a moment to worry about the game because of the situation facing his school. “It’s been a very difficult time – mentally draining,” Vermiglio says. “I would have liked to have focused on this game more, but I’ve had to put it to the bottom of my list of priorities, to be honest. I’ve had a lot of late nights worrying about school because we’ve got a duty of care to the local people. That’s been my priority and this has had to take a back seat.” Vermiglio says of Rooney: “I grew up on Scarisbrick Road in Liverpool, and he was a Toxteth lad, I think. Seeing someone from near where you live do what he’s done, it’s been very inspirational for the local lads in Liverpool. It would have been great to get the opportunity to come up against him with Chorley as equals.” Derby’s development coaches Pat Lyons and Gary Bowyer will bring a squad of youth and under-23 players to Chorley. Although Vermiglio concedes it is disappointing not to square off against Rooney, he says it presents Chorley with an opportunity to create even more  FA Cup  history, having eliminated Wigan and Peterborough. “We’ll probably never have a better chance,” Vermiglio says. “But even if it is their under-18s, with the greatest respect to our players, they should still be favourites. They’re all training full-time and they should be fitter, stronger and all of that. But our lads will fancy our chances.” The Cup run has reinvigorated Chorley’s push for promotion following relegation last season, but with fans barred – depriving the local community of an unforgettable afternoon in the spotlight – there is a far more important backdrop to Chorley’s exploits. “I’m not exaggerating when I say it’s saved the club,” Vermiglio says. “We told the players at the start of the season that, with all the uncertainty, we’d commit to paying the wages but they may not get them on time every week. I think it’s a figure close to £250,000 with all the TV revenue, and it’s put us in a very fortunate position compared to some other non-league clubs. It’s been a saviour for us.” This is new ground for Chorley but they do have Cup experience to call upon. The assistant manager, Andy Preece, scored the winner for Stockport in their shock victory against Queens Park Rangers in 1994, and the goalkeeper Matt Urwin was in the  Bradford City squad that beat Chelsea  and reached the quarter-finals six years ago. Victory Park would have been packed on Saturday, and Vermiglio concedes that would have given his side further advantage. Yet despite all the uncertainty and the feeling this tie does not quite have the lustre it should do, some things, it seems, never change. “I don’t know how they’ll feel about our stadium,” Vermiglio says with a laugh. “The changing rooms here were already cold, but with this weather, I wouldn’t want to go and sit on the toilet in there on Saturday. They’ll be freezing.”
Adama Traoré hits rare goal as Wolves prove too strong for Crystal Palace:	Adama Traoré has not scored  since February  but his ferocious first-half strike proved enough to overcome Crystal Palace and earn Wolves a place in the FA Cup fourth round. Traoré was allowed more space than Roy Hodgson, the Palace manager, will care to have seen as he received Rúben Neves’s crossfield pass 10 minutes before half-time and cut back inside to unleash a left-foot shot into the top corner. His last goal had come in the Europa League against Espanyol at the end of February last year and, with negotiations over a new contract progressing slowly, this seemed a big moment for player and club. The 24-year-old is widely recognised as the most effective dribbler in the Premier League but with his assists much reduced in recent months, this match-winning effort was a big boost. He immediately jogged right across the field to slap hands with an appreciative Nuno Espírito Santo. The Wolves head coach laughed at suggestions he had been asking Traoré for more end product, and rejected suggestions that he could be tempted to a bigger club. “I ask all the players to get shots on goal,” he said. “Now I will ask Adama to keep doing this every game. “I don’t have to say anything. He’s our player, he’s happy. He’s a Wolves player. It doesn’t have to change his attitude – he’s always looking for ways to improve his game and help the team. He’s hard working and special. He has good actions in the game, good delivery, good crossing that we have to take advantage of.” Nuno confirmed that Traoré was substituted only because he had cramp and should be fit for Tuesday’s game with Everton. “He is so explosive in his actions we just didn’t want to push him any more with the busy schedule we have.” This was only Wolves’ second win in eight games but, with Traoré returning to something like his best alongside Pedro Neto’s continued brilliant form and players returning from loans, they can approach next week’s home games with Everton and West Brom in good heart. Equally important for Nuno, this was Wolves’ first clean sheet in 11 games since they beat Palace here in October. In truth, they should have won by a greater margin, but they restricted Palace to no shots on target. “No shots on target,” Hodgson accepted, “but plenty of balls across the face of the goal which interest me much more than shots on target sometimes. “We lost to a wonder-goal – that seems to be happening to us quite a lot unfortunately, but I thought we played a lot of good football in the second half, had a lot of good possession but unfortunately couldn’t create enough clear chances.” Jack Butland, making his Palace debut, could do nothing about Traoré’s goal, getting a hand to the shot as it flew past him, but otherwise performed well, making an excellent save from the returning Leander Dendoncker as Wolves looked to put the game to bed. Wolves had made only two changes to the side that  let slip a 3-1 lead at Brighton  but again Fábio Silva failed to convince, missing with three good headed chances. The £35m teenager was replaced late on by Patrick Cutrone, back from a year on loan with Fiorentina, and Nuno was honest about the young striker. “Fábio had a good game but he missed chances that he should do better at, especially with the cross from Pedro [Neto],” he said. “You can’t always be sorry about it – there’s a lot of work to be done. He has to approach situations better. “When you’re in the six-yard box you have to be decisive. In a lot of respects he has to be a lot better. We expect him to be more clinical and we will help him improve. Patience is good but at the same time we have to improve.”
FA Cup roundup: Sheffield United end winless run at Bristol Rovers:	For the first time in 182 long days  Sheffield United  savoured that winning feeling after surviving a  FA Cup  third-round scare at  Bristol Rovers . It was not a vintage performance and the League One side twice pulled level but the Premier League strugglers eventually prospered from this five-goal affair after Jayden Bogle struck what proved to be the winner within seconds of Rovers equalising. After 18 defeats in their previous 21 matches, Chris Wilder could be forgiven for not caring how they got the job done. Wilder acknowledged Rovers would be licking their lips at the prospect of causing an upset and, until Bogle’s strike on 63 minutes, they appeared to have the measure of the visitors, who looked vulnerable at set pieces and were twice punished for some slack marking. Alfie Kilgour levelled superbly after powering a header beyond Aaron Ramsdale and, in the second half, the Rovers captain Max Ehmer prodded in at the back post after Jack Baldwin kept Zain Westbrooke’s corner alive. From there, though, Rovers came unstuck and, less than a minute later, Sheffield United regained the lead. Lys Mousset, whose Lamborghini was involved in a collision with several parked cars last weekend, had opened the scoring and the substitute Oliver Burke drilled in after being played through on goal by John Fleck, but they struggled to shake Rovers until Bogle punctured the hosts’ belief. Wilder was desperate to build some momentum and only tweaked personnel, making a sole change from the defeat to Crystal Palace last time out with John Lundstram replacing the injured Enda Stevens. Things started promisingly, with Mousset sending a looping header beyond Joe Day on seven minutes after meeting a delicious left-footed cross by Ben Osborn. It was almost a carbon copy of a first-minute move that left Wilder in disbelief, only on that occasion Mousset failed to convert from close range. Sheffield United twice left the door open to hand Rovers a route back in but Bogle ultimately had the final say. Less than 60 seconds after Rovers pulled level, they allowed the roaming wing-back to burst down the right flank and finish from an acute angle. Burke almost earned United some breathing space but was denied by a post and David McGoldrick, too, could have put the game beyond doubt. At long last, a team that had forgotten how to eke out victories had stumbled on a winning formula. Millwall  avoided a potential banana skin at Meadow Park as they comfortably overcame  Boreham Wood  2-0 to advance to the fourth round. The Championship side took the lead on the half-hour mark. Scott Malone fed the ball through to Kenneth Zohore, who slotted home effortlessly. And with 16 minutes of the game remaining, Millwall got the second goal their play had threatened. An inswinging corner by Malone found the head of Shaun Hutchinson, who connected powerfully to seal the tie for the south Londoners. Leicester  advanced into the fourth round in comfortable fashion as the Premier League high-fliers beat  Stoke  4-0 at the Bet365 Stadium. James Justin put the Foxes in front with a fine strike in the 34th minute, shortly after Sam Vokes had missed a good chance to give the Championship hosts the lead. Marc Albrighton doubled the advantage with a 59th-minute finish, Ayoze Perez made it 3-0 with 11 minutes of normal time to go, and Harvey Barnes added a fourth two minutes later. Norwich  scored two early goals to see off fellow Championship side  Coventry  2-0 in a low-key tie at Carrow Road. An assured sixth-minute finish from Kenny McLean and a firm header from Jordan Hugill 80 seconds later settled a game that rarely hit the heights after an exciting start. George Moncur scored the only goal of the game as  Luton  beat fellow Championship side  Reading  1-0. The midfielder volleyed the only goal of the third-round tie in the first half to decide the contest at Kenilworth Road. Lyle Taylor ended his longest goal drought since October 2017 to fire  Nottingham Forest  to 1-0 win against  Cardiff . The former Charlton striker took less than three minutes to claim the only goal of the game and his first in 13 outings. Wycombe  reached the fourth round for only the third time in their history thanks to a dominant 4-1 win over  Preston . Goals from Fred Onyedinma, Joe Jacobson and Josh Knight had the Chairboys 3-0 up after just 25 minutes, before Emil Riis pulled one back from the penalty spot just short of half-time. But Preston never looked like mounting a comeback, and Alex Samuel put the tie to bed with a cool finish late on to earn Wycombe their first ever home win over Preston. League One high-flyers  Doncaster  caused an upset by defeating Championship side  Blackburn  1-0 at Ewood Park, Taylor Richards’ third goal of the season three minutes before half-time enough to put Darren Moore’s men into the draw for the fourth round. And  Sheffield Wednesday  overcame both a coronavirus outbreak and a gallant  Exeter  to book their place in the fourth round with a 2-0 win at St James Park. Headers from Wayne Routledge and Viktor Gyokeres ensured  Swansea  comfortably went through with a 2-0 victory at  Stevenage , while Josh King netted his first two goals of the season as  Bournemouth  swatted aside League Two  Oldham  with a 4-1 victory at the Vitality Stadium. More results to follow
Brighton in line to pip rivals to Moisés Caicedo signing:	Brighton are hopeful of winning the race to sign Moisés Caicedo after holding talks with the Ecuador midfielder. Manchester United have repeatedly been linked with Caicedo, who has also been targeted by West Ham, but Brighton have emerged as strong contenders to buy the 19-year-old from Independiente del Valle. Brighton have retained a good relationship with Independiente after signing Billy Arce in 2018. Caicedo has been capped four times by Ecuador and has attracted interest from several Premier League clubs. West Ham are on the hunt for depth in midfield and have also made a move for the youngster, but it is believed they are behind Brighton in the queue. Everton and Newcastle have also shown an interest. It has previously been reported that Manchester United were on the verge of completing a deal to sign Caicedo this month. That is believed to be wide of the mark.
Crawley’s Max Watters ready for starring role in El Loco v the hot shot:	T he prospect of Leeds pitching up at Crawley and  Marcelo Bielsa , one of the game’s most revered coaches, squatting beside his cushioned and commercialised blue bucket in modest but smart surroundings is a match-up made for the FA Cup. For Crawley, Sunday’s third-round meeting represents the biggest home game in their 125-year history. Throw in a 62-place chasm between the teams and that the League Two club boast the country’s sharpest shooter and there are the ingredients for an upset. There are plenty of subplots. There is  El Loco  v the straight-talking and chiselled John Yems, who in October said: “Donald Trump is a little bit more diplomatic than me”; the 41-year-old Crawley player-coach, Dannie Bulman – the oldest player in the Football League – featuring in the Cup 10 years on from  a slender defeat at Old Trafford , in the season when Crawley went on to gained promotion to the Football League; and then there is the 21-year-old striker Max Watters, whose numbers are astounding. Since joining from Maidstone in October, Watters has scored 16 goals in 18 matches in all competitions, including 13 in the league. He averages a league goal every 79 minutes, the best goals-to-minutes ratio in the top four divisions among players who are regular starters. Watters’s rapid rise is an uplifting tale. After being released by Doncaster – a casualty of the League One side shelving their under-23s team owing to the financial strain of the pandemic – he had unsuccessful trials at Dagenham & Redbridge and Bromley of the National League and so returned to Maidstone after making four appearances on loan at the end of last season, to keep fit. In September, the sixth-tier club overcame Crawley in a friendly; Watters impressed, Yems invited him for a week’s trial and, 13 weeks on, the rest is history. “Two and a half months ago, if someone had told me I’d be playing against Leeds, I would have just laughed,” says Watters, fit again after a brief hamstring injury. “Everybody looks at Jamie Vardy’s story, especially in non-league, for inspiration. I hope I can follow in his steps, or at least somewhere close to it. “There are a lot of friends of mine, who were also released by Doncaster at the same age as me, who have struggled to get back into football. Even now, some of them still don’t have clubs.” Before signing for Doncaster, where he made six substitute appearances, on his 18th birthday, Watters, who grew up in London, was juggling playing part-time for Ashford – predominantly as a marauding wing-back – with working for his father, Terry, in removals and storage. “I was moving furniture in the day and playing football at night,” he says. “There were some long days and it was tough but I had to make a living. “When I was 16 I played men’s football for Barking in the Essex Senior League, playing against 34-year-olds on a Tuesday night. I think that matured me a lot and showed me where I don’t want to be and where I need to be. I learned the hard way. He always says to me now: ‘In the summer, you’ll be back on the road in the van,’ so that keeps my feet on the ground.” His father always kept him hungry. “He’s the reason I’m still playing,” says Watters. “He’s always pushed me, from training as a young kid to taking me to games. Everything he has done, from making me go down to his work at 6am and getting back at 6pm … he knew what he was doing, keeping my feet on the ground and making me mature quickly. Even when I got released, he was always saying: ‘Look, it might not happen in a month or even a year, but keep your head down and if you keep working hard, it will happen.’” Can Watters continue to deliver? Cups can catapult careers overnight – a goal on Sunday would inevitably inflate Crawley’s asking price, which is thought to be in excess of £1m – but he is already the subject of firm interest. The Peterborough manager, Darren Ferguson, who took Watters to Doncaster, is keen on the striker, and Crawley, aware of watching Premier League eyes, have rejected a bid from Swansea of the Championship. “I’ve never seen so many scouts here,” says Erdem Konyar, the West Sussex side’s technical director. Crawley, who rent a 4G training facility in Horsham, and Leeds, who put five goals past West Brom on their last away trip, orbit different spheres but three years ago Leeds were embarrassed by Newport in round three. A Crawley team unbeaten in nine matches represent another hazard. The route to hosting Leeds began when Watters helped edge out Torquay in a preposterous 11-goal first-round thriller, featuring three stoppage-time goals and another five in extra time. Watters’s whirlwind story, from free agent to one of the hottest properties this month, could soon take another twist but first Bielsa and his bucket are coming to town. “They can bring one for Yemsy as well,” says Konyar, laughing. “He [Bielsa] is a god. Don’t get me wrong, we are not Leeds but we are not hoofball merchants – we don’t just lump it up from back to front. Yemsy has unified us, we are in a good place and anything can happen.”
Brazilian football has a racism problem – from grassroots to the elite:	B lack people in Brazil are  beaten to death in supermarkets on Black Consciousness Day ,  routinely harassed and brutalised by the police , and even  cropped out of marketing photos for private schools  so only their white peers are shown. The football field is usually one of the few places where black Brazilians are not subjected to prejudice and racism, a stage that provides a form of escapism from the harsh realities of everyday life. Yet two incidents over Christmas showed that the game is far from immune to racism, either at the grassroots level or the professional ranks. First, a  clip of an 11-year-old boy Luiz Eduardo  went viral. At the conclusion of a match in Caldas Novas, in the rural state of Goiás, the youngster was left distraught and in tears after the opposition’s coach repeatedly told his players to “close down the  preto ”, which is a highly offensive racial slur in Portuguese. Corinthians  wore Luiz Eduardo’s name on their shirts  in solidarity in their game against Goiás a few days later and he received videos of support from players such as  Gabriel Jesus and Neymar.  Santos, the club that nurtured Neymar,  have even offered him trials . In a land home to one of the world’s most racially unequal societies, where public education is poor, access to private schooling is expensive and the minimum wage is miserly, football stereotypically offers one of the few avenues to a better life for young black kids and their families, making professional employment in the industry the dream of millions. Yet, as shown during a fiery clash between  Flamengo  and Bahia in December, escaping poverty does not mean players are free from discrimination. During a tussle in a keenly contested league game, the Flamengo midfielder Gerson says he was told to “shut your mouth,  negro ” by the Bahia player Juan Pablo Ramírez. Speaking after the game, Gerson said: “I have played many games as a professional and I’ve never said anything because I had never suffered prejudice. But after conceding one of the goals, Ramírez started arguing with Bruno Henrique and I went to talk to him and he told me: ‘Shut your mouth, black.’ He has to learn to respect people.” Various high profile players commented on the incident, with Everton striker Richarlison, who played alongside Gerson for various Brazil youth teams,  telling his former teammate on Twitter : “They won’t shut us up. We will scream louder and louder! We are together brother! Burn the racists!” After the game, the Bahia manager Mano Menezes argued with Gerson on the side of the pitch and  accused him of “ malandragem ” , a form of rogue trickery that could be translated as shithousing. Menezes – who had a stint as the Brazil manager a decade ago in which he led his country to the  Olympic final at London 2012  – was effectively suggesting that Gerson had only accused Ramírez of racism to gain an advantage in a tight game. The furore has been hugely embarrassing for Bahia, who have proudly cultivated a reputation as one of Brazil’s  most progressive clubs on issues such as racism  and  homophobia . Amid the fallout after the final whistle, the club  announced that they had suspended Ramírez and dismissed Menezes . The club said they had sacked their manager because of the team’s poor form – their 4-3 defeat to Flamengo left them 16th in the Brasileirão table – but his remarks seem to have played their part. “His attitude certainly weighed heavily on Bahia to take the decision to fire him on the same day,” says Brazilian football journalist Breiller Pires. However, Pires points out that not every club would have acted so quickly or decisively in punishing their staff. “Were it another club, we would have probably seen different conduct. Bahia have been a pioneer in creating a core of affirmative actions and carrying out major social actions, which has contributed to the club adopting a zero tolerance attitude towards the case in removing the player and avoiding blaming the victim.” “Despite this, they still need to improve on their progressive fronts. Replacing Roger Machado, a black and socially engaged coach, with Mano was a mistake. The club left social responsibility in the background and looked only at the sporting side of things. And, due to the sullying of their image due to this case, they have paid dearly for it. Bahia must make their players and employees more aware of their stance, by showing them the importance of demonstrating anti-racist attitudes and that racism will never be tolerated by the club and its fans.” Gerson has  made his complaints to the police official  and Ramírez has subsequently offered an apology in a  video posted by the club on its social media channels . Although he maintains that he did not tell Gerson to shut his mouth, did not say anything racist and might have been misunderstood. Bahia hired a language specialist, who concluded that there had been no wrongdoing on the part of their player. He has since been reinstated to the team.  The club say they will take steps to prevent further incidents , including writing “anti-racist, xenophobic and homophobic” clauses in their players’ contracts and putting players through structural racism immersion courses in pre-season. They have also proposed an anti-discriminatory protocol for matches and supported the idea for a national anti-racism in football day in Brazil. Dani Alves, who started his career at Bahia, played for Menezes in the  Brazil  team and is now back in Brasileiro at São Paulo FC, has been critical of the punishments given to Menezes and Ramírez. “It seems a shame to me that we have evolved in so many banal things, but in the things that we really should have evolved, we have been getting more stupid,” he wrote on Instagram. “As long as there is no severe punishment, it will never end.” Pires agrees, saying: “Dismissal is little for what Mano did. The coach’s conduct was reprehensible. A football professional cannot behave like him in the face of a report of racism, in blaming and discrediting the victim. It was the most shameful episode of his career.” Pires says the cases of both Luiz Eduardo and Gerson “are reflections of the structural racism of society, which still marginalises black people, as happened with João Alberto at the Carrefour supermarket on Black Consciousness Day. In football, there is an even greater tolerance for racism. Racist offences are seen as part of the ‘sporting culture’ – something evident when Mano Menezes treats an accusation of racism as a footballing provocation. The absence of black people in commanding positions – such as coaches, directors and club presidents – is normalised, even though football is full of black idols and great athletes. The lack of representation in the sport’s most powerful roles is one of the reasons why racist offences generally go unpunished, and why victims are blamed.” •  This is an article from  Yellow & Green Football •  Follow them on  Facebook ,  Instagram  and  Twitter •  And follow  Tom Sanderson  on Twitter
NBA players weren't surprised by DC. We live with white supremacy every day:	T he silence has been deafening on the right. From the right-wing evangelicals who had prayed for Donald Trump to be reelected, to the All Lives Matter and Blue Lives Matter crowds, to the Kaepernick haters and those who denigrated Black Lives Matter as violent thugs. In the wake of a mob of Trump supporters invading the US Capitol in an attempted coup on Wednesday, the same people who rushed to condemn peaceful protests against racism are either silent or  ludicrously blame the scenes on antifa . The events in Washington DC really should have come as no surprise to anyone.  Trump had been promoting  the ‘Stop the Steal’ rally which led to the Capitol invasion non-stop on Twitter as if it were an upcoming pay-per-view fight, promising his supporters: “I will be there. Historic day!” He marketed it. He encouraged it. And yet the reaction of large parts of middle America was shock that white supremacists could invade the heart of US democracy largely undisturbed, strolling through the Capitol like it was their own private kingdom. But none of this came as a surprise to NBA players, 80% of whom are Black and see the effects of white supremacy every day. Not the violence at the Capitol, nor the election of Trump in the first place, nor his  describing large parts of Africa with an obscenity , nor the police killings of George Floyd or Breonna Taylor, nor the acquittal of the officers who shot Jacob Blake. In fact, one of the few white people who wasn’t shocked was Golden State Warriors coach Steve Kerr, who has spent most of his career around Black people. “A legitimate election is suddenly questioned by millions of people, including many of the people who are leading our country in government, because we’ve decided to – over the last few years – allow lies to be told,” he said on Wednesday night. “So, this is who we are. You reap what you sow.” Later, Boston Celtics guard Jaylen Brown explained – as if it still needs explaining – how Black people live with white supremacy every day. “It reminds me of what Dr Martin Luther King has said, that there’s two split different Americas. In one America, you get killed by sleeping in your car, selling cigarettes or playing in your backyard,” he said. “And then in another America, you get to storm the Capitol and no tear gas, no massive arrests, none of that. So, I think it’s obvious: It’s 2021 – I don’t think anything has changed. We want to still acknowledge that. We want to still push for the change that we’re looking for. But as of yet, we have not seen it. We want to continue to keep conversations alive and do our part.” Jaylen is absolutely right. We have watched over and over mainstream America justify police shooting after police shooting.  Terence Crutcher  in Oklahoma; 12-year-old  Tamir Rice in Cleveland ;  Eric Garner  in New York;  Philando Castile  and George Floyd in Minnesota;  Breonna Taylor  in Kentucky;  Jacob Blake  in Wisconsin. The long, heartbreaking list goes on and on. Anyone who is still having trouble recognizing white privilege after what we saw this week is simply in denial As we  discussed  on my show, The Collision, police choose to use restraint and deescalation techniques with white people – as we saw at the Capitol on Wednesday – as opposed to the shoot-first-ask-questions-later approach when dealing with Black men, women or children. We all watched as they allowed the white domestic terrorists who had just stormed the Capitol to simply walk out like they were on a school field trip. There was an image of a white lady literally being helped down the stairs by a police officer. They were handled with such care, unlike the tear gas and rubber bullets that  greeted Black Lives Matter protesters  this summer. As Deadspin journalist Chuck Modiano, who was on the ground at the Capitol, told me: “I was like OK, when’s the tear gas coming because I’ve been covering protests in DC for seven months pretty religiously, and the amount of provocation to get tear gas is as little as a water bottle. This is what I am accustomed to, this is what Black people in DC have been dealing with. My mind was so blown at the inaction by the police because this was so easily preventable”. Anyone who is still having trouble recognizing white privilege after what we saw this week is simply in denial. Black American NBA players know this, they have witnessed it their entire lives. And they are using their fame to get the message into homes across America and the world, hoping something will change. That’s why Milwaukee Bucks and Detroit Pistons players  knelt at the start of their game  on Wednesday night. It’s why Colin Kaepernick knelt in the first place. After Golden State’s game on Wednesday, Draymond Green addressed the media. “Stop describing [the Capitol invaders] the same way you describe someone who just stands there and makes a chant saying ‘we want justice, we want peace’”, he said. “Stop using that same word, it’s disrespectful and it’s shameful to keep calling them protestors … they’re terrorists” Draymond is absolutely right. Nobody is demanding that the police shoot white Trump supporters like they shoot us. We’re demanding that the police  not  shoot us like they  don’t  shoot them. That’s not too much to ask.  Just ask our next president .
Schalke avoid record as Hoppe hat-trick secures first league win in a year:	Schalke’s American teenager Matthew Hoppe scored a hat-trick on only his fifth  Bundesliga  appearance to carry the struggling side to a 4-0 victory over Hoffenheim and snap the Royal Blues’ 30-game winless streak in the league. Hoppe, who made his Bundesliga debut in November, chipped the ball over keeper Oliver Baumann after a superb pass by Amine Harit to finish off a quick break three minutes before half-time. The pair combined perfectly twice more for the 19-year-old Hoppe to score again in the 57th and 63rd minutes. Morocco international Harit then turned scorer by drilling in their fourth goal after 80 minutes as  Schalke  climbed off the bottom of the table. “I have no words for this day. I cannot really describe it,” said a beaming Hoppe, holding on to the match ball. “Just very happy.” The California-born player joined Schalke in 2019 from the Barça Residency Academy in Arizona. Schalke, whose last league win was back in January 2020, were a defeat away from matching Tasmania Berlin’s German top-flight record of 31 matches without a win from the 1965-66 season.
The magic of Marine is the magic that will get us through these next months:	W hen my daughter was little, I took her to watch Marine AFC play. Thrilled by the revelation that it was socially acceptable to shout your head off on the terrace, she yelled: “Come on you football match!!” She never uttered a truer sentiment. For a few blissful moments the crowd behind her took up the chant. It was empowering. And, Football Match did indeed come on. This Sunday, it’s Marine’s turn to embody the magic of the  FA Cup  when they play Spurs – currently something like 160 places ahead of them, the biggest discrepancy at this stage in the competition’s history. José Mourinho’s team will apparently be using the Arriva Suite – which we’ve hired for our kids’ 18th birthdays – as their changing room. Sadly it will also be Marine’s turn to embody 2021. The biggest match the club has ever played will take place in front of no fans. I say no fans. In fact one side of the pitch is bordered by the back gardens of Rossett Road. Some residents are in the habit of watching the game from atop their garden walls or – in one case – their children’s slide, rather than walk round the corner to the turnstile. Back in the heady days of Tier 2 there was a lot of banter about them renting out their back bedrooms on Airbnb – with uninterrupted pitch views – to Spurs supporters. One of my sons had booked himself a tip-toe speck on a Rossett Road toilet seat. Those dreams have now burst like pretty bubbles in the air. Marine fans have to be made of stern stuff. “The game against Stalybridge,” says the club photographer Susan – AKA Mrs Marine – Nugent, “is annually scheduled for the wettest and coldest Tuesday night of the year. It’s often played without a shot on target.” She never misses it. When I talk to fans about highlights they will often name a coach trip to Kent – there and back in a day – to watch the club lose 4-3 to Dover Athletic in the second round of the FA Trophy. One arresting fact about lower-league sides is that while attendances rise when a club is doing well, they rise a lot more when a club is facing relegation. The coach trip to Dover may have been exciting but Susan enters a kind of ecstatic trance when describing The Great Escape – the time Marine avoided relegation in the closing moments of the 2014-15 season thanks to a 2-1 victory against Blyth Spartans. They sang all the way home, as though something more than football had been saved. What was that something? Adam Bretherton who helps run the unofficial fan group – the Crossender Way – started supporting Marine when he gave up his Liverpool season ticket in order to save up for a mortgage. “The first time I came down here the chairman – Paul Leary – was greeting people at the turnstile. He didn’t recognise me so he introduced himself. And I thought, this is good.” Adam and the other Crossenders noticed that the club didn’t do much in the way of social media so started to do their own post-match interviews. “I’d often had a few drinks so I was sometimes not that clear about who I was interviewing and whether they had actually played.” In the end, the official fan association were persuaded to start providing their own content. Part of the attraction of supporting a club like Marine is the fact that a fan like Adam can have an impact like that. Susan’s day job was as an environmental health officer. Mrs Marine is her superhero identity. At Rossett Road a little girl can shout and be heard. The night the team qualified for this match by beating Havant & Waterlooville, my friend Stuart posted a photograph of the goalkeeper Bayleigh Passant – still in his kit – dashing back from the Co-Op where he’d bought some carry out booze for his teammates. This togetherness is widely cited as an argument for the widespread belief that Marine will prevail on Sunday. That and the fact that it’s probably been a while since Spurs played on a pitch where the ball might have to be retrieved from someone’s back garden. I’ve been re-reading and recommending JL Carr’s novel How Steeple Sinderby Rovers Won the FA Cup, somehow forgetting that it’s a work of fiction not a handbook. I know I know, the FA Cup isn’t really magic. The main reason it holds such glamour for people of a certain age is that it was the only match that went out live on TV. On the estate where I grew up every window would have its curtains half drawn on the day of the FA Cup Final to keep the sun off the screen. The fact that a Marine game is going to be televised is almost compensation for the fact that we won’t be watching it together. If this last terrible year could do one good thing it would be to move the definition of the word community away from its more recent meaning – online interest group – back towards its older, more challenging meaning – the people who live near you with whom you have to learn to get along with. The magic of Marine – and clubs like it all over the country – is the magic that will get us through these next few months. The magic of knowing that shared bad times – whether they be lockdowns or rainy nights in Stalybridge – can bring you together. The magic of knowing that we matter to each other. Indeed that we only matter at all in so far as we matter to each other. Frank Cottrell Boyce is a British screenwriter and novelist
Black Caps capture public imagination in rise to top of Test rankings:	W hat a difference a year can make. While very few places around the world have been left untouched by Covid-19, New Zealand has been luckier than most. And the country’s men’s international cricketers have made the most of it. But even as they sat in the Hagley Park dressing room on Wednesday afternoon, reflecting on  New Zealand’s rise to No 1 in the Test rankings for the first time , the players would have been entitled to rewind the tape, 12 months to the day, to another dressing room, in another country, and a vastly different set of emotions. 6 January, 2020 saw the Black Caps suffer the final indignity of a tour when promise imploded into humiliation, beaten inside of four days for the third time in a row as Nathan Lyon spun the Sydney Test to an early end. While Lyon’s 10 wickets consigned New Zealand to their final defeat, the tourists had been spun out mentally from the start, losing the three matches by 296, 247 and 279 runs respectively. For a side that had arrived filled with optimism on the back of a home series win over England, and who had left behind a country full of excitement about the prospect of New Zealand’s first Boxing Day Test at the MCG for 32 years, the disaster that transpired was a bitter disappointment. That it didn’t prove demoralising for the home summer that followed reflects the character and humility that has been instilled into a nation that has reached the past two finals of the ICC World Cup. The nice guys don’t always have to finish second. Professional coaches will tell you that they learn the most about their charges in the toughest situations; how they handle disappointment or non-performance and, most importantly, how they respond. New Zealand’s ranking is testament to how the Black Caps responded to probably the biggest letdown in the Test arena that most of the players had ever had. Six weeks after that trauma concluded, the all-star India batting line-up was fired out for 165 and 191 at the Basin Reserve, as New Zealand won by 10 wickets. That victory was historic, and almost as much a coming of age as is the new ranking. New Zealand’s 100 th  victory in Test matches, it was achieved 90 years after the country first played. It took New Zealand 26 years to win their first Test, against West Indies in 1956, and 72 years, and 296 Tests, to reach their half-century of wins, which was achieved against England in 2002. The second fifty came at lightspeed by comparison, in just 18 years from 145 Tests. A seven-wicket win in the second Test completed the domination of India, eclipsing a side that contained nine of the 11 who recently shocked Australia at the MCG. Although it can be argued it has been made easier for the Black Caps, as they have played eight of their past 11 series at home, you can only beat who is put in front of you. An unbeaten record from their past 17 home Tests, 13 of which have been won, highlights their effectiveness operating in familiar conditions. Since the SCG, the Black Caps have won six Tests in a row, which is a first. Such is the manner that the current side has captured the public imagination, it is threatening to rival the class of the 1980s as the standard bearer of New Zealand cricketing excellence. That decade saw New Zealand go unbeaten in Test series at home, a run that began against Clive Lloyd’s fearsome West Indians of 1980, and lasted for 12 summers, before finally being ended by England, under the command of Graham Gooch, in 1992. Spearheaded by the incomparable Sir Richard Hadlee, surrounded by seasoned professionals such as Martin Crowe, John Wright, Jeremy Coney, Ewen Chatfield and Ian Smith amongst others, New Zealand defeated every Test-playing country, inspiring the nation as a result. Test cricket became cool, and crowds flocked to see their heroes in action, in much the same way as they have packed the grass embankments during the recent tours by West Indies and Pakistan. One of the key strengths of the 1980s was the togetherness of the side, united in purpose, well led, but with a good supporting group of leaders, the classic sum of its parts being greater than the effectiveness of the individuals. There was more playing depth than New Zealand cricket had ever enjoyed before, fuelling consistency due to the fierce competition for places. There is no shortage of similarities to the current crop. Each era had its stars. New Zealand’s two most prolific century-makers, Kane Williamson (25) and Ross Taylor (19), are the mainstays of the present-day batting order. The next two on the list, Martin Crowe (17) and John Wright (12), were core members of the 1980s generation. Likewise, while Hadlee’s 431 wickets remain unsurpassed by a New Zealander, 31 years after his retirement, Tim Southee (302) and Trent Boult (281) are leading the chase among the current bowlers, split only by the long-serving spinner, Daniel Vettori (361). The feisty South African-born quick Neil Wagner (219) is sixth, but just 14 behind the fifth-placed Chris Martin. Yet for all the star power of both eras, the sharing of responsibilities has been the key to success. Since 2017, Williamson, Taylor, opener Tom Latham and middle-order batsman Henry Nicholls have accumulated 21 centuries and over 6,500 runs between them. Southee, Boult, and the irrepressible Wagner have claimed 275 wickets during the same period. None can afford to rest on their laurels. The emergence of Kyle Jamieson has made headlines with 36 wickets in just six Tests, broadening the depth of pace bowling options for a side that usually only plays three quicks. The pressure from the prolific domestic batsman, Will Young, and the South African recruit Devon Conway, was such that Nicholls, despite being ranked 12 th  on the world Test batting rankings, was only a failure away from the axe, until his 174 against West Indies in the second Test of the summer. Daryl Mitchell’s maiden Test century this week could have regular all-rounder Colin de Grandhomme sweating before the next New Zealand Test XI is selected, whenever that might be. The lack of a proven test spinner is a weakness which, while less of a vulnerability on New Zealand’s seamer-friendly pitches, has been exposed too often for comfort in foreign conditions. Perhaps that is a further role for Williamson. Why not? He can do everything else. The world’s No 1-ranked batsman has rolled his arm over sparingly since rehabilitating his arm action but broke a stubborn lower order partnership at Hagley showing that, even when the Black Caps are in the field, it’s hard to keep their ever-humble skipper out of the action. In Williamson, New Zealand cricket has arguably the most influential captain it has ever had, the level of his influence on the side’s fortunes on par to that exercised by Richie McCaw. Like his two-time Rugby World Cup-winning All Black counterpart, Williamson has guided his side to the top of the world. For a nation that was once bowled out for 26 in a Test match, the achievement is arguably even greater.
Ruan Ackermann finds room for Gloucester growth after father's exit:	R uan Ackermann considered leaving  Gloucester  when his father, Johan, ended his contract as head coach at Kingsholm prematurely to move to Japan last May, but the lure of playing for England proved too strong. The back-row, who qualifies through residency having joined the Premiership club in 2017, had only had one boss in his senior career, which started with the Lions in his native South Africa. “The biggest thing for me is the need to be challenged in life,” the 25-year-old says. “It was a shock to me when my father left Gloucester because I did not know anything about it. He could not come and say goodbye to everyone. The thought of moving on did go through my mind, but I saw it as an opportunity to grow as a player and move out of a comfort zone, and prove to someone new what kind of player I was. “When George [Skivington, current head coach] arrived, you quickly got a feel of how he wanted us to play. The first thing I said to him was that he had the same mentality as my father when it came to the pack, and the same style of play. It made it easy for me to move on from my dad. Things have not gone for us this season, but it is all stuff that we can control. There is no questioning the character and belief in the squad.” Ackermann qualified for England at the end of last season. Head coach Eddie Jones spoke to him at the beginning of that year, but there has been no contact since with a player who played for South Africa at under-20 and A level, and can operate as a No 8 or blindside flanker. “I have not had any interest from South Africa in the last 18 months,” Ackermann says. “England have grown since last year’s World Cup and the prospect of playing for them has excited me. There is a Lions tour coming up and, even if you are not involved, you feel how players react to it, the excitement it generates and how big an achievement it is to make the squad. “I had discussions with Eddie Jones before the first lockdown, but it was nothing massive. He told me what I should work on and what he liked about me. There has been nothing since then and I just need to play to the best of my ability, making sure that I am ready if it ever happens and take it with both hands.” An improvement in Gloucester’s form would help. They went into the sixth round of the Premiership at the bottom of the table, having played all their matches unlike some of their rivals who have been awarded cancellation points, but it is hard to argue that it is a false position: since beating Bath at the beginning of January last year, they have lost 14 of the 18 Premiership matches they have played. They are at Newcastle on Saturday and their only away win in the past 12 came at Worcester in August, Skivington’s first match in charge. “It will be a really tough game,” Ackermann says. “Their forwards work hard and they are playing well with a lot of belief. We will probably be underdogs but it is another challenge for us. “It was a difficult time when George started, with people coming and going. There was not time as a squad to sit down and discuss things. Results have not gone our way this season, but it is not about how we are playing, intent or belief, but the small things that happen during a game and the need to learn from them. Results will come through experience and you can see how the young players are growing. I am happy I stayed here; the reward will come.”
Talking Horses: Secret Reprieve poised to land Welsh Grand National:	E van Williams has done an excellent job with  Secret Reprieve (3.10) , guiding the talented seven-year-old through the early stages of his chasing career so that he lands right at the foot of the weights for today’s Welsh Grand National. It will be a crying shame if the race is abandoned for a second time because otherwise the Vale Of Glamorgan trainer seems very well positioned to get his first victory in the Chepstow feature. There is plenty that can go wrong, of course, and Secret Reprieve is not generously priced at 4-1 but it is hard to identify a potent, reliable threat. Truckers Lodge will run an honest race but is 16lb higher than when second last year. Big River makes life hard for himself by getting outpaced and if he breaks a fence at the wrong time his chance will be scuppered but the Scottish raider is capable of nicking a place at 16-1. 1.10 Kempton  He has yet to win over fences but  Smarty Wild  looks nicely treated in this sphere, having arguably run above his rating in all three runs this season, even when his stable was having a slow time of it. He coped well with a slow surface at Ascot last time and this is a step down in class. 1.25 Chepstow  The ex-French Houx Gris seems likely to be a work in progress and it is hard to see past  Nassalam , hot favourite for this Finale Juvenile Hurdle. Gary Moore is having a fine time of it in this division of late and this chestnut showed masses of ability in two spins round Fontwell. 1.45 Kempton  In this really tricky contest, a chance is taken on a horse from the Graeme McPherson stable, which is having its best season for some time. Although winless since his novice days,  Ami Desbois  has run well in races like this and was beaten by just a neck at Sandown a couple of seasons back. A capable claimer takes over in the saddle and he may outrun odds of 25-1 2.05 Wincanton  Was it worth saving the Dipper for this three-runner field? Lieutenant Rocco is a likeable type but looks outclassed while Messire Des Obeaux will have to improve on his successful handicap reappearance.  Protektorat  has taken really well to fences and should score. 2.20 Kempton  McFabulous is classy but doesn’t have much in hand on these terms and softer ground doesn’t help. Younevercall is respected but had a hard race three weeks ago. Perhaps this is a job for  On The Blind Side , who has done well since returning to hurdles and was giving lumps of weight to the winner when second in a Cheltenham handicap last time. 2.35 Wincanton  Having been given a couple of tough assignments on his return from an absence,  Glen Forsa  has had no chance to shine this term. But he won three on the bounce, including the Kingmaker, a couple of seasons back and this looks much more winnable. 2.55 Kempton  A big-field handicap at Cheltenham was, unsurprisingly, not the ideal test for  Master Tommytucker  but he may be underrated here with that blot on his record. Taking on just three rivals and getting weight from two of them should be right up his street. ⭐️ Master Tommytucker produced a magnificent round of jumping at  @haydockraces   😍 Relive 18 superb leaps on his way to a fluent success for  @samtwiston  &  @PFNicholls   pic.twitter.com/ATdj7r5B73 3.30 Kempton  Bristol De Mai aside, it has not been an especially fruitful season for the Twiston-Davies yard but  One True King  is the kind of doughty handicapper they do so well with and he looks one to trust here. Runner-up in big-field handicaps at Cheltenham in October and November, he looks like improving for this step up in distance and can finally put one over on the official assessor. Lingfield 11.30 Subliminal 12.00 Something Enticing 12.31 Craved 1.05 Make It Rain 1.40 Sheila 2.15 Centroid 2.50 Tommy Rock 3.25 Come On Girl Chepstow   11.45 Champagne Rhythm 12.17 Esprit Du Large 12.50 Farrants Way 1.25 Nassalam 1.58 Ask Me Early (nap) 2.30 Easy As That 3.10 Secret Reprieve 3.50 Whiteoak Fleur Wincanton   11.52 Flash Collonges 12.25 On To Victory 12.58 Ede’iffs Elton 1.30 Just So Cool 2.05 Protektorat 2.35 Glen Forsa 3.05 Baignard 3.45 Glajou Kempton   12.05 Ray’s The One 12.35 The Domino Effect 1.10 Smarty Wild 1.45 Ami Desbois (nb) 2.20 On The Blind Side 2.55 Master Tommytucker 3.30 One True King 3.57 Breffniboy Chelmsford 1.29 Excellent George 2.04 Album 2.34 Revolutionise 3.04 Assimilation 3.40 Mandarin 4.10 Tributo 4.45 At Your Service 5.15 Carryonregardless 5.45 Zayriyan  3.45 Wincanton  Gardefort is worth respecting after defying big odds to run second at Ascot’s Christmas meeting. But he is 12 and this is a quick second run back, so  Glajou  looks the percentage call. Paul Nicholls’ runner has plenty of scope to improve on just his fourth try over fences.
Wasps fight back to win enthralling high-scoring encounter at Bath:	For those seeking escape from wider troubles, the Rec this Friday night was the place to be – if only anyone had been allowed in. No fewer than 96 points scored, but a riot of running from start to finish. And once the dust had settled, yet another win for Wasps, yet another defeat for Bath. It is difficult to know what the significance of points are these days, so many awarded for events off the field, but the five  Wasps  picked up here take them into the top four of what passes for the table. Bath , incredibly given the rate at which they opened, had to wait until the sixth minute of overtime to get their bonus-point try. Having led by 13 points early on, then 12 with half-time approaching, an eight-point defeat will hurt. But what a match they contributed towards. The covers had been pulled over the pitch overnight, the icy grip over the UK as tight in the West Country as anywhere. The excuses for a dour slug-fest were manifold. Yet those who like to complain about the state of modern rugby were confounded yet again by another invigorating contest that melted the ice from the off. There were 53 points in the first half alone. Rhys Priestland, in the form of his life these days, scored 24 of them on his own. Bath were awarded five penalties in the first half, and the former Wales fly-half (how long will we be describing him like that?) landed all of them. His first contribution, though, was the game’s first try, before the third minute was out. Tom de Glanville fielded a Wasps kick on his 22, Zach Mercer broke and Priestland appeared on his shoulder, still inside the Bath half. Off he went. As he realised he had only a Wasps prop in pursuit, he cantered all the way home. Within 10 minutes he had piled on two more penalties, before the game heated up another degree at the end of the first quarter – three tries in six minutes. A driven lineout yielded Wasps a penalty try, but two minutes later Taulupe Faletau set up Sam Underhill for the latter’s first  Premiership  try, after he picked a fine support line. Two minutes later again, we had the best of the lot. Paolo Odogwu has enlivened Wasps back division this season. He was at it again, breaking from 22 to 22. He found Dan Robson in support, and when Robson found Tom Cruse, the hooker dummied and stepped as confidently as any of them to score the game’s fourth try, in the 20th minute. Two tries apiece, but the difference was Wasps’ indiscipline, Jack Willis pinged three times at the breakdown, and Priestland’s accuracy from the tee. He opened up a 29-17 lead a few minutes short of the break with his fifth penalty, but Wasps kept themselves in the game with a close-quarter try for Brad Shields, on for Will Rowlands, on the stroke of half-time. Another salvo of three tries in six minutes ensued, barely three minutes into the second half. Cruse developed his audition for a future in the backs with a 20-metre run, turning loose ball into another seven points. Wasps had the bonus point and, even more ridiculously, the lead. Then, two minutes later, Bath had it back, then two minutes later again Wasps. Cameron Redpath scored Bath’s third, a step doing for Mercer, followed by a gallop to the line. No matter, Odogwu had Wasps’ fifth minutes later, taking Cruse’s inside ball off a lineout to power through Underhill, no less. He had their sixth another six minutes later, this time a simple run-in after another attacking lineout – 45-36 to the visitors. And we hadn’t even played an hour. The final quarter was the least eventful – just the 15 points scored – but Josh Bassett’s try, Bath’s seventh, secured them the match. Elliott Stooke’s try, with the clock well into the red and Wasps down to 14, earned Bath at least a bonus point. But the real winner, as they say, was rugby.
Cool down the outrage and give football's Covidiots a little empathy:	What did you do in the culture wars, Daddy? Cue the haunted stare across the parlour room, the weak-chinned stammer, the single bead of sweat above the starched collar. Well, I … That is … I struggled to come up with relentlessly partisan opinions. I was unable to be convincingly enraged on a daily basis. And that, children, is why I sit around all day in an Edwardian armchair rather than hosting an urgent new current affairs show or arguing profitably on social media with celebrity chefs. These are inflamed and inflammatory times. This is one of the few non-inflammatory opinions it’s possible to hold right now. We’re all having a massive argument: we can at least agree on that. Even in the attic room of sport there has been a notable shift in the past few years. Blame must be doled out. Somebody must always be wrong. Polarising polemic: this is what humans find enragingly moreish, like dogs being tickled with a sharp stick. So it has proved to be this week with the rise of the Covidiots in English football. Players in the  men’s teams of Tottenham , Fulham, Crystal Palace, West Ham and Manchester City have, it is alleged, broken the coronavirus regulations over the festive period. More dramatically a group of players in the Manchester City and Arsenal women’s teams travelled to Dubai and have seen their WSL games this weekend  cancelled as a result, a source of huge frustration for all involved . What is the correct response to this? It was inevitable the citadel would begin to crumble at some point. The new strain of the virus is clearly hyper-contagious. Humans are flawed and easily distracted. And footballers are only humans, often away from home, often larrikin types by nature. The real surprise is how long it took. At which point, back to the here and now, and that urge to winch the great creaking finger of blame into place, to see not only stupidity or weariness, but moral depravity, some kind of profound identity fault. The Football Association has duly been trashed for failing to step in and punish those involved. This is standard practice for those of us in the football-centred universe, a place where the English FA is still deemed all-powerful in human affairs. Meanwhile, the women’s players in particular have been the object of visceral personal criticism, accused of trashing the basic integrity and professionalism of their league. There are two things worth saying about this. The first is to clarify the role of the FA. It has been a reflex response all week: how is it the FA can ban a player for unwittingly using a racist word, but not for seeming to endanger lives? Most of us aren't risking our physical health by getting into a state of extreme team-sport exertion three times a week This sounds logical. It isn’t. Agreeable as it may be to have Someone To Blame, there is nothing the FA can sensibly do about potential Covid law-breaches by third-party employees that have nothing to do with actual football. In practice the FA can only sensibly take action when a player has been convicted of something concrete, or appears to have done a specific thing – use of racist language; gambling stuff – that goes against its own specific rules. The punishments doled out may be inconsistent. But there is at least some process here, a  locus standi  to act. Otherwise the FA is not the police, the CPS or a firm of private detectives. What do we want it to do? Hammer down Sergio Reguilón’s door with one of those hand-held metal battering cylinders? Stake out  Benjamin Mendy ’s house and interrogate his New Year’s Eve chef (and the chef was the really galling detail here: who needs a chef, who craves above all a chef in these difficult times?)? EFL and  Premier League  clubs do have a direct employer relationship with their players, with the right to investigate and discipline. And there has been unease here too. Pep Guardiola has appealed, a little weirdly, for sympathy for chef-boy. Players at other clubs have continued to appear in match-day squads. This is the second thing worth saying. There is, in the end, nothing to be gained from being outraged at every footballer who makes a mistake or a bad call on this. The collective effort has been commendable over the past year. But we all feel wearied by the routines, forced into odd shapes by this wretched tentacular microbe. And most of us aren’t risking our long-term physical health by getting into a state of extreme team-sport exertion three times a week, while also being judged, ranked and microscrutinised at the weirdest of all possible times. The women in particular are being hammered. The consequences of a careless decision have been dire (despite City’s players having the club’s permission and Manchester being in tier 3 at the time). But it is worth bearing in mind Cristiano Ronaldo, Robert Lewandowski and Gerard Piqué were also in Dubai, also travelling from battened-down countries. There has been no backlash, no talk of Piqué betraying a generation. What is the difference? Why is it OK for Ronaldo, but not Lucy Bronze? This is the other thing. Bad stuff happens. Bad choices are made, sometimes with real-life consequences. But none of these people are responsible for creating this impossibly complex situation, one that feeds and exists on these hard-wired human habits. Perhaps it might be time – even in football’s zero sum game of winners and losers, frauds and GOATS – to halt the wars, to understand a little more, condemn a little less. While we’re at it, as the pipes of peace are trilling through the morning mist, can I add that Ole Gunnar Solskjær is doing better at Manchester United and that’s a fun thing. Liverpool are still a good team. Middle-aged Americans pushing over a fence is not a fascist coup d’état. And with a firm hand, and a little species-empathy, we will get through this.
Six Nations and European rugby in jeopardy over French Covid fears:	The worsening Covid-19 situation is threatening to derail the European club rugby season and disrupt next month’s Six Nations championship with the French government on the verge of banning Top 14 club teams from travelling outside their own country. With infection rates rising sharply, European tournament organisers, European Professional Club Rugby, will hear on Saturday morning whether the French government has effectively ruled out any realistic chance of the final two group rounds of the  Champions Cup  and the Challenge Cup being completed as scheduled. EPCR officials have been doing their best to convince the French authorities that all necessary health and safety protocols will be in place for visiting teams but accept that the continuing spread of the virus has not improved the prospect of their two competitions proceeding without major interruption. Six European matches were called off in the previous round of fixtures before Christmas and, as things stand, there is no space in the current calendar for the games to be replayed, other than potentially scrapping the proposed two-leg quarter-finals in early April and proceeding straight to the semi-finals and finals. Leading European figures, however, insist it would be inconsistent to wipe out a fortnight of cross-border club fixtures and then permit the French national team to travel for the Six Nations as normal. If the French government do opt to tighten border restrictions, officials argue it should trigger unilateral discussions and a review of the existing domestic and international calendars, which might also affect this summer’s British & Irish Lions tour of South Africa. While the Six Nations officially remain hopeful that cross-border international games will take place next month – assisted by biosecure bubbles for national squads – reports in France claim the organisers are considering taking the unprecedented step of hosting the entire championship in one country. There are already growing concerns that the Women’s Six Nations may not take place with no fixtures yet confirmed. As for the European competitions, the organisers do not consider it feasible to proceed without the French clubs taking part. Earlier this week it emerged that the Top 14 clubs were unhappy with the testing protocols in place at the Premiership and Pro14 clubs. It was subsequently agreed by both those leagues that players would be tested three days before matches – in line with the Top 14 clubs – and EPCR presented the changes to the French government on Thursday. It was at that meeting however, that the French government expressed increasing fears over the more transmittable variant of Covid-19 which is increasingly prevalent in the UK.
Meet Marine's band of brothers gunning for Spurs' FA Cup scalp:	Neil Young  is the Merseyrail manager who has also managed Marine, of the Northern Premier League Division One North West, to seven victories in this season’s  FA Cup  and a fairytale third-round tie at home to eight-time winners Tottenham. Here he gives the rundown on only the second team from the eighth tier of English football to reach the third round in its 149-year history … Bayleigh Passant  He came in this season after being released by Tranmere and his form has been very good. He’s a young, local lad who is still learning the game and fits the profile of what we are trying to do – a hungry lad who wants to do well and get back into the professional game. And he gets the ale in on his birthday [Marine beat Havant & Waterlooville on the goalkeeper’s 20th and, still in his kit, he went to a nearby Co-op to buy some beers]. He’s a lovely lad. The other day I told him he needed photo ID for his Covid test. He said he didn’t have any so could he use a selfie on his phone! Josh Solomon-Davies  Josh was also at Tranmere initially although we eventually got him from Stalybridge. He’s a very quick, attacking full-back who ran the 100 metres in 11.3 seconds when he was 16. He currently works in the NHS’s track and trace system. James Joyce  Joycey is one of the longest serving players at the club and was here before I arrived. An attacking left-back who is a great one-v-one defender, he has improved year on year. Works in a car plant. Alex Doyle  Doyley is on loan from Salford. He’s been struggling with an ankle injury since the Havant game and hasn’t played since then, but we’re hoping he’ll be fit for Spurs. We agreed an extension to his loan period only this past week. Anthony Miley  He had a slow start but has really stepped up to the plate this season, his second year with us, and has probably been one of our best players. He’s a real leader on the pitch and chipped in with five goals already from central defence, including the goal at Colchester in the first round. David Raven  This is an interesting tie for David. He made his Liverpool debut in a League Cup tie against Tottenham in 2004, when a young team beat an experienced Spurs team on penalties. His background speaks for itself, with nearly 200 games in the Football League and six years in Scotland with Inverness Caledonian Thistle. We have some good young centre-halves at the club but we waited in the summer for a more experienced centre-half and David was exactly what we wanted. Neil Kengni  Neil is a player I’ve liked for a number of years and we finally managed to get him on loan from Stalybridge towards the end of last season before lockdown. We then signed him permanently in the summer. Very quick, strong, and improving all the time. We’ve got high hopes for him. Josh Hmami  Signed in the summer from TNS [in Wales’s Cymru Premier]. Josh started out in Bolton’s academy but had come out of league football with Accrington Stanley. He caught our eye during a loan spell with Ramsbottom last year. A free-kick specialist who has scored seven goals already this season from midfield, a number of them direct free-kicks. Niall Cummins  I knew all about Niall from my Conference North days with Chester. We got him on loan when I first arrived, because we didn’t have many forwards at the club, and our record while he played was seven wins, one draw and one defeat. Then he broke his ankle at Hednesford [and  Marine  were ultimately relegated for the first time in their history that season]. Niall is a PE teacher. He’s a real talisman for the club, a good pro around the place, a firm fans’ favourite and the club captain. And a big Arsenal fan! James Barrigan  An ex-pro at Wigan Athletic. Baz has really improved this year. We gave him a positional change from wide left to inside and his form has been exceptional. He is one of the stars of this FA Cup run in terms of his energy and commitment. Never stops running. He’s a binman now, or a refuse collector as he keeps reminding me. Adam Hughes  On loan from TNS. We just agreed an extension to his loan deal this past week. A big centre-half who can also play in midfield or left-back. A real winner. I’m looking for him to kick on because we have high expectations for him. Germano Mendes  Germano is the character of the team. Our No 2 goalkeeper. He was here when I arrived, a real character and a good goalkeeper. Very good to have around the place – most of the time! Kenny Strickland  One of our more experienced players and the longest-serving member of the squad. He was at Chelsea and Manchester United as a kid and can play in a number of positions, including full-back and midfield. He’s vice-captain and great to have around the younger players as someone they can learn from. Jay Devine  Had a year as a pro at Tranmere and came to us after his release. Played a lot at centre-half last year but this season we put him in central midfield and in the last seven or eight weeks he has really taken off. He replaced Alex Doyle when he got injured against Havant and has been excellent. I’m hoping he believes in himself a little bit more because, if he does, I think we’ve got a real player on our hands. Michael Howard  Mike has had a stop-start time because of injuries. He came to us just before lockdown last year on loan from Morecambe, having started out at Preston, and we signed him permanently in the window. He was flying in pre-season but has had a few knocks and is just coming back from a knee injury. A quick winger who can get himself a goal. Ryan Wignall  Wiggy is another senior player who started at Liverpool, where he twice won the FA Youth Cup. We signed him from Connah’s Quay Nomads, who won the Welsh Premier League last year. His goal started this Cup run. We were 1-0 down against Barnoldswick Town in the preliminary round when he came on as sub and scored an unbelievable volley with two minutes to go. I think it was named FA Cup goal of the round.  Danny Shaw  A big centre-half who had a short spell away from the club at Widnes. Great in the air, in both boxes, and another player who has missed quite a bit of this season through injury. He suffered a really bad back injury in pre-season and with so few games it has been difficult to get him back up to speed. James Ellison  A quick young left-back who has been out on loan at Stalybridge. Ex-Tranmere Rovers, he’s also had a few knocks but he did really well at Stalybridge and we’re hoping he can continue that form with us.
Welsh Grand National: Secret Reprieve storms to victory on home soil:	What should have been a Christmas bonus was instead a new year’s present for backers here on Saturday, as Secret Reprieve, the heavily-backed favourite, cruised to an easy success in the Coral Welsh Grand National. Sent off at 5-2 in an 18-strong field, the seven-year-old eased into contention on the run to the second-last and then left Evan Williams close to tears as he became the second successive Welsh-trained winner of the country’s biggest race. Secret Reprieve had been a strong favourite for the race before it was abandoned on its traditional date of 27 December and his supporters were out in force once again on Saturday. Adam Wedge, who had suffered falls from two of his first three rides of the afternoon, was always travelling well on the winner and had three lengths to spare at the line from The Two Amigos (9-1) and Yala Enki (12-1), who finished third in the race for the third year running. Earlier in the afternoon, Adagio staked a convincing claim to be the best juvenile hurdler in Britain this season with a two-and-a-half length defeat of Nassalam, the even-money favourite, in the Grade One Finale Junior Hurdle. Nassalam had won his two previous starts by a combined total of more than 100 lengths, but while he had a useful advantage at the second-last, Adagio and Tom Scudamore moved smoothly into contention and then the lead between the final two flights and sealed the win with a flying leap at the last. Adagio was cut to around 10-1 for the Triumph Hurdle, while Nassalam is out to 16-1 (from around 12-1).
'Chorley are on the map': win over weakened Derby makes FA Cup history:	For Derby, the circumstances were clear for all to see, and the advantage it gave Chorley’s players was obvious as they created another piece of  FA Cup  history. But when all is said and done, only one thing matters: this Lancashire club from the sixth tier of English football are one of the last 32 teams left standing in the competition. Never before in the 138-year history of  Chorley  had they reached round three of the cup. Now, the club sitting 125th on the league pyramid will go one step further at least, the first team from this level to reach the fourth round since Havant & Waterlooville in 2008. Derby’s young players certainly did their best in trying circumstances, but nobody could deny this was the right result. With the interim manager,  Wayne Rooney, and his entire first-team squad already isolating at home due to a Covid-19  outbreak at the club, further positive tests leading up to kick-off meant the development coach, Pat Lyons, had to field a side without a minute of first-team experience. Those who started wore 1 to 11 on their shirts because none of them owned a first-team squad number. Here we go, then -  @Adele  🙌  pic.twitter.com/jPhuIvu6dZ They did not disgrace the club, though. Far from it. But this was men against boys, epitomised by Chorley’s front two, Harry Cardwell and Connor Hall, who terrorised the three teenage  Derby  defenders all afternoon. The theme was similar across the field, with Chorley’s seniority undoubtedly giving them a clear edge. Their manager, Jamie Vermiglio , insisted in the week that despite Rooney and his first-team regulars being unavailable, Derby were still favourites. It was clear from the opening 10 minutes, in which time Chorley took the lead with Hall’s third goal in three rounds, that was very much not the case as Derby’s teenagers struggled to cope with the non-league side’s presence. “I played it down all week but with the greatest respect after five minutes you could see we were the stronger side,” said Vermiglio, a boyhood Liverpool fan, who said a trip to Anfield is his dream next. “It would have been disappointing not to get through when we saw their line-up.” Vermiglio is right, but Chorley still had to play their part. They certainly did. Derby’s shout for a penalty after four minutes, when Kevin Friend pointed to the spot after Cameron Cresswell was challenged by Matt Urwin only to then change his mind, was the closest they came to troubling Chorley. Five minutes later, Hall nodded home after Derby failed to clear, and they rarely looked flustered thereafter. Yet Derby did not disgrace themselves. “We’re proud of every single one of them,” Lyons said. “We’ve given them a right go until the final 10 minutes. They were disappointed when I went in after, but I told them to get their heads up. This is a moment they’ll never forget.” Nor will anyone associated with Chorley, who are one win away from becoming the 10th non-league side to reach the fifth round. They will be in the hat for the last 16 no matter what, with the draw for rounds four and five taking place at the same time. For a side who were bottom of National League North with four straight defeats at the start of the season, this is a life-changing cup run. “Chorley are on the map,” said Vermiglio, who has been with the club as player, coach and now manager for more than a decade. “We’d made around £250,000 before today – goodness knows what it will be now. We could maybe get to £500,000: not only has it saved us, it’s enabled us to grow.” That, despite all the uncertainty and changes Covid-19 has caused, is the one thing that thankfully has not changed about a cup run like Chorley’s. They dominated all afternoon, and should have finished Derby off long before Mike Calveley met an Elliot Newby cross with seven minutes remaining to put the tie beyond doubt. Vermiglio had dreamed of rubbing shoulders with his fellow Liverpudlian Rooney when the draw was made. That was ultimately not to be – though he did get a call from the Derby manager before kick-off wishing him luck. Now, Vermiglio and Chorley can dare to dream all over again about what happens next.
Fallout from Dubai trips threatens civil war within WSL:	T he fragility of the Women’s Super League has been exposed after a combination of  rising Covid‑19 infections  and shallow squads prompted the postponement of four of this weekend’s six top-tier fixtures and left another in doubt. While the Football Association’s deferment of  Aston Villa v Arsenal and Manchester City v West Ham  on Saturday stemmed from coronavirus outbreaks imported  by Arsenal  and Manchester City players returning from ill-advised Christmas trips to Dubai, an injury crisis prefaced Birmingham’s decision to call off their visit to Tottenham. An independent tribunal will determine whether their action was justified and, if not, Birmingham could face a fine and/or points deduction. As questions mounted regarding the WSL’s ability to complete the season – or at least continue without a circuit breaker-style pause – Sunday’s fixture between Bristol City and Brighton was also threatened by a mixture of Covid and injuries. Should that game fall, Reading v Chelsea would be the sole survivor as the league faces a mounting fixture backlog following an ill-starred winter break. If the emergence of players visiting Dubai – a headline-grabbing controversy involving leading footballers strutting their stuff on Jumeirah Beach – hardly came as a shock, the gender of the internationals from Arsenal, Manchester United and Manchester City who flew to the United Arab Emirates provoked surprise. Maybe the received wisdom that women footballers are invariably impeccable role models requires some revision? Although none of the players did anything illegal, government advice counselled against such journeys and the consequences could be calamitous for the remainder of the campaign. Given that a number of Covid-19 infections acquired in the UAE have led to club-wide outbreaks, accusations of irresponsibility, naivety and arrogance are being directed at those involved. Granted, the once undreamed of attention can be seen as a milestone in the game’s evolution from niche pursuit to mainstream popularity, but they are also corrosive. Apart from prompting damaging fallouts between team-mates at Arsenal, the attendant media storm has opened a window on a disturbing lack of candour and willingness to shoulder responsibility among some elite clubs. After it emerged three Arsenal internationals headed to the Middle East for a jaunt classified as a “business trip”, the manager, Joe Montemurro, remained silent. Likewise, Manchester City’s manager, Gareth Taylor, has said nothing in response to an outbreak sparked by  four of his leading players returning from Dubai carrying infections . So hats off to  Casey Stoney for apologising  having allowed some of her Manchester United players to visit Dubai for an ostensibly commercial event she describes as “a holiday”. “I’m deeply, deeply sorry,” said the former England captain. “It was a poor error of judgement, a mistake.” Considering no United player subsequently tested positive, Stoney could have stayed silent, but she is concerned by the self-destructive omerta elsewhere. “It’s not great for the game; there does need to be a lot more transparency,” she said. That message was aimed partly at Willie Kirk. On Friday morning, Everton’s manager said the club had “no Covid positives” and praised his squad’s “exemplary behaviour” in adhering to health protocols. Eight hours later the FA informed Stoney that United’s game at Everton was off due to Covid issues inside a club already struggling with injuries. It transpired Kirk had been somewhat disingenuous. The FA revealed five of his squad had tested positive between Christmas and New Year and despite now registering negative results they were not fit enough to play. Stoney voiced fears that the FA’s requirement for 14 fit players to fulfil a club’s fixtures could be open to abuse. Meanwhile, the infinitely less well-resourced Bristol City manager, Tanya Oxtoby, and her Brighton counterpart, Hope Powell, confronted the havoc Covid wreaks on already skinny squads featuring several first-teamers sharing accommodation. Small wonder that respected veteran players, including Villa’s Anita Asante and West Ham’s Gilly Flaherty, who spent the early part of their hard-won careers fighting for professionalism, are furious over the Dubai misadventure. Asante described the trip as irresponsible and  Flaherty went further . “As much as the growth of the professional women’s game is brilliant, I really don’t like the arrogance that the money and wages have introduced,” she said. “Hopefully the girls involved will apologise. They need to remain humble and remember how quickly things can change.” With Chelsea angered by the postponement of their Continental Cup quarter-final against City on Wednesday, an unwanted descent into a chaotic civil war beckons.
Chris Woakes rejoins England – at a distance – before first Sri Lanka Test:	Chris Woakes emerged from isolation in Sri Lanka on Saturday and rejoined his England teammates at a distance as their second and final day of warm-up cricket was ruined by rain before next week’s first Test in Galle. Woakes has spent the past seven days in his room at the Shangri-La hotel in Hambantota after a shared journey to Heathrow with Moeen Ali last weekend left him deemed a close contact when the latter tested positive for Covid-19 on arrival. But while Woakes has been told by the team’s medical staff he must still avoid contact with the squad initially, the 31-year-old – England’s player of last summer – was able to undergo some running and fielding work before the squad departed for Galle. It remains to be seen whether Woakes will be ready for Thursday’s series opener, having not bowled for two weeks. He had been viewed as the man to balance the side in the absence of Ben Stokes but may well miss out – initially at least – to Sam Curran. Moeen must isolate until Wednesday, ruling him out of the first Test, and England’s players are light on preparation time generally, with 100 overs of a one-off intra-squad match played on Friday before events were washed out 24 hours later.
Everton taken to extra-time by Rotherham before Doucouré spares blushes:	The Everton assistant manager, Duncan Ferguson, admitted his side’s failure to finish off  Rotherham  left them fearful of a late FA Cup shock after the home side scraped through 2-1 after extra-time at Goodison Park. Carlo Ancelotti made eight changes but saw his side labour against a side second-bottom of the Championship with Abdoulaye Doucouré scoring the winner three minutes into the additional period. Matt Olosunde’s first senior goal had cancelled out Cenk Tosun’s early opener as the Millers pushed their Premier League opposition all the way. “It was a tough match so you are always fearing the worst when they got a corner in the last minute so it was a wee bit of relief,” Ferguson said. “I thought we started the game well, got an early goal, Cenk took his goal well. I thought we had the best of the first 25 minutes and then Rotherham came back, pushed us all the way and got the equaliser. It was a tough game for us and one we were delighted to get through.” Ancelotti left out top scorer Dominic Calvert-Lewin, Richarlison and goalkeeper Jordan Pickford, but their replacements were second-best for much of the 120 minutes at Goodison Park. Rotherham, with just one win in their previous nine games, made six changes of their own but looked far more cohesive and they deserved more than just Olosunde’s maiden senior goal for their efforts. Tosun’s first strike for  Everton  since November 2019 was cancelled out just after half-time by the former Manchester United academy graduate, who won a solitary cap for the United States in 2018. Doucouré scored the eventual winner three minutes into the additional period but it was far from comfortable for Ancelotti’s side, who progressed to the third round for only the second time in five seasons. Rotherham manager Paul Warne felt had his side won, there would have been no complaints. “I was really pleased. The only disappointment for me was the first five or 10 minutes, I think we showed them too much respect which I warned them about in the dressing room,” he said. “I thought we took the game to them after we conceded and I thought we were the better side in the first half. “We could have got a 2-1 in and no one would have complained about it. For us to come here and compete against a team three or four points off the top of the Premier League shows how well we performed today so I am proud of that.” What began with the appearance of a behind-closed-doors friendly arranged primarily for James Rodriguez to sharpen his fitness, given free rein by Ancelotti to roam where he liked, turned into something of an ordeal for Everton. The Colombia international’s movement pulled Rotherham’s defence out of position to allow the 19-year-old Anthony Gordon to turn his marker Michael Ihiekwe and his inviting through-ball down the inside-left channel was dinked over the advancing Jamal Blackman by Tosun in the ninth minute. This week the Turkey international, with one eye on this summer’s Euro 2020, said he was considering his future this month and while the goal was a much-needed confidence boost little else about his play suggested he has much to offer Ancelotti. His goal should have given the hosts a platform but in the 30 minutes to half-time Rotherham were the better side with Robin Olsen making a double save from Olosunde and then Dan Barlaser before Matt Crooks flicked a near-post header onto the roof of the net. Despite having the lead Everton were second-best for the remainder of the first half and within 10 minutes of the second were made to pay. Wing-back Olusunde capitalised on a weak Tom Davies header back towards his own goal to turn and fire a shot across Olsen and inside the far post. Ancelotti sent on Doucouré, Bernard, Yerry Mina - replacing Lucas Digne after his first appearance since ankle surgery in November - and Gylfi Sigurdsson in two quick double substitutions in an attempt to change the momentum. Everton won their first corner in the 73rd minute from a Rodriguez deflected shot but it was hardly the turnaround the Toffees boss expected. Tosun thought he had won it three minutes from time by diverting in Rodriguez’s free-kick, but the goal was ruled out by VAR for offside. But three minutes into the additional period there was no denying Doucoure, who slotted home from Rodriguez’s pass to make it 2-1. Bernard should have killed off the game but hit the post but the visitors could not force another equaliser.
FA Cup third round: Blackpool knock out West Brom on penalties – as it happened:	KaiKai has the chance to put Blackpool through, after misses by Edwards and Furlong. He sends the keeper the wrong way ... but his shot clatters off the base of the left-hand post and out! Head in hands. No matter, though, because Pereira’s preposterous stuttering run-up ensures the shock still happens. A dismal easy-to-read effort is snaffled by Maxwell and the 1953 winners are through! Oh Sam. Bardsley sends the Clarets into the fourth round with the decisive kick. A tedious match enlivened by a couple of lovely Fulham goals in extra time. EXTRA TIME, FULL TIME: Blackpool 2-2 WBA.  That draw at Anfield really did take it out of Albion’s players, didn’t it. Another poor performance. Allardyce chewing gum like billy-o. Can the Premier League save themselves in the penalty shoot-out? EXTRA TIME, FULL TIME: Burnley 1-1 MK Dons.  There must be something wrong with the Guardian clock. Batteries cost a few quid, to be fair. It’s going to penalties at Turf Moor. We’re six or seven minutes away from full time in extra time at Blackpool and Burnley.  The game down at QPR is a few minutes behind, though. Penalties looming in Lancashire. HALF TIME, EXTRA TIME: QPR 0-2 Fulham.  A double whammy just before the break in extra time has surely done for the Hoops. GOAL! QPR 0-2 Fulham (Kebano 105+3).  The ball shuttled across the front of the QPR box, left to right. Kebano lashes home from a tight angle, and that is surely that. HALF TIME, EXTRA TIME: Burnley 1-1 MK Dons.  It’s the visitors who have come closest to scoring. HALF TIME, EXTRA TIME: Blackpool 2-2 WBA.  The hosts have been giving as good as they’ve been getting. Big Sam continues to chew a wasp. GOAL! QPR 0-1 Fulham (Decordova-Reid 104).  The deadlock is finally broken at Loftus Road, and this is a gem! Decordova-Reid one-twos with Mitrovic down the middle, opens his body, and curls a forensic sidefoot into the bottom right. MK Dons midfielder Ben Gladwin is inches away from recreating Ronnie Radford’s famous goal for Hereford against Newcastle in 1972.  He whistles an ambitious 30-yard effort towards the top left of the Burnley goal. A smidgen to the right, and it would have been in. As it is, it cannons off the post and away. Ah well. It’s a thin line between a decent effort and  FA Cup  immortality. Not a great deal of action to report from the three matches that have gone to extra time.  You come this far, you hunker down. The 3pm full-times. Classified check coming up in a second.  But for clarity’s sake ... there are three of the 3pm kick-offs going to extra time, and possibly penalties: Blackpool v WBA, Burnley v MK Dons, and QPR v Fulham. More excitement ahoy! FULL TIME: QPR 0-0 Fulham.  So much for tempting fate. FULL TIME: Bristol Rovers 2-3 Sheffield United.  A much-needed win for the Blades. Something of a shock, given both sides’ Championship form. Yep, three in a row for the visitors. No real drama as the League Two strugglers are clinically dispatched by the high-flying Swans. FULL TIME: Blackpool 2-2 WBA.  See also the third-tier Seasiders versus the Premier League’s Big Sam. FULL TIME: Burnley 1-1 MK Dons.  And that’s the final gasp of the 90! Burnley save themselves at the death, and this one’s going to extra time. GOAL! Burnley 1-1 MK Dons (Vydra 90+4).  Bardsley is needlessly fouled out on the right. From the free kick, the Clarets save themselves! The ball’s whipped into the mixer, and rammed home by Vydra, sliding in at the right-hand post! Easy in the end for the home side. Or the away side, depending on how you look at it. A shock as the League One side see off Championship outfit Rovers. Easy for Brendan Rodgers’ men. GOAL! Exeter 0-2 Sheffield Wednesday (Paterson 90).  It’s going to be three wins on the bounce for previously floundering Wednesday. Penny for the thoughts of Tony Pulis. Let’s see if we can tempt fate and tease out some last-minute drama in the west London derby between QPR and Fulham.   Bugger all  has happened in that one. GOAL! Bournemouth 4-1 Oldham (King 86).  A shot not so much belted past but through the keeper. King doesn’t bother celebrating. GOAL! Wycombe 4-1 Preston (Samuel 82).  The 1889 and 1938 winners are toast. Samuel enters the box down the right and slots home calmly in the Buckinghamshire fog. Stevenage spurn a great chance to get back into it against Swansea.  A penalty kick, dispatched towards the bottom left by Norris, but turned around the post brilliantly by Swans keeper Woodman. GOAL! Blackpool 2-2 WBA (Pereira 80 pen).  A lifeline for Big Sam! A cross hits Turton’s arm. Nowhere near his silhouette, and it’s a penalty kick. Pereira lashes it into the bottom right, the keeper guessing correctly but given no chance. GOAL! Stoke 0-4 Leicester (Barnes 81).  This is a rout now. Some pinball in the Stoke area. The ball breaks to Barnes, who slams home from 12 yards.  GOAL! Stoke 0-3 Leicester (Perez 79).  Bragging rights in ATVLand confirmed for the Foxes. A lovely move, the ball shuttled in from the right by a couple of blue shirts, then slammed home from the penalty spot by Perez. This is over. GOAL! Bournemouth 3-1 Oldham (King 74) or Oldham 1-3 Bournemouth (King 74), whichever you prefer.  Quite a few headed goals this afternoon. Here’s another! Still plenty of time to go in the 3pm kick-offs.  But there’s a big match kicking off in just under an hour, and the teams contesting it have landed. Barry Glendenning has the details of The Arsenal v Newcastle United. BREAKING NEWS:  Big Sam continues to stomp about the technical area with a face on. Burke continues to shine against Bristol Rovers.  He drives down the left and sends a shot across Day and off the base of the right-hand post. Meanwhile another near miss, this time at Ewood Park, where Blackburn still trail Doncaster. Harvey Elliott has come on, and goes close with a curler towards the top left. Balcombe in the Donny goal fingertips spectacularly, then parries the rebound as well. Magnificent play all round. GOAL! Blackpool 2-1 WBA (Madine 66).  A lovely sweeping move by  the 1953 winners , and Big Sam is under pressure again! Lovely combination play between Yates and Madine, and the latter moves into space down the middle before whistling a low shot into the bottom left! Anyone interested in the aforementioned Matthews Final should click below, or perhaps consider  this . Whatever happens in Bristol, this should serve Sheffield United well.  They’ve been so constipated in the Premier League, with just eight goals in 17 matches. This should blow a few cobwebs off, and yes, it’s for the best that I mixed metaphors there. GOAL! Bristol Rovers 2-3 Sheffield United (Bogle 63).  More good work by Burke, followed by a smooth run into the area by Bogle down the inside-right channel. He slots home at the near post, and this is turning into a classic! GOAL! Bristol Rovers 2-2 Sheffield United (Ehmer 62).  A corner from the right. A flick-on at the near post, and Ehmer can’t miss from a couple of yards. Dismal defending. However ... GOAL! Bristol Rovers 1-2 Sheffield United (Burke 59).  The latest jinking genius off the Scottish conveyor belt is sent scampering down the middle. No mistake. He slots home. However... GOAL! Stoke 0-2 Leicester (Albrighton 59).  A lovely goal this, as the ever-underrated Albrighton swans in from the right, drops a shoulder, and whips a lovely curler into the bottom left. Could this be Leicester’s year in the  FA Cup  at long last? Four losing appearances out of four in the final. It has to happen sometime, surely. Just in case you’ve been as confused as me ...  and if that’s that case, I feel for you ... but the Oldham-Bournemouth tie is being played at the Vitality Stadium, on account of the Boundary Park being frozen. So we’ve been referring to Bournemouth-Oldham as well as Oldham-Bournemouth. No idea what the official line is. I suspect traditionalists will go with the latter, as per the draw, but for clarity I may keep on with the former. In either instance, feel free to sue us. GOAL! Blackpool 1-1 WBA (Ajayi 52).  See Swansea’s second, just there. Easy as that, with the assist going to Big Sam’s Half-Time Hairdryer. GOAL! Stevenage 0-2 Swansea (Gyokeres 50).  Cross from the right. Header down. In! GOAL! Oldham 1-2 Bournemouth. (Riquelme 49).  A few cute triangles down the right, and Riquelme is on hand to slam home a low cross. Lovely move. Second halves underway again, y’all.  Remember, extra time and penalties could be coming up. Almost certainly will be, somewhere or other. Here we go, then. The half-times, then.  A very entertaining first 45. At Burnley, Richard Keogh is shown the red card when the ball hits his hand as he covers as last man.  Has a clear scoring opportunity been denied? Not according to VAR, because Chris Wood, who would otherwise have been sent clear, was offside. Or was Wood in the process of fouling Keogh? Either way, the decision is overturned. GOAL! Oldham 1-1 Bournemouth (Bahamboula pen 45).  Keillor-Dunn is brought down by Dennis - or was it a dive? It’s soft, put it that way. Bahamboula smashes the gift home. 
Could Britain rejoin the EU? It seems like a hopelessly lost cause – but so did leaving:	Have I mentioned the  man in the egg-stained tie ? I first spotted him at Tory party conferences two decades ago. A forlorn figure – mocked even by his fellow Conservatives – he stood at the back of fringe meetings, armed with a plastic bag full of leaflets, leaping to his feet to offer “more of a comment than a question”, uniting the room in a collective groan. You’d see him at most political events; he was often in the Question Time audience. His obsession was Europe and the supposed tyranny of Brussels. Nobody wanted to be the man in the egg-stained tie. He was a bore and an object of derision. Yet today that man is celebrating a victory, one that, at the turn of this century, would have seemed like the stuff of laughably improbable fantasy. Against all odds, he got his way: the new year begins with Britain having  completed its exit  from the European Union. What was once the quixotic cause of anoraks and obsessives – to overturn a settled decision on Britain’s relationship with Europe – has proved to be among the most effective political movements in the country’s history. For pro-Europeans, that movement ensured the start of this new year is tinged with regret, even longing, for what’s been lost. All of which prompts a question. Could the trick be repeated by those who lament it most? Could Britain’s pro-Europeans do to the 2016 vote what the anti-Europeans eventually did to the 1975 one and reverse it? Is it conceivable that Britain might one day rejoin the European bloc it has now left? The conventional wisdom says no. People are thoroughly fed up with the issue: note  this week’s polling , which showed Britons simultaneously urging MPs to vote for Boris Johnson’s deal even as a  hefty majority  of those same Britons couldn’t say whether the deal was good or bad. They just wanted the whole saga over with, yearning for an end to an argument that had split the country and consumed four and a half years of our energies. What of the  6.4% shrinkage  in GDP per person that is coming our way over the next 10 years, thanks to Brexit? It won’t cut through, and not only because any immediate economic pain in 2021 can be conveniently blamed on the pandemic of 2020. It’s also that the agony won’t be sudden: thanks to the deal, we did not cycle off a cliff at 11pm on New Year’s Eve. Instead, the coming failure will be of the slow puncture variety, the air seeping out of the economic tyres steadily and over time. The UK economy will grow, but more slowly than if we’d never left. That’s a hard case to sell. As Gordon Brown’s former strategist, Stewart Wood, puts it, “You don’t feel a counterfactual.” Little wonder that when asked this week by a Spanish newspaper whether a Bre-entry might occur in his lifetime, Matthew Goodwin, professor of politics and international relations at the University of Kent,  said no  – pointedly adding that he’s 40 years old. He suspects that the probable consequences of Brexit make a return less likely: with those pesky Brits out of the way, the EU27 can get on with ever closer integration, thereby making the European Union of 2040 an even less enticing prospect to federalism-wary Britons than it was in 2016. What’s more, any British attempt to rejoin the club would not be on the bespoke terms we used to enjoy: if we want to come back, we’ll have to do so without the once-cherished, Thatcher-negotiated cash rebate and by agreeing to join the euro, a bridge too far even for some committed remainers. As for the generation that would have voted to stay in 2016 but never got the chance, they’ll soon move on: other issues will assume greater priority, starting with the climate crisis. The most ardent pro-Europeans accept one core part of that view: it won’t be economics that wins it for rejoin. They are not braced for a rerun of the stagnation and decline that led post-imperial, 1970s Britain to conclude it had become the economic sick man of  Europe  and needed to team up with its neighbours. Instead, they expect – or hope – that the argument might be won generationally and culturally, as young people see their peers in Germany, France or Spain move freely across the continent and demand that same right for themselves. They picture the young Brit who will now need a hard-to-get visa to work as, say, a holiday rep in Italy or chef in Portugal, or the would-be student barred from the Erasmus exchange programme. Hassle could be a big factor. At the most trivial end, it’s the holidaymaker now herded into the longer queue at the airport or burdened with the bother of health insurance and pet passports where there used to be none. More serious will be the 215m additional customs forms a year, costing UK businesses  an estimated £7bn , along with myriad other checks – border, rules-of-origin and veterinary – that didn’t exist when we were in the single market and customs union. Witness the Gloucester-based  exporter of eels  who, having voted leave, now discovers that his continental customers will have to produce “a raft of documentation” to buy his product: far easier for them to buy from an EU-based supplier instead. Every bureaucratic irritation, every job lost, will plant the thought: maybe we’d be better off in than out. Wood wonders if elite, including even Conservative, opinion will shift in the coming decades as we discover it’s cold outside – that the Americans don’t give us much attention, that in reality there is no “Anglosphere” to replace the EU as our obvious home. We’d have lost our seat at the grownups’ table and, with it, our clear place in the world. Theoretical sovereignty might be a thin comfort blanket to a nation that feels diminished and “marooned”. Nor will Brexit deliver its most basic, if disingenuous, promise: to have resolved the great European question once and for all. On the contrary, negotiations with Brussels will be a  permanent fixture , not least because Johnson’s trade deal does not cover all of Britain’s trade – excluding, among other things, the 80% of Britain’s economy made up of services. “Europe” will remain a live issue, as it has for centuries, and that will give rejoin an opening – not today, perhaps not soon, but eventually. The easy assumption is that this question has been settled for a generation or more. But politics moves faster now. The case for a second Scottish independence referendum is looking increasingly hard to resist, less than seven years after that issue was also supposedly settled for a generation. (If an independent Scotland  rejoins the EU , alongside a Northern Ireland that is already half-in, then the question will press on England and Wales all the harder.) To be sure, many of these arguments – about red tape or Britain’s rightful place in the world – might seem hopelessly abstract or obscure, just as the request that the EU27 “ keep the light on ” for our eventual return might seem hopelessly romantic. But even apparently lost causes can prevail in the end. Just ask the man in the egg-stained tie. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist
Covid has exposed how incompetent the British state is, from top to bottom:	C ome the day of reckoning, who gets blamed? No one could call this week’s reopening of England’s local schools anything but a shambles. The prime minister  has declared  that all primary schools are “safe … very, very important to stress that” and must stay open. That appears not to apply  where they stay shut , as in London and possibly Manchester, Newcastle, Slough, Brighton … and perhaps elsewhere as the week goes on. The appearance is of a man embattled in Downing Street, wholly out of touch with the country he is governing. Inconvenience, cost and stress are inflicted on millions, with  Boris Johnson  seemingly concerned only for his daily press conference. No government in Europe has had an easy ride over the past nine months, but none has had a worse one than Britain’s. Indecision on lockdown was followed by chaotic PPE supplies, the “world-beating”  test-and-trace  shambles, school exam confusion and now the  multi-form bureaucratic deterrent  to potential vaccinators. British politics likes to keep blame simple. Politicians are entitled to the pleasure of success and the pain of failure. When things goes wrong, we blame the person in charge – be it Johnson,  Matt Hancock , Michael Gove or Gavin Williamson. Damn each incompetent, damn the lot of them. That feels better. Certainly Johnson’s lack of grasp over his government is distressing to see. He sacked many of his best colleagues from Theresa May’s team and replaced them with nonentities. The nation is paying a high price for a prime minister who puts blind loyalty before ability. But the current incompetence of British government is due not just to poor ministers. The  PPE contract scandal  exposed deep-seated cronyism in state procurement. The decanting of sick elderly people from hospitals into  care homes  showed institutional NHS contempt for private care. Last year’s  exams algorithm debacle  was the result of officialdom’s obsession with quantification. The multibillion-pound test-and-trace fiasco resulted from Whitehall’s aversion to local government.  Coronavirus  has revealed a country so ill-governed that current politicians cannot be blamed for all of it. The traditional model holds that ministers decide on the general direction of policy and officials interpret and implement it. This balance of roles has been eroded at least since the turn of the century, largely by a ministerial craving for headlines that led to a daily welter of central initiatives, interventions and vanity projects. Officials are expected not to challenge but to obey. This has clearly affected the calibre and morale of the civil service, with  high-profile departures  from Downing Street, the Home Office and Foreign Office. Johnson also gave too much prominence to scientists, hoping to blame them if things went wrong, and then found himself in perpetual conflict with them. This in turn allowed Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland to appear blessed with decisive and clear-sighted leadership by contrast. Come the inevitable inquiry into the events of the past year, it is not only politicians who should carry the can. All the components of Britain’s government, central and local, should be tested – the constitution as a whole should be under examination. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist
The Julian Assange extradition ruling: right result, wrong reason:	J ulian Assange’s extradition to the US to face charges of espionage and hacking  cannot take place . This ruling by judge Vanessa Baraitser is a victory, albeit one not won on the principled grounds that should form the basis of opposing his extradition. The legal basis of the ruling is that “extradition would be oppressive by reason of mental harm”. The WikiLeaks founder has a “recurrent depressive disorder” and he was likely to be imprisoned in a supermax prison, where procedures would not prevent Assange “from finding a way to commit suicide”. It is not to critique the soundness of Baraitser’s legal judgment to argue that this was the right decision, but for the wrong reason. That a British court has ruled that the US prison system is too barbaric to guarantee the safety of Assange tells its own story. But this is about something much bigger than Assange: it’s about journalism, the free press, and most importantly of all, the ability to expose atrocities committed by the world’s last remaining superpower. Assange isn’t free yet: the US can appeal against a ruling by our lowest tier court – he should now be released on bail rather than remain incarcerated in Belmarsh given his proven mental state – but  legal experts believe  that Baraister’s ruling would prove hard to overturn. What remains worrying, then, is that no precedent has been set to protect other whistleblowers – unless there are similar mental health grounds – and therefore the principled case must be spelled out all the louder. More than a decade ago, Chelsea Manning courageously downloaded classified documents from US military servers, uncovering – most notoriously –  a 2007 video  of US aircrew laughing after they killed 12 innocent people, including two Iraqi Reuters employees. The aircrew had dishonestly claimed to have encountered a firefight: without Manning’s video, history would have continued to record it as such. Other files showed how hundreds of civilians in Afghanistan – people whose lives are not judged worthy of being covered by most media outlets – had been killed by  US-led forces . Yet another cable exposed scandals and corruption in the western-backed regime of Tunisia, helping to drive a protest movement which toppled its autocrat ruler,  Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali . Manning had first approached US newspapers with the information but with no luck, so instead went to Assange’s WikiLeaks organisation, which published the material. It is for this reason that Assange is being pursued by the US: to set an example,  pour encourager les autres . The US authorities fear that if Assange does not face the worst horrors of their inhumane prison system, then it will not disincentivise others to similarly expose US atrocities. Here’s why that matters. The ability of the US to unleash violence against foreign populations depends on its domestic citizenry not being aware of the consequences. Consent for the Vietnam war, for example, began to crumble when US citizens saw footage from the conflict of screaming children with their clothes burned away by napalm, or became aware of the hundreds who were slaughtered by US forces in the  My Lai massacre . Since then, the US government has become more adept at managing media coverage, including the embedding of journalists in military units. The use of drone strikes –  drastically accelerated  by Barack Obama, who used them 10 times more than his predecessor – killed unknown numbers of civilians who remained largely anonymous.  Civilian deaths  from airstrikes in Afghanistan increased by 330% in four years under Donald Trump, and he not only upped the drone strikes, he revoked a policy to publish the  number of civilians killed  by drone strikes outside of war zones. The US war machine depends on being able to airbrush out of existence the brutal human realities. If innocent civilians can be silently killed without consequences, then there is nothing to stop even more suffering the same fate. The  US military  cannot be allowed to operate with impunity: that’s what this case is really about. And while Assange’s freedom may be saved – though this is not certain – the argument for revealing the truth about wars conducted in the name of the American people must be made more stridently than ever. •  Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist
The lack of honesty over school closures in England has eroded what little trust was left:	S chools are not a battleground between parents and teachers, or unions and politicians. Teachers do not prefer remote learning; they are more aware than anyone of the damage school closures cause. Overwhelmingly, everyone wants kids at school, while everyone, looking at the UK’s Covid curve which is  now almost vertical,  can see that they must stay at home. It’s this kind of maturity – being able to see that the outcome you prefer is not possible within the reality of your situation – that makes the general population so inconvenient for a political discourse that skids by on bluster and false binaries. The government is in denial about this and continues to treat its citizens in England like children. What parents are worried about is not the homeschooling per se, but its open-endedness. The education secretary has  bandied about 18 January  as the date when schools in England that are closed will reopen – everybody knows that isn’t the case. It is impossible to bring infection numbers under control within two weeks, and no measures can be relaxed until that happens. The prime minister, meanwhile, keeps it vague, promising changes “as soon as possible”. It could mean anything, and functionally means nothing. This matters because of our experience with the last lockdown. If anyone had said, on 18 March, that  schools in England were likely to remain closed  (apart from for vulnerable children and those with carers who are key workers) for the rest of the school year, there are things most of us would have done differently. At the level of the family, we would have got a jumpstart on structuring the day, we could have identified the gaps in learning provision and communicated them to the school, we might have gathered with other parents for online group learning, we could have thought creatively about long-term projects; crucially, we wouldn’t have looked so clueless in front of our own kids. Instead, we existed in this waiting room of ignorance, always told to expect the resumption of normality within the next fortnight, until we ceased to be told anything at all. We doubtless would have done more, had we known the length of the hiatus, for the whole school community: raised money for families without laptops or wifi or food, checked in on one another. This is the work PTAs were born to do, and yet in the fog created by the government’s false promises and incompetence (its laptop scheme in England a particularly  ignominious example ), this was all left to schools, themselves drip-fed information on a needed-to-know-a-month-ago basis. The  Oak National Academy  was commissioned to produce online lessons which parents on pay-as-you-go phone contracts couldn’t afford the data to download. I spoke to one teacher at a secondary school who, by June, had had to ask the police to check on pupils who hadn’t surfaced in three months. It may have seemed more convenient to Gavin Williamson that we were kept in the dark; it meant we didn’t organise, launched no campaigns, made no demands; perhaps it saved some money here and there. The furlough scheme wasn’t extended to  cover those who couldn’t work because of childcare  until November. It took  Marcus Rashford  to mobilise around the fact that, without school meals, many children weren’t getting enough to eat. The only way that man could have been more expensive for the government is if they’d given him a PPE contract, and I bet – without wishing to sanctify him – he would have delivered some actual PPE. It is a false economy and a catastrophic error to exclude civil society from knowledge and decision making; it undermines trust, which compromises compliance. It squanders communal efforts which people were ready and willing to make. One scant justification would be that the government didn’t know itself how long school closures would be needed, that it was as frustrated as any of us by a constantly changing picture. This is implausible; as hapless as ministers seem, they do still have a civil service, which continues to plan seriously for the medium term, even in the grip of a fundamentally unserious government. It was common knowledge by October that  the rule of six  (remember that?) would be needed until March; yet we had to endure these mindless press conferences, in which obfuscating ministers stood at the podium, promising jam the day after tomorrow, maybe, waiting for the numbers to tell their own grim story. Parents and teachers have largely taken matters into their own hands; teaching unions are  calling for schools to be closed  across England, not just London and some areas in the south-east of England; individual schools are taking teaching online even when they haven’t been instructed to; many parents are assuming that the closures will last at least until after the February half-term. Life without a horizon is dark and aimless, so we construct our own, but it comes at a cost: our faith in authority, which was already pretty thin. •  Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnist
Why has Britain become numb to the horror of deaths caused by incompetence?:	S hockability is a primal quality. Lose that, and you lose all humanity. Latest figures say there have been 93,000 deaths  involving Covid-19 in the UK . I am trying to imagine how high 93,000 stacked coffins would reach, or how deep a plague pit would be to hold 93,000 bodies. Because they are disposed of decorously out of sight, there are no such gruesome pictures to jolt the senses. The Guardian has done its best to  remember some of the people  who have died of Covid: their stories, those family tragedies. Yet still there’s something missing, in a national sense of the true horror that has descended on us. A plane crash, an earthquake, wildfires, the twin towers falling – those shockingly visual news events immediately clutch the heart.  These pandemic deaths  outpace those from the blitz and flying bombs (estimated at 61,000 deaths), yet somehow, the ONS daily tolling the bell for our fast-rising dear departed hasn’t shaken the country enough. A wilful denial clings to the alienating reassurance that the dead are all old, unhealthy or with “underlying conditions” – even though some of those “conditions” turn out to be far too mild to account for a death. Regardless of age, hundreds of thousands of very good life years are being lost, as measured in quality adjusted life years (QALYs), the figure used by the National Institute for  Health  and Care Excellence to estimate life-saving value in drugs and treatments. Back in August’s phoney Covid peace, in our  eat-out-to-help-out  madness moment, the  ONS was estimating  the health impacts of contracting Covid-19: “between March 2020 and March 2021, these represent 570,000 lost QALYs”. Projecting ahead over five years, the ONS found “the impacts of lockdown and a resulting recession are estimated to reduce England’s health by over 970,000 QALYs”. But that was before the second, and now third, wave of the virus, with present infection rates surpassing 2020 highs, hospitals at bursting point and a likely three-month lockdown which will cause further loss of QALYs. What should shock us to the marrow is how many of those lost good years could have been saved. That’s not new news,  as numerous scientists , including those on the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), have said thousands of lives would have been saved with an early March lockdown, when Boris Johnson still larked about shaking hands. The timeline of failure to act is too painfully familiar to rehearse, but that summer photo of  maskless Rishi Sunak  serving food to customers taking his bribes to go out breathing on each other in restaurants may be career-defining. Does it shock enough now, looking back? The government’s deadly repetition of the same blunders should shock; all that dither, delay and deference to the lunatic libertarian fringe who continuously argue against lockdowns. What swayed Johnson to close schools between Sunday’s  The Andrew Marr show  and Monday’s  U-turn ? The polling, No 10’s own and the likes of  Savanta Comres  finding 79% of the public back the lockdown, only 9% against: the people are wiser than the rightwing headbangers. Last September,  Michael Heseltine  captured Johnson’s leadership style: he “waits to see the way the crowd is running and then dashes in front”. Even so, the country seems not yet sufficiently shocked by its prime minister, nor by thousands needlessly dead. They knew what they were getting when they elected Johnson, and his party is still level pegging with Labour in  the polls . In other words, Britain’s shockability seems a bit weak. Everyone sees the test and trace fiasco (test results never even arrived for some of my Covid-stricken family – on phoning to find out more, they were told “they   often get lost”), despite vast sums of money spent on private companies. Failure of that “ moonshot ” suggests that it’s optimistic to hope the vaccine will be delivered to timetable: GPs are already  cancelling  vaccination sessions, held back by lack of promised supply. Airports, meanwhile, remain wide open to any infected new arrivals, while  Priti Patel chases  headlines over a handful of far less dangerous people to deport. Numerous Covid contracts have gone to companies and individuals  with connections  to the Conservative party, while elsewhere Tory donors are given peerages or the  BBC chair , but all seem to fall below the national shock threshold. Are we inured to it, is this who we are? The pandemic lifts social paving stones to reveal the depths of deprivation among children. How can  1.3 million children  have no access to laptops and wifi after nine months of missed schooling? It takes the great  Marcus Rashford  to force a grudging minimal recognition by the government of child hunger. But the needle on the shock-o-meter over Britain’s gross poverty and inequality moves slowly:  Opinium polling  for Compassion in Politics records a little improvement – half think that poverty is the result of the system, 24% think it’s the fault of the individual; while 66% think benefits should cover the cost of food, housing and bills.  Ipsos Mori  finds only 59% support keeping the £20 extra on universal credit after April. Is that enough to prompt action from the perennial crowd-follower Johnson? Yes, probably. Those who claim to put the economy first might be shocked by this week’s annual Financial Times survey of 90 leading economists: not only is Britain top of the EU charts for infections and deaths, but our economy will be  slowest to return  to pre-pandemic levels, due to Covid and Brexit mismanagement. Reading many of these stories in the Guardian means you may not be deficient in shockability but, as yet, such feelings don’t seem to be shared quite so widely. While the grotesque events in the US of Donald Trump’s last days in power lend our own government a little comparative edge, the deadbeat incompetence of cabinet ministers at the most basic tasks should by now have the whole country aghast, astounded and shocked to the very core at what we have become. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist
If Boris Johnson cared about schools, he'd already have sacked Gavin Williamson:	Not much is constant about Britain’s handling of the pandemic, but one rule applies throughout: there is no scenario so bad that it cannot be made worse with  Gavin Williamson in charge of schools . Closing classrooms  is demoralising for parents, teachers and children. The prospect of cancelled exams for a second year compounds the stress. Months of disrupted education will wound a generation. Poorer families will bear the deepest scars. There is no quick policy solution, but it is possible to imagine that remedies exist. Government cannot fix everything, but it must be capable of something. It is not the task itself that induces despair, but the identity of the man whose job it is to complete it. Williamson’s record allows only  expectation of failure . The unknown element is whether he will inflict the damage by negligence or more assertive sabotage. Will his next adventure in maladministration look like last summer’s  exam grades fiasco , when the education department had months to prepare for a predictable problem and was still ambushed? Or will it be something more proactively malevolent, as when he  threatened legal action  against councils that wanted to shut schools before Christmas, thus forcing them to stay open for a few gratuitous days of viral proliferation? An education secretary possessing even flimsy scruples might, in recent weeks, have got to grips with practical challenges: sourcing laptops for remote learning, equipping venues to safely teach children who cannot stay at home. Instead English schools were shut with less than a day’s notice, after a Christmas holiday during which headteachers had been told the priority was  arranging the Covid tests  that would allow them to stay open. They did open, but for just one day: a bonus round of infections before the U-turn. Resources and goodwill have been squandered with a thoroughness that would make more sense as deliberate villainy – a plot to induce staffroom stress – except Williamson is not capable of implementing a conspiracy that effective. Administrative inadequacy is aggravated by the absence of any passion for the portfolio. There is no evidence that the secretary of state has any notion of what education is even for, or how it fits into some wider national story. His only known expertise in the field is the fact of having once been to school himself. And it is unclear how much attention he was paying then. He is despised by teachers. He has alienated even the moderate wing of the trade unions. It is never easy for Tory ministers to win trust in the staffroom, but Williamson has fulfilled the caricature of ideological provocateur with spiteful relish, casting teachers as slackers and saboteurs. In a recent survey  where frontline staff were asked whom they would trust with the decision on whether it was safe to go into the classroom, Williamson came a distant last – miles behind scientific advisers, local authorities, Public Health England, headteachers and trade unions. Respondents were allowed to tick multiple boxes, and still the education secretary got just 1% of the vote. The rebarbative side of his character is notorious in government. It is not unusual for advisers and MPs to whisper unkind things to journalists about ministers, but the acridity of what is poured on Williamson by his own party is unique and mostly unprintable. The kinder accounts dwell only on his abject ineptitude, but most include chapters on deviousness, duplicity and vindictiveness. It is said that he styles himself as a Machiavellian operator with an ostentatious immaturity that undermines any plot he might undertake – a homage to House of Cards in cruel, humourless slapstick. All of which raises the question of why he is in the cabinet. Williamson’s incompetence was not a secret. He failed at defence before he got his hands on education. His memorable contributions in the security arena were the playground exhortation that Russia should “ go away and shut up ”, and his dismissal by Theresa May after the leaking of secret information.  He denied that one , but steam was still rising from the disgrace when, just three months later, Johnson tapped Williamson for the education job. The only credentials that mattered to the new prime minister were loyalty and readiness to defend the most extreme Brexit. Williamson had been a remainer for David Cameron, and a defender of May’s doomed deal when she was his benefactor. When May resigned, Williamson adopted a more hardline position instantly and without qualm, like a true mercenary. It did not take Johnson long to see the utility of a man as lacking in principle as himself. What might happen to schools was never a consideration. Yet, by now, Johnson must see that repetitive failure in that department damages his own reputation. The pandemic has generated countless painful dilemmas for Downing Street, but the choice between keeping the current education secretary and putting almost anyone else in charge is at the easier end of the spectrum. The argument that a crisis needs consistency of personnel does not apply when the person in question is a walking engine spewing out more crisis. A popular view in Westminster last year, when Williamson was barely flexing the full extent of his uselessness, was that Johnson kept him on so as to sacrifice him at a later date. The reviled minister might soak up more public opprobrium before being discarded. But the rag is now saturated and rank. Another theory is that Williamson has some sinister leverage dating back to  his time as chief whip : that he knows where bodies are buried, having served as executioner and undertaker. Perhaps Johnson  avoids sacking people for incompetence  through fear of signalling that competence matters, and that success in politics should be measured by capable policy delivery. That is not the prime minister’s favourite test. Williamson will go, eventually, once the stench of having him around exceeds Johnson’s  reluctance to deal with foul messes . It is hard to predict when that point will come. The prime minister’s nose is accustomed to the smell of bad government, but he can see other people recoil. Sacking the education secretary would not automatically make things better. But it would at least eliminate one compelling reason to keep expecting the worst. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist
Johnson is betting everything on the vaccine – we'd better hope it works:	I t says something about the current state of Britain that the economy has become a sideshow. At any other time, the prospect of a double-dip recession would be front-page news, but it is now merely a footnote to daily bulletins charting infection rates, hospitalisations and deaths. For the past year there has been a debate about whether lockdowns are worth the pain, once all the collateral damage – the  cancelled cancer operations , the  lost months of schooling  for children who can ill afford it, the increased incidence of  domestic abuse  and  mental health  problems, the lengthening  dole queues  – is taken into account. That debate is now over. The risk of the NHS being overwhelmed has forced a return to restrictions almost as severe as those enacted last spring. Having blundered its way through 2020, the government felt it had no choice but to shut the schools and instruct people to stay at home. Make no mistake, there is an economic cost. The loss of output in late 2020 and early 2021 will be nothing like as severe as the  25% contraction  suffered between February and April last year, but it will be bad enough. Businesses have been running down their cash reserves. For some, a third lockdown will be one too many. Others will survive only if the restrictions imposed this week are relatively short-lived. Supermarkets’ logistics stopped Britain running out of food. The government could use them to distribute vaccines Boris Johnson’s view is that a successful vaccine programme will solve both the health crisis and the economic crisis – and the prime minister is right about that. Once enough jabs have been administered, the pressure on the NHS will begin to lift, restrictions will be eased, businesses will be allowed to reopen and the economy will recover. But the experience of the past year suggests it might not be as easy as that. The government has repeatedly made big promises that it failed to deliver. Its test, trace and isolate programme failed to  meet expectations ; Rishi Sunak’s furlough scheme was supposed to end last October but has been extended for a  further six months ; the tier system was supposed to keep the virus in check but England is now in a third lockdown. It would be entirely understandable if the public wasn’t confident that the government will fulfil its  vaccine promises . Outside of wartime, it’s difficult to recall an administration that has played for such high stakes – let alone one that has appeared so clueless. Providing daily updates on the number of vaccinations is a good idea, but there are plenty of other things Johnson could do to get a grip on the situation. In 1915, the prime minister Herbert Asquith moved Lloyd George from the Treasury to become minister for munitions, because he understood that managing the nation’s money mattered less than the struggle on the western front. The government has appointed Nadhim Zahawi as parliamentary under-secretary of state for the vaccine programme, but there’s a strong argument for having a senior cabinet minister responsible for the vaccine delivery. Despite the panic-buying last spring, supermarkets’ sophisticated logistics networks kept the shelves stocked and stopped Britain running out of food. The government could draw on their capacity to distribute the vaccines – as it is doing with high street pharmacies, which are due to start offering the  Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine  next week. If the lack of staff to administer vaccines is a problem, as it may well be, government could cut the red tape to make it easier for GPs and nurses to volunteer to come out of retirement – indeed, it has already proposed expanding the workforce of people who are  able to deliver jabs . In the days when they were open, theatres used to limit the number of empty seats by allowing people to queue up for last-minute tickets from returns and no-shows. Israel has adopted the same principle for its vaccination programme, offering on-the-spot jabs at the end of the day in order to cut waste. Thus far the government has not appeared keen on innovation, despite the way test and trace exposed the shortcomings of a command and control approach. There is already a sense of excuses being prepared for when the target of vaccinating 13 million people in four priority groups by mid-February is not met. One lesson of the past year has been that there has been too much spin and too little creative thinking.   The furlough was an example of an innovation that worked: sure, paying the wages of workers has been expensive but the alternative – an unemployment rate comfortably into double figures – would have been far worse. Sunak’s job now is to keep splashing the cash. Having protected jobs and businesses for the best part of a year, the Treasury would undo all its good work if a misplaced frugality allowed unemployment to rise sharply over the coming months. Even if the vaccination programme goes as planned, social distancing restrictions will be relaxed only slowly, leaving some sectors of the economy struggling well into the summer and perhaps beyond. The chancellor needs to approach the phasing out of financial support in the same cautious manner, offering plentiful assistance to those that need it most. There has been a string of mini-budgets since last summer and there was a strong case for another one this week to  coincide with the new lockdown  rather than one-off grants of up to £9,000. It would have been a good time to announce the extension of the furlough, a further one-year business rates holiday and a continuation of more generous universal credit. Why? Because it would have suggested there was a plan for getting us out of this mess – not just a hope that somehow everything will be alright. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editor This article was updated on 7 January 2021 to clarify that there is currently a junior minister responsible for the vaccination programme.
It's back to school for Boris Johnson, the man who refuses to learn:	A nother series of breakneck U-turns from the government’s world-beating driverless car, as the things Boris Johnson said on Sunday turn out not to be true  on Monday . I’m sure he means them when he says them, like wedding vows or the sort of nonsense one might insist in a newspaper column. Johnson declared the moment “pivotal” – and he’s certainly pivoted. Again. Perhaps we should view the trait positively. In a country that has spent the past few years digging ever deeper into entrenched positions, Boris Johnson may be the last human capable of changing his mind. Unfortunately, not in a competent way. I can’t believe that honking “debate me, you coward!” at a virus hasn’t worked. By now, of course, you know  the latest facts , because you live in them. That’s really the problem with all this for the prime minister. It’s just possible that people are going to vaguely notice. Yet again, we are doing something  entirely inevitable entirely too late , meaning it will have to be done much longer and much harder than it would have had Johnson showed some leadership and grasped the nettle. No one should be in any doubt that we are paying for his weakness and vacillation in lives, in the bitterest economic terms, and in vital freedoms that will end up being lost for greater stretches. It’s not that Boris Johnson can’t see round corners – it’s that he can’t see two steps straight ahead of him. What was he waiting for? Better news? Did he think that, having informed Andrew Marr’s viewers on Sunday that things were bad and getting worse but he wasn’t going to act, some kind of cosmic miracle was going to occur? Perhaps he hoped a Downing Street aide might rush breathlessly into his office on Monday morning and say: “You’ll never believe this – the R number has plummeted and we don’t need to do the difficult thing after all! Wow, thank God for you. Bravo for having the lack of courage of your lack of convictions. That’s why they pay you the big bucks, even though you tell friends your salary is  chickenfeed .”  I’m afraid the prime minister’s given answer was even more bizarre. On Monday evening Johnson informed the nation that he had sent England’s primary school children back to school on Monday morning because “we know how important each day in education is to children’s life chances”. Well yes, but … DO ME A FAVOUR. Sending 3 million children back for one day of school – the first day of term, where you don’t really do anything too meaningful, other than mix around all your germs then take them back home to another lengthy lockdown. Meanwhile, secondary schools which on Sunday night were supposed to be preparing a testing regime were, by Monday night, supposed to be preparing at least half a term of remote learning programmes. Something they had foreseen weeks ago but been  threatened with legal action  for seeking time to do properly. Mindbogglingly, this also seems to be the way Johnson’s administration treats civil servants. PoliticsHome  reported  that Monday at the Department of Education had featured an all-staff meeting at which it was announced that schools would not be closed, and exams would be going ahead. But listen, it’s not the prime minister’s fault, the prime minister explained to the nation last night – it’s all down to this guy New Variant, who got repeated namechecks throughout his sober speech. So sober, in fact, that it was one of those clearly not entirely penned by Johnson, in the manner of the occasional Donald Trump tweet that is very clearly not typed by Trump. Earlier in the day Johnson had warned of “tough, tough weeks” ahead. Maybe Jamie Redknapp’s writing for him now. Anyway, as Johnson literally pointed out, he would have got away with it if it hadn’t been for pesky New Variant. In his words: “Our collective efforts were working and would have continued to work.” Johnson assured the nation that there was “no doubt” about this. Which is a complete lie, and a useless one. Like a lot of comically weak men, Johnson is presumed to be an “alpha male” by other inadequates. Only two weekends ago, a prime ministerial aide  panted to the Sunday Times : “This is Boris’s world now. The rest of us are just living in it.” Repurposing Dean Martin’s famous line about Frank Sinatra to describe the prime minister is certainly bold. We do, however, undoubtedly all have to live in Johnson’s defective psychology at the worst possible time for it. Indeed (and needless to say), this awful moment for the nation was not without personal vanity for the prime minister. I see Johnson still found time to get his personal Downing Street photographer along to take photos of him as he was  “preparing” to give this address . Are you familiar with this guy’s work? I very much enjoy it – cost to the public: £100k a year – and recently marvelled at a series of backstage photos of Downing Street during the final days of the Brexit deal. Is that really half the frame taken up with an out-of-focus Christmas tree and wine bottle, and a poorly lit Boris Johnson reading a piece of paper in the background?  Why yes it is . History! I think we all feel its hand on our shoulder. Certainly its finger on the lens. The only bit of last night’s address to the nation that sounded Johnsonian was the bit I imagine we’ll be hearing most about. This is the section where he promised that “if things go well, and with a fair wind in our sails”, we will have vaccinated 13.2 million of the most vulnerable people in less than six weeks, by mid-February. This is the entire top four categories of vaccine priority. I would, quite literally, love to see it. But on the form book, who among us does not instinctively feel we will be revisiting that promise in 40 days, only more in anger than in sorrow this time? So yet again, “we are where we are”, as the oddly blame-free motto of the times runs. And we are, for the third/fourth/twelfth time, where we were. The person who really needs to go back to pandemic school is, of course, Boris Johnson. Has anyone ever learned less from a situation that keeps repeating itself? I feel I have been very unfair to goldfish in this space previously. Our prime minister’s spirit animal is in fact a headless chicken. Then again, the Guinness World Records show that in 1940s Colorado, one farmer decapitated a chicken, and the headless creature nonetheless survived and  walked around for a further 18 months . So a year into his handling of the pandemic, there’s everything for Boris Johnson to play for. •  Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Doctors are our frontline against Covid. Now they lead the fight against its deniers, too:	It was a few weeks before Christmas when reports first emerged from Italy of doctors being abused, insulted and physically intimidated. Italy, of all places. Where hospitals were overwhelmed last February by suffering on an almost medieval scale, and where public gratitude towards medical staff risking their lives inspired Britain to clap for its own care workers. But by November, Italian doctors using their social media accounts to warn of a serious second wave were being swamped with abuse from Covid deniers. Their car windows were smashed, murals celebrating their heroism defaced; a family doctor in Vicenza who asked a patient to put a mask on was  beaten up . Somehow, doctors had become the enemy. They were bearing the brunt of the backlash for bringing news nobody wanted to hear, which was that the nightmare was back. Still, for some reason I assumed nothing like that could happen in the UK. Now that feels complacent. It’s doctors, more than journalists or politicians, whose eyewitness reports make Covid denial so hard to sustain, and for a twisted few that creates a motive to shut them up. With reporters largely denied access to hospital wards in the eye of the storm, doctors using Twitter or YouTube or Instagram to talk about what it’s like on the inside have become almost citizen journalists. They can translate those scary but abstract graphs of rising infections into human stories that are so much harder to ignore or argue with, and some clearly feel an ethical duty to do so. Many scientists, too, are spending spare time they don’t have plugging patiently away at an avalanche of social media misinformation, a shaming amount of it peddled by blue-tick columnists who were arguing only a few months ago that the pandemic was over or that rising infections were just due to false positives. An activist generation of medics have become the frontline against Covid denial as well as Covid itself, but at an increasingly heavy personal price. Dr Matthew Lee, a senior house officer at St Thomas’ hospital in central London and a YouTuber posting regularly about life as a doctor, emerged last week from a late shift on A&E to what  he described  as “hundreds of maskless, drunk people in huge groups shouting, ‘Covid is a hoax’, literally outside the building where hundreds are sick and dying”. His post brought an outpouring of sympathy from the public and frustration from other NHS staff, describing the pressures of doing an unimaginably difficult job while being antagonised by trolls claiming hospitals are empty really. But it also brought forth enough deniers to show what they’re up against. Matt Morgan, a critical care consultant at the University Hospital of Wales who has been a prominent voice in the media,  revealed last week  that his reward was to be called a eugenicist and a pharmaceutical shill. One of his colleagues, meanwhile, received a death threat. It was tough, he said, picking up his phone to relax after a grim day’s work and hearing “that what you’ve done is a lie or what you’ve done is exaggerated”. There’s nothing new, of course, about NHS staff who speak out being trawled for political affiliations or anything else that might discredit them. Although some of the higher-profile names on medical Twitter are familiar from the junior doctors’ strike (which perhaps first revealed a divergence between older BMA members and a more impatient, politicised younger generation), that’s by no means true of all. It’s fair enough, too, to weigh the stories of someone who claims online to be a doctor against reality – there are fantasists out there, and anyone can make a mistake. But that’s not what is happening here. This is about naked, drive-by hostility from strangers, some of whose almost deranged unwillingness to hear the truth must surely be rooted in fear. Denial is a powerful way of managing the anxiety we all feel. Yet the cumulative effect, scrolling through the replies to doctors and scientists on social media, is to make you wonder why they bother banging their heads against the brick wall. And presumably that’s the point. How many must conclude there are easier ways to spend their time off? Covid trolls are still a tiny minority. Most people are overwhelmingly grateful to, and supportive of, all those fighting the virus. Social media is emphatically not real life. But that’s not to say it doesn’t matter. Anyone who has been on the end of online misogyny, racism or other forms of bullying knows how visceral it can feel; that even if it’s never likely to spill over into physical confrontation, intimidation works. Nobody wants to be viciously harangued or ganged up on in their own living room, and so a handful of zealots can have a chilling effect wholly disproportionate to their numbers. It’s tempting just to avoid topics guaranteed to make a war zone of the place you go to relax, even when disputing untruths is your job, let alone when it’s done unpaid at the end of a knackering shift in the hope of having one fewer dying hand to hold in future. Looking back now on March, when a nation tried to show its support and boost morale by sticking “Thank you NHS” posters in our windows or sending cakes into A&E, obviously it wasn’t enough. But those were halcyon days in comparison with what’s now being dished out to staff exhausted and in some cases traumatised by the first wave of Covid. They have no choice but to face reality on a daily basis. All they ask from us, in return, is to be believed. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
There’s a simple way to green the economy – and it involves cash prizes for all:	O ver the past year – when societies around the world have had to grapple with their greatest challenge in decades – climate change hasn’t been at the top of the agenda. But that doesn’t mean it’s gone away. Far from it – in fact, we just experienced the  hottest September in 141 years , and  extreme warmth  recorded in the Arctic continues a disturbing trend. When the focus turns back to this ongoing existential threat, hopefully we’ll have learned some lessons from the pandemic about what can be achieved when imaginative thinking is brought to bear. Our approach towards tackling the climate crisis is necessarily going to be multipronged. But one powerful tool is that of a carbon tax. So far, however,  only a few nations  have taken this route. Why? First of all, how do taxes on carbon work? Basically, they penalize fossil fuels for the CO 2  emitted when they’re burned, and in doing so offer a two-part advantage compared with other measures. They make non-polluting industries and products more competitive, and yield a flow of revenue that can be used to calm opposition to emissions reduction. Weaning our economies off fossil energy involves making it less financially attractive. In market economies, most personal and business decisions are driven by prices, and wherever a fossil fuel is the cheapest source, and not forbidden, it will continue to dominate. Not only that, but fossil energy is a determined adversary, ploughing money back into research and development designed to push costs down so it can remain competitive, even as renewables become cheaper. A price penalty on fossil emissions counteracts this. There are several ways to raise the prices of coal, oil and natural gas. For example, you can build a tax-and-trade system, which limits total emissions but encourages emitters to trade their carbon allowances. It’s simpler, however, to just tax fossil fuels when they’re burned, as it sends a clear price signal to the market, which a variable trading price doesn’t. At the moment, taxes on fossil energy are collected across the supply chain, from the point of production, as with US state severance taxes, to final sale, as with gasoline taxes in many countries. It’s messy. For environmental effectiveness, and ease of collection, carbon taxes are best imposed at the earliest point you can: the wellhead or the mine mouth, the refinery output gate, or the port of entry for imports. That way, the incentive to reduce emissions spreads down through the economy. For example, a US tax of $50 per metric tonne of CO 2  would raise the price of oil leaving the Texas oil patch by about $21 a barrel, and increase prices throughout the country for motor fuel and products made using oil-based energy. This would percolate down to your local store: environmentally friendly goods would become relatively less expensive, and carbon-intensive ones would be pricier. So, if taxes on carbon are so effective, why aren’t they more widely used? Well, perhaps it’s because of the associations we all have with the “T” word. Tax is when you take money away – from businesses, and once that feeds through into prices, from individuals. No one likes the idea of having less money. Then there are those who argue that adding taxes hurts the economy as a whole. Yes, this ignores the fact that any tax would be less damaging to GDP than the effects of climate change, which is having devastating impacts. But the short-termism built into the economic status quo makes that hard to appreciate. Yes – no one really likes taxes. They’re unpleasant to contemplate, and a hard sell, politically. But what if there was a way all of that could be neutralised? A small but imaginative policy tweak that rendered raising the price of CO 2  pollution not a tax, but a gift? There are many ways to manage the proceeds from a carbon tax. It doesn’t have to simply disappear into government coffers. And that’s the secret: it’s possible to design systems that achieve what is called revenue neutrality – where every dollar taken in tax is returned to people’s pockets. One version of this idea would send the revenue to the public as a per-capita carbon dividend, in an annual check. For example,   in 2020 a $50 per metric tonne CO 2  tax would return each US household an annual dividend somewhere between $1,500 and $2,000. That’s more than the pandemic stimulus checks distributed to most US taxpayers in light of the extreme economic situation. And yet it would come every year. But what’s the point of collecting a tax if you just give the proceeds back? It all comes down to incentives. The tax part of this arrangement would make carbon-intensive goods less attractive, and green ones more so. Environmentally friendly businesses would thrive. Polluting businesses would be incentivised to make their operations less damaging, driving green innovation in the process. Gradually, via the millions of consumer choices made every day, the economy would shift on to a more sustainable footing. The dividend part would not only make millions of people happy – who doesn’t like receiving a check in the mail? – it would have a social impact. Even when you factor in the increased cost of energy and other goods, all but the highest income groups – those who consume the most carbon-intense goods and services – would come out ahead, with the lowest income group benefiting most of all. This result should be especially welcome in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, which has imposed the harshest penalties on the least advantaged communities and cast a harsh light on underlying disparities in income and wealth. There are other revenue-neutral designs, but they’re not as good – one proposal, for example, involves a tax swap.  Carbon tax  revenue could be used to lower a tax on labor, like the payroll tax. But this would be less favorable than a direct rebate to lower-income households. Cutting a corporate tax as part of a tax swap on the other hand, would favor wealthier income groups. A carbon dividend feels like a novel, unusual idea. There certainly aren’t many directly comparable fiscal mechanisms in place. But if now isn’t the time to try bold new solutions – when we’ve seen that governments can move mountains in the right circumstances – then when is? And though it looks radical, the dividend really is just a rather elegant solution to a major problem, which neatly circumvents many of the usual political objections to increased taxation. It might even be the first highly popular tax. Moving market-oriented economies off fossil energy is going to be a long and difficult struggle. Funds will also have to be found to ease the burden of the energy transition in fossil-dependent parts of the economy, helping displaced workers and supporting the communities where they live. But marshaling the power of the price system to rebalance the whole economy away from carbon-intensive industries – while supporting those on lower incomes – seems like a wonderful place to start. •  Henry D Jacoby is emeritus professor of management at MIT and former codirector of the MIT joint program on the science and policy of global change Gary Yohe and Richard Richels contributed to the preparation of this article
Wonder Woman 1984 is a smug, dishonest let-down. How very 2020:	I  remember very clearly, three years ago, going to the cinema to see  Wonder Woman . It was an afternoon showing and the entire experience – slinking off work while the kids were at school, paying extra for the posh seat, walking out on to the street two hours later confident that, if push came to shove, I could probably bend metal – reminded me how transporting big movies can be. Superhero franchises are, for the most part, made by men for men, but this movie, directed by Patty Jenkins, felt like a rare exception. It was almost pitiful: how gratifying – moving, in fact – it was to see a woman at the centre of a  $150m (£108m) movie . Sentimentality for a commercial beast of that size was probably always misguided, like celebrating the “empowerment” of women pole dancing in clubs run by men. If  Wonder Woman  didn’t feel cynical, it was still formulaic and subject to the usual requirements; it is hard to imagine Batman fighting crime in a suit that ended at the bum-line. And yet, it seemed to me, you could tell there was a woman in charge. If the fight scenes at the top of the movie had a slightly porny aesthetic, the intended audience was other women. For once, it wasn’t about the men. Cut to the release, on Christmas Day in the US, of  Wonder Woman 1984 . Because of the pandemic, the movie opened simultaneously in cinemas and for streaming on HBO Max, and while the budget had gone up to  $200m , most of the other details were consistent with the first movie, with Jenkins directing, Gal Gadot as Wonder Woman and Chris Pine, looking more like Tom Hollander with each passing year, as the love interest. A lot of women I know, particularly those with young daughters, sat down that afternoon ready, once again, to lose their hearts and vaguely wonder if they should start weight training. It’s a big, dumb movie, not an arthouse adaptation of essays by Mary Wollstonecraft. Still, the fact it’s so bad isn’t only disappointing but enraging. It’s not merely that the script is terrible and that in the first half of the movie, after an encouraging opening scene, hours seem to go by in which nothing happens. It’s not that, for long stretches, Gadot has nothing to do but look passively into space, pining for her dead boyfriend. It’s not even that WW 1984 commits the ultimate sin of engaging Robin Wright, jamming her into gladiator gear, then dispensing with her services in the first five minutes of the film. It’s that all of these fails are presented with the smug, dishonest air of a movie that purports to be critiquing the very thing it is selling us. Hilariously, towards the end Wonder Woman 1984 delivers an anti-capitalist message – as if trying to launder a largely conservative movie through a quick liberal spin cycle. The problem with the US and the world, it suggests, is that nobody wants to work any more, they just want to snap their fingers and see their dreams come true. Wonder Woman herself learns this lesson the hard way when, for a brief spell, she wins her heart’s desire – no, not world peace, a cure for cancer, or as in the first movie, the defeat of an evil overlord, but the return of the dead boyfriend. Here is a woman who can stop bullets with her wrist plates but oh, hi, let’s give the guy with no powers not only two-thirds of the movie, but most of the fight scenes and the job of saving the superhero. On top of everything else, it makes no sense. The worst thing about Wonder Woman 1984, however, is probably the role occupied by Kristen Wiig. I’ll keep it vague to avoid spoilers, but her heart’s desire involves transcending the shame of being a dowdy nerd men ignore to becoming more in line with someone who looks like Gadot. The movie punishes her relentlessly for harbouring this shallow, misguided dream while promoting the hell out of the notion that for women, male attention is the only metric that matters. Who cares, right? If the extra $50m on the budget pushed a filmmaker who has, in the past, been mildly interesting back into formula, why should anyone be surprised – and it’s at least in line with the conventions of the genre. The aggravating thing is that by using faux feminism and other tropes of social justice in the service of a reactionary movie, the insult is far worse than if Wonder Woman 1984 was bad in the regular ways – although, oddly, it does make it a movie very much in the spirit of the age. Pure and simple, it’s gaslighting. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnist
To solve the problem of loneliness, society needs to look beyond the nuclear family:	“I have been trying, for some time now, to find dignity in my loneliness,” wrote the poet and critic Maggie Nelson in her 2009 book Bluets .  When I read these words, they struck a chord. I’ve been thinking a lot about loneliness over the last few years as I’ve drifted in and out of various forms of it myself, the most extreme form coming, unsurprisingly, in 2020. Is there dignity to be had in it? Perhaps not, and perhaps that’s why we find it so difficult to talk about or admit to. A few months into the Covid-19 outbreak, people started to talk about a corresponding “ loneliness pandemic ”. Pages appeared on the NHS and Red Cross websites advising how to cope with the isolation thrust upon us by the global health crisis and its accompanying lockdown. But before this year, various reports claimed that loneliness had reached  dangerous  and even life-threatening epidemic levels, and in 2018 Theresa May launched a UK government “ loneliness strategy ”. Such concerns have always been particularly heightened during winter and around Christmas, a time when charities and politicians frequently urge festive revellers to think about and reach out to the lonely and vulnerable. There isn’t much talk in all this, though, of what loneliness actually is, what it feels like or where it comes from. In these scenarios it is an affliction: distant, othered and slightly frightening, coming to us in the form of elderly people at Christmas, the recently widowed, those who are unloved or forgotten about. But thinking about it as some kind of disease is wrongheaded. The historian Fay Bound Alberti, who has written a “biography” of the condition,  argues that  this way of thinking suggests “that it’s coming from the outside, rather than being something that is a social problem”. Loneliness , then, is partly produced by the way we organise the world – and to address it we need to seriously rethink how we approach our public spaces, housing arrangements and relationships. This includes questioning our dependency on certain forms of relationship – the couple and the nuclear family – as units of social organisation. I first started properly thinking about all this around the summer of 2017. I had recently come out of a 12-year relationship and, not unrelatedly, had moved to Ireland to work on my PhD, that most solitary of endeavours. After years of coupled domesticity, I was living alone. Solitude is not the same as loneliness, of course – as Nelson puts it, “loneliness is solitude with a problem” – and some of this was OK: I read, I walked, I wrote, I went out and made new friends. But my isolation, coupled with the rawness of a recent heartbreak, frequently was a problem. At such times I would message friends and family back home, filling my phone screen with three, four, five WhatsApp chats, and in these exchanges they described their own struggles: too much to do, not enough time or space for themselves, an excess of people and stuff to look after. The contrast in our predicaments seemed, at times, completely absurd and, above all, wasteful. I often wondered whether it wouldn’t make sense to bolt my household on to one of theirs, to redistribute some of my caring resources and they, in turn, to share some of the human company that I often craved. That “bolting on” was, I suppose, a kind of pre-Covid version of the “support bubble”, though there was a greater flexibility in my vision. The “household” has taken on particularly rigid meanings this year, as we have been forced to spend practically all of our time in our homes and been severely restricted from mixing with others. This has made all of us consider the realities of our living arrangements in new ways. Feminists have long pointed out that the burden of housework and childcare overwhelmingly falls on women – and lockdown has  made these inequalities  more stark. For me, as somebody living alone, lockdown has meant dealing with a relentless and often grinding solitude and so I’ve returned to the alternative living arrangements I pondered back in 2017 with a new seriousness. At the age of 41 I have decided that I no longer want to live alone, but what do I do about this? I’ve had some extremely rewarding cohabiting relationships in house and flatshares in my life, but in reality this form of living is not taken seriously or supported by our society’s approach to housing. Too often houseshares exist in the context of the precarious rental market and are perceived as stopgaps on the way to the more permanent and “adult” arrangements of homeownership, a family, marriage, or at the very least cohabitation with a romantic partner. But I don’t want to depend on a romantic partner to avoid solitude and I don’t think anybody – single or partnered – should have to. Many second-wave feminists thought hard about how to organise homes and communities in a way that uncouples caregiving from essentialist ideas of family and distributes it across communities; there have also long been efforts in the LGBTQ community to develop alternative family models on similar principles in response to the challenges they have faced. These ideas are revisited and updated in the recently published, collectively authored  Care Manifesto ,  which imagines more expansive models of kinship than traditional family models and aims to reclaim “forms of genuinely collective and communal life”. The experiences we’ve all weathered in 2020 have shown how important and urgent this project is. Such considerations should not be seen as optional add-ons when we talk about the world we want to live in after the pandemic. Let’s imagine ways of doing things differently that enable us all to live in more communal, less isolated and more pleasurable ways. Eli Davies is a writer and academic researcher, and the co-editor of Under My Thumb: Songs That Hate Women and the Women Who Love Them, an anthology of women’s music writing
If the pandemic taught us anything, it is that 'care' has to be central to politics:	A s we reflect on 2020, many tell us that it was a  lost year , a year to forget. That’s not quite how we see things. What has been invaluable about the past 10 catastrophic months is that this pandemic has brought the issue of care to the very centre of public discussion. This very old word is newly fashionable, and with some unexpected twists. We have always  undervalued the work of care . Historically, most hands-on caring has been marginalised as women’s “unproductive” housework or, more recently, offloaded as underpaid work, largely shouldered by precarious, often immigrant workers. Sexism combines with racism to further devalue this vital work. Decades of welfare cuts followed by the savage austerity policies initiated in 2010 have produced a lack of adequate care provision now evident at every level in British life, from cradle to grave. Cuts to the NHS, its selective privatisation and the removal of nursing bursaries had already left massive shortages of hospital beds, doctors and nurses. It’s why we have seen such uneven infection rates and exceptionally high mortality levels throughout this pandemic – more than double that of Germany. As Richard Horton, the editor of the Lancet, noted, Britain was already “ the sick man of Europe ” well before Covid-19 appeared. This is why, in 2017, five of us from differing academic backgrounds formed the  Care Collective , and wrote  The Care Manifesto   to highlight just how uncaring our society has become. The ongoing calamity of social care, especially for the disabled and elderly, is merely the nadir of this systemic carelessness. With public services weakened or outsourced, often to global corporations, paid care workers are themselves facing intolerable   and precarious working conditions, curtailing any continuity of care. The resulting provision often mocks the very name of care, with so little security for either the cared-for or   the care workers. Meanwhile, many corporations have been busy promoting themselves as caring through numerous “carewashing” and “ coronawashing ” campaigns. Others have been making massive profits from outsourced “care” and, more recently, failing  test and trace systems . Combating such systemic carelessness requires a radical approach: we must begin to place care and wellbeing at the centre of politics. This starts with expanding public health provision and empowering local communities to deal with our ongoing health emergencies, and continues with pioneering new ways of ensuring social and environmental wellbeing. In a growing global movement promoting  radical municipalism , for example, we see councils pursuing approaches such as the “ Preston model ”, seeking to insource hitherto outsourced local infrastructures, while offering support for alternative forms of ownership and economic cooperation. Placing care at the heart of politics also requires us to recognise that “hands-on” care does not exist in a vacuum. The reason care is in such a multifaceted crisis today is because of the stubborn interconnectedness of everything around it. To be able to cook a nutritious meal for our loved ones, for instance, we need to have access to appropriate housing, kitchen equipment and ingredients sourced in our local (digital or physical) marketplace. Our vegetables may be locally produced, fairly traded or, conversely, unfairly traded and at risk of relying upon extreme labour exploitation in their supply chain. Different forms of care in the home, on the street or at work are practically and structurally interconnected. Working to create more caring communities requires that they be more democratic, too; forging a society where everyone feels their voices are being heard. It also requires collective engagement in making them heard, as opposed to indulging in  consumerist , individualist and apolitical lifestyles. For example, whereas most accounts of “care economies” primarily (and narrowly) focus on workers in the care sector, a 2020 report by the Women’s Budget Group also explicitly  embraces broader issues  of gender equality and environmental sustainability. Our manifesto argues for a truly capacious understanding of care, one that encompasses all the economic and ecological challenges feeding into it. As we begin a new year, many of us are at last paying more heed to caring. But we have seen little material change. We clapped for carers and other essential workers, yet have seen no pay increases, better conditions or reduced working hours. Good caring, paid or unpaid, requires time, patience and flexibility, as well as ample support and resources – exactly what is usually lacking in unsupported home care and a lot of marketised care. It is still mothers, for instance, who have been  most over-burdened  throughout this pandemic. For all this to change, we need state institutions and communities to themselves become caring, to help to nurture and enable all our capacity to give and receive care. This is why we call for an expanded notion and language of care if we are ever to appreciate all that it really involves. “If you have the words, there’s always a chance that you’ll find the way,” as Seamus Heaney reflected .  We are never outside the social, we are not the autonomous individuals some fantasise themselves to be. There is only interdependence in human existence, as we lean towards and upon each other, as well as on all that sustains the world we inhabit. Lynne Segal is anniversary professor emerita of psychosocial studies at Birkbeck, University of London. Andreas Chatzidakis is professor of marketing and consumer culture at Royal Holloway University of London
The Guardian view on education in lockdown: a foreseeable challenge:	M uch of what has gone wrong with the government’s approach to the pandemic was contained in the spectacle of primary schools opening for just one day at the start of this week. Last Sunday, the prime minister said that there was “no doubt” in his mind that classrooms were safe.  By Tuesday, they were shut . Boris Johnson’s impatience to return to something called “normality” has been a constant obstacle to contingency planning. Many Conservative MPs have refused to accept the scale of adaptation demanded for life in a pandemic, and that culture of denial inhibits preparation for a long haul. Last December, headteachers could see that Covid was spreading through their institutions at an alarming rate. But Mr Johnson had promised to ease regulations over Christmas, and fear of playing Scrooge trumped an honest evaluation of the problem.  Gavin Williamson , the education secretary, used legal threats to keep schools open. As the facts changed, neither Mr Williamson nor Mr Johnson changed their minds. Teachers spent precious time over Christmas preparing to reopen schools, chasing impossible Covid testing targets. They were misdirected by the education department, which could have focused on plans for extended remote learning. The unreadiness of government was clear in Mr Williamson’s  statement to parliament  on Wednesday. He identified many of the most urgent tasks –  access to remote learning , support for vulnerable children and a method for awarding grades  in the absence of exams . But the substance was missing, or flimsy when present. A pledge to deliver 750,000 laptops to families without a suitable device by the end of next week sounds bold, but it is also a measure of what might have been achieved if the goal had been understood weeks, if not months, ago. Those children should already have those machines, and  many more need them . Even with a device,  the cost of internet access  locks hundreds of thousands of children out of digital learning. Agreement with the private sector on “zero-rating” online platforms so that they do not drain limited data-usage budgets is technically tricky, but the problem would be closer to resolution if ministers had recognised the urgency sooner. As for grades, every imaginable mistake was made last year, so the requisite lessons could already have been learned. But there is no detail of a new scheme. It is being “fine-tuned”, according to Mr Williamson, who was still insisting that exams would go ahead a few weeks ago. The government’s defence is that a mutation in the virus caught everyone by surprise. But the effect of the mutation on infection numbers was visible before the cause. Another lockdown was predictable from the graphs. Scientists were ringing the alarm before they had a genetic analysis of the new variant. Government complacency should have been checked in the autumn, when the effects of summer’s rule relaxation showed up. Ministers should have set about preparing plans for a second wave as severe as the first. But foresight and strategic competence seem alien to Mr Williamson, just as they are unknown to his boss. The challenge of supporting schools and families through another lockdown is formidable, but not unmanageable. There is no new science to be mastered in the education challenge posed by the pandemic. Children need resources and care.  Schools  need timely, realistic guidance. Parents need to have confidence that politicians have a grip. Those are old, routine tests of statecraft. The recent evolution of the coronavirus is no excuse for the government failing so consistently.
With the Capitol riot the Trumpists have become a de facto third party:	W ednesday’s invasion of our “temple of democracy” constituted an “insurrection” only in the sense of dark comedy. What was essentially a flag-wrapped biker gang wielding staves stormed America’s ultimate country club, chased senators into the Capitol’s catacombs, squatted on Mike Pence’s throne, trashed Nancy Pelosi’s office, and shot endless selfies to send to the dudes back home in white people’s country. Otherwise, they were clueless and when the serious cops finally arrived, filed out clutching souvenirs to show to Daddy Trump. Monty Python with four dead bodies. Meanwhile, several hundred evacuated solons sweated together in their hiding place. Some of the  Republicans , steadfastly loyal to their death cult, refused the face masks offered by police. One outraged Democrat described it as a “super-spreader event”. Hours later, Representative Jake La Turner, a Trump diehard from Kansas, punctually tested positive for the virus. Predictably liberal pundits are now telling us that the far right has committed suicide, that the age of Trump has ended, and that the Democrats are free to build their shining city on the hill. In fact the riot was a deus ex machina that lifted the curse of Trump from the careers of conservative war hawks and rightwing young lions whose higher ambitions have been fettered by the presidential cult. By the White House’s  Führerprinzip  standards, Trump’s former praetorian guard – senators Tom Cotton, Chuck Grassley, Mike Lee, Ben Sasse, Marco Rubio and Jim Lankford – are now traitors beyond the pale. Ironically this frees them to become potential presidential contenders in a still far-right but post-Trump party. Moreover their path has been eased by Ted Cruz’s stupid and self-destructive decision to pose as leader of the president’s angry mob. The resumed joint session on Wednesday night and Thursday morning was the  et tu, Brut e ? moment as former hardcore Trumpites, including half of the “stolen election” crew, imitated Biden’s call for “a return to decency” and denounced the actions of the zombified plain folk whom they had hours earlier applauded as patriots. Let’s be clear about what happened: the monolith has cracked and the Republican party is splitting up. Preparations for this have been in progress since the election, with various conservative elites loosely but energetically conspiring to take back power from the Trump family. Big business especially has been burning its bridges to the White House in the wake of the Covid-19 disaster and Trump’s chaotic war on constitutional government. The most sensational defection involves that bedrock Republican institution, the National Association of Manufacturers. While the riot was in progress, they called upon Pence to use the 25th amendment to depose Trump. Of course, they had been happy enough during the first three years of his regime to enjoy the colossal tax cuts, comprehensive rollbacks of environmental and labor regulation, and trade sanctions on China, but the last year brought the unavoidable recognition that the White House was wildly incapable of managing major national crises or ensuring basic economic and political stability. The goal is to realign power within the party more closely with traditional capitalist power centers such as NAM and the Business Roundtable as well as with the Koch family, long uncomfortable with Trump. However, there should be no illusion that “moderate Republicans” have suddenly been raised from the grave; the emerging project will preserve the core alliance between Christian evangelicals and economic conservatives and presumably defend most of the Trump-era legislation. As Trump embalms himself in bitter revenge fantasies, reconciliation between the two camps is improbable Institutionally, Senate Republicans, with a strong roster of talented young predators, will rule the post-Trump camp, a generational succession that will probably be cinched before their Democratic counterparts finally throw off their own octogenarian oligarchy. The internal competition will be fierce, another monster’s ball, but centrist Democrats should be wary of issuing death warrants. Liberated from Trump’s electronic fatwas some of the younger Republican senators may prove to be formidable competitors for the white college-educated suburban vote that has been the holy grail for the Democratic establishment. That’s one side of the split. The other is more dramatic: the true Trumpists have become a de facto third party, bunkered down in state legislatures and the House of Representatives. As Trump embalms himself in bitter revenge fantasies, reconciliation between the two camps is improbable. A poll on Tuesday found that 45% of Republican voters supported the storming of the Capitol. These true believers will enable Trump to terrorize Republican primaries in 2002 and ensure the preservation of a large contingent in the House as well as in red state legislatures. (Republicans in the Senate, accessing huge corporate donations, are far less vulnerable to such challenges.) Democrats may gloat at the prospect of an open civil war among Republicans, but their own divisions have been rubbed raw by Biden’s refusal to share power with progressives. The best hope for the left will be sweeping electoral reforms that roll back Republican voter restrictions and accelerate the racial and generational turnover of the electorate. But Mitch McConnell’s chief legacy, a far-right supreme court, may be an insuperable obstacle. In any event, the only future that we can reliably foresee – a continuation of extreme socio-economic turbulence – renders political crystal balls almost useless. The civil cold war in America is far from over. Mike Davis is the author of City of Quartz, Late Victorian Holocausts, Buda’s Wagon, and Planet of Slums. He is the recipient of a MacArthur Fellowship and the Lannan Literary Award. He lives in San Diego This piece is updated from when it originally appeared on  NLR Sidecar
The Guardian view on Covid relief: a package of shortcomings:	A  few days into 2021, and a large European country  imposed  yet another lockdown on its weary public. The leader of the governing rightwing party held out hopes for a mass vaccination programme, but insisted that in the meantime, non-essential shops and services must close and school pupils study from home. Not the UK, but Germany. Not Boris Johnson, but Angela Merkel. Our overwhelmingly parochial political debate nearly always ignores how countries very similar to our own can take far more imaginative and helpful measures. One of the first moves Chancellor Merkel announced this week was  an extra 10 days’ leave for parents to look after children  – double that for single parents. As policymaking, it is a modest but useful step. As politics, it is smart. And as an attempt to gain beleaguered families’ trust and their acceptance of the inevitable difficulties to come, it is deft. Compare that with  the tin-eared response from London’s ministers . The day after Mr Johnson’s imposition of a third lockdown, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, unveiled a £4bn package of one-off grants for retail, hospitality and leisure companies. If your firm does the laundry for a big leisure centre or supplies crockery to cafes, you will have to jostle with every other business for a part of a far smaller £594m contingency fund. All the new support is aimed at businesses rather than their workers. For anything else, the Treasury will wait until its March budget. The best that can be said for this is that it is better than nothing. But it shows  no grasp of how businesses make decisions  and no appreciation of the sacrifices being made by households across the UK. Most of all, for a professional and promising politician, it shows scarcely any political nous. What is unfolding this week is  a public health emergency  that on some measures is already more acute than the one that hit the UK last March. To try and contain it, the government has locked down the country. Those two factors in themselves as good as guarantee that the UK will go into another recession. Right now, a range of businesses are watching their cash flow dry up all over again. For many small and mid-sized firms, their main recourse will be applying for a government loan. Some can’t wait for the government to extend support and will lay off workers or shut up shop entirely. These closures, and those redundancies, will be partly the fault of Mr Sunak. Rather than pause and prevaricate, as the chancellor has done throughout this crisis, he should do three things immediately. First, confirm that the support for workers and businesses will carry on at least until the autumn statement. Second, fix the gaping holes in his support for the self-employed and those on benefits. And finally, sort out what is  one of the stingiest state sick pay schemes in Europe . Do all that, Mr Sunak, and you might be able to back up your claims that we are all in this together.
The violence at the Capitol was an attempted coup. Call it that:	O n Wednesday, a coup attempt was led by the president of the United States. A rightwing mob attempted the coup in the form of  a violent riot that stormed the Capitol building . They disrupted the proceedings that would have completed the recognition of the election of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Those proceedings had been disrupted earlier by elected officials bringing forth bad-faith claims that the election was not legitimate and should instead produce a continuation of Trump’s presidency. This too was a coup attempt, an effort to violate the constitution and override the will of the voters in this election. Inside and outside were two faces of the same thing, and both were fomented by the leaders of the Republican party and by the US president. The mob outside would not exist without the politicians inside. Those insiders will make noises of horror and repudiation, but they own this. Had Mitch McConnell and other Republican leaders recognized the legitimate winner of the election in early November, had there been no challenge to a legitimate election from inside the government, there would have been no mob. Having failed to suppress enough votes to guarantee a Republican presidential victory, the Republican party and the Trump administration decided to try to suppress them retroactively. Trump invited the mob and whipped it up for months and set it off today, as surely as if he’d lit a bomb’s fuse. I call it a coup attempt because, though I assume it will not prevent the Biden presidency, it certainly intended to, and is part of a campaign to delegitimize and thereby weaken the incoming administration. It was a long time coming, building up for years with white rage, especially white male rage fuelled by everyone from Trump himself to the National Rifle Association, Fox News and the various rightwing pundits, the Republican party, the various faces of white supremacy, and far-right groups such as the Proud Boys. It is a rage against the fact that other people might be equal under the law, that women and people of color might also govern as power begins to be distributed more equally, the same rage that attempted to delegitimize a black president with birtherism and obstruction. It is a rage against equality. Democracy is a set of agreements to make decisions together and respect the outcome whether you like them or not. The kind of violence we saw on Capitol Hill is authoritarian, a way to try to force other people to submit to the will of the perpetrators. This violence comes from the white men who were long the only people with power in this country imagining themselves as marginalized and oppressed outsiders because others might also have power and a voice. We saw these kind of men last summer, when they invaded the Michigan capital while carrying semiautomatic rifles and saw them again when a handful of them were arrested for a plot to kidnap Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer. We saw them in racist shootings from the Texas border to a Pennsylvania synagogue. This coup attempt was built by the more and more uninhibited ideology of violence we have seen again and again, in the mass shootings that became a norm in 21st-century America, the fetishization of guns and gun rights that made the killing machines and the death they inflict far more common, so that death by gun recently overtook death by car as a leading American way to die. As I write, I hear a Republican leader on TV say “Remember we are the party of law and order,” and, of course, the riot going on in the Capitol is technically lawless, but “law and order” as a rightwing slogan means that they are the law and they impose their version of order. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I change them at will and punish those who don’t obey, or, if I feel like it, those who do because I can. Political scientist Frank Wilhoit once said: “Conservatism consists of exactly one proposition … There must be in-groups whom the law protects but does not bind, alongside out-groups whom the law binds but does not protect.” They are demonstrating that nothing binds them and that they expect to have whatever they want. Entitlement is too demure a word for this. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I punish those who don’t obey What is at stake in America today is the outcome of an election. But it’s also the rule of law and the rights of voters. And in the end it’s also about the authority of facts and evidence and history and science, that no one has the right to override those things for personal gain. Trump’s position all along has been that he in particular has that right. Today it came to a head and became a crisis as a mob sabotaged a constitutionally mandated procedure for the peaceful transition of power. This was always going to happen because Trump’s power was always going to be finite in reach and duration under the law, and because he wants that power to be infinite, he was always at war with the law, and he always had a volunteer army willing to help him take it. Today they acted like an army, a hostile occupying force in the nation’s capital. This is what he wanted and this is what he orchestrated and this is what we got. Trump was the most prolific public liar America has ever seen, and his lies were an essential part of his authoritarianism, a refusal to be bound by facts, even the facts of what he said or did the day before. He demanded a parallel narrative in which he won the election and laid the groundwork long before to claim, if he lost, that it was illegitimate, as he did in 2016. In a recorded video on Wednesday, Trump said to the crowd “We love you” as he told them to go home but also reasserted that the election was stolen, which is why they’re there in the first place. Ivanka Trump apparently deleted a tweet in which she called them “American patriots”. The Trumps and their loyalists in office will disavow the worst of what happened and pretend to be surprised by it and continue feeding it. Conversation about what’s been happening over the past several months has often bought into the false binary that either we have a successful coup, in which they steal the election, or we have a failed coup, but there is something insidious in-between: the delegitimization of the democratic process and the incoming administration. In this in-between state, Trump supporters continue to regard their leader and themselves as above the law and entitled to enforce it however they see fit, on the basis of whatever facts they most enjoy having. They are building a separate reality and appear to wish for a shadow government to beleaguer and undermine the legitimate one. Today, we’ve seen it in action. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist
The Guardian view on culture in 2021: a tough road ahead:	T he past 10 months have been cataclysmic for the arts: unimaginable, unprecedented. No other part of the UK economy, with the exception of hospitality, has been so gravely impacted by the pandemic. Soon after the shock of closure last March, the  financial consequences for arts organisations  began to sink in. Without shows, there was no way to earn. Cultural workers were faced with the personal catastrophe of seeing a year’s employment abruptly cancelled. The  rescue package  of £1.57bn for the arts, entertainment and heritage was designed to enable institutions to cling on until this March – though any notion of “normality” by spring seems fantastical, particularly in the performing arts, and more government help will certainly be necessary. The package also left an unforgivable gap: individuals. The vast majority of cultural workers – artists and composers, actors and makeup artists, technicians and designers – are self-employed. But  most have found themselves ineligible  for support. These people – the engine house of Britain’s creative brilliance – have been thrown to the wolves. The theory was that institutions would solve the problems of freelancers by swiftly being in a position to re-employ them. But this, as with so much of the government’s pandemic response, was too optimistic – irresponsibly so, given the warnings of scientists that there would likely be  two or three waves  of the virus. “ Operation Sleeping Beauty ”, the attempt by the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, to get the English performing arts up and running for Christmas, was always risky. It duly hit the buffers, with huge losses for producers. It is clear that any attempt to revive this part of Britain’s creative economy in 2021 must be supported by a government-backed insurance scheme such as that which has enabled some film and TV production to go ahead. 2020 was certainly a year of reckoning – and not always in a negative way. It became obvious how deeply the arts are relied upon as means of solace, company and inspiration. Book sales were surprisingly brisk. Viewers were transfixed by Netflix shows – some of them, like The Crown, made in Britain by British creatives. BBC TV dramas such as Michaela Coel’s extraordinary  I May Destroy You  struck a deep chord. Listeners flocked to Radio 3. The BBC valiantly showcased the work of UK arts organisations during the lockdowns. Its new chairman, Richard Sharp, and the director general, Tim Davie, must ensure that the corporation continues to live up to its role as the world’s leading commissioner of art, from drama to cutting-edge contemporary music. This must rest upon the foundation of the licence fee. A BBC that is shared in common among all citizens, that sits at the centre of the public square, will be the organisation that can most effectively demonstrate British creativity and British excellence to the world. For some arts organisations, closures have meant a chance to reflect: the wisest minds have faced up to the fact that though, in time, there will be a recovery, there will be no return to pre-pandemic conditions. That is neither possible nor desirable. Covid-19, in bringing so much of the world to a stop, made many in the arts question previous norms. Was it really necessary for the (highly globalised) visual art world to have flung itself constantly round the world on planes? Did orchestras really need to do all those tours to far-off cities? Amid a deadly climate crisis, the answer is a resounding no. Much can be done remotely, or differently. In general, there has been a useful acceleration of digital technologies in the UK arts, with sagacious organisations looking to a hybrid model of live and streaming in the future. The Black Lives Matter protests of last summer – which most strikingly coalesced around the  toppling  of the statue of the slave trader Edward Colston in Bristol – concentrated the minds of more thoughtful arts leaders on diversity and representation. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, and Mr Dowden, on the other hand, chose to  fan the flames of discord  rather than attempt any kind of mature discussion, falsely claiming that protesters were aiming to “erase history” (quite the reverse was the case). Regrettably, it is almost certain that this kind of cheap political point-scoring will be increasingly indulged in by the right. The BLM protests also drew attention to the fact that many items in British museums were acquired either through straightforward theft, as in the Benin bronzes, or under iniquitous colonial conditions. Debates on such matters must be conducted by museums with humility, not defensiveness. There are dangerous generational fissures opening up in the arts: young cultural leaders are impatient with their elders’ apparently complacent adherence to old liberal norms. Those currently in power must be alert to shifting priorities if they are to stay relevant. Amid immense instability, little looks clear about the future for the arts. One certainty, though, is that Brexit will be highly damaging: amid many other concerns, British musicians who tour to the EU, from pop bands to orchestras and string quartets, will now face an expensive bureaucratic tangle of carnets and work permits. Another certainty is that the economic impact of the pandemic will be deep and long-lasting. Over the past two decades, success for cultural institutions, as officially reckoned at least, has involved embracing a neoliberal, expansionist model: running shops, cafes and bars; mounting blockbusters; maximising visitor numbers. This model has been dealt a blow, and perhaps that is not entirely a bad thing. For now, the arts will have to be leaner and sparser – and that spirit will also be reflected in what is seen on stage and in museums. If any good is to come from this austere spirit, amid heart-wrenching job losses, it must be that organisations focus on what is absolutely essential: enabling artists; bringing meaningful, joyful experiences to audiences; firing the creativity of their publics;  working deeply with their local communities . Arts organisations must not programme the most conservative, “crowd-pleasing” work they can, tempting though that may seem: the work that will capture imaginations will be fresh and bold. The arts have shown again and again that they can inject life into ailing towns and cities; as high streets are rethought for a post-Covid future, culture has a vital role to play. It is going to be hard. But there are grounds for hope. People long for a world beyond the vaccination programme when they can gather together once more to share stories and witness wonders. The arts, it has been abundantly demonstrated, have immense power to heal. Which is what the nation so desperately needs.
Shield some and let others carry on? This Covid theory is dangerous, and foolish:	T here is currently a discussion, relayed by media such as  the Sun  and  MailOnline  and circulated on social media, about the way Covid-19 predominantly impacts older people and those who have pre-existing health conditions. Some are advocating that those who are healthy and aged under 60 should not be subject to restrictions. There are several flaws in this narrative, from practical as well as ethical perspectives. It is  correct that 388 people  aged under 60 with no pre-existing health conditions have died from Covid in England. Similarly, “only” 1,591 Covid-related deaths have occurred in people without pre-existing health conditions who are aged 60 or older. The majority of deaths – 45,770 – have occurred in people with pre-existing health issues (3,210 of them in people below the age of 60). But what is meant by “pre-existing condition”? Included are things such as having had treatment for a mental health condition, having autism or other learning difficulties, asthma, chronic kidney disease, chronic neurological disorders, chronic lung disease, dementia, diabetes, rheumatological disorders (types of arthritis and other joint conditions), and ischaemic heart disease (angina and heart attacks). I have asthma, along with about  7% of the population in England . Should I happen to die from Covid (which is unlikely), I will be classified as having a pre-existing condition. What’s more, health – and therefore the distribution of “pre-existing conditions” in society – is inextricably linked to wealth. Being poor means you are at increased risk of health conditions such as asthma and diabetes. Being poor decreases your life expectancy. The recently published  Build Back Fairer: The Covid-19 Marmot Review  highlights the link between deprivation and mortality from Covid-19 and other health conditions – the more deprived the local authority in which you live, the higher the mortality. The best explanation of this I have seen is from  Dr Mike Ryan , an executive director at the World Health Organization: “It is not just Covid-19 that is killing people, it is under-privilege, it is lack of access [to healthcare], it is years of living with health conditions that haven’t been properly managed because of the colour of your skin, or your ethnicity, or your social group.”  Suggesting that the young and the healthy should be able to live their lives unhindered by restrictions reduces social responsibility for Britain’s health inequality and draws a distinction between “them” (the poor and the at-risk) and “us”. We have little chance of eradicating Covid-19 (or many other infectious diseases) or preventing the next pandemic unless we take the issue of health inequality seriously. The argument often made, citing mortality statistics for those without underlying health conditions, is that the economy will be ruined unless some are free to return to “normal”. It is not that simple. Society is interconnected, and our individual actions have an impact on others. Going to a pub or a restaurant requires people to serve the food and drink; others to supply the goods we consume; cleaners; and a host of other roles, many of which are occupations at increased risk of mortality from Covid. The concept of “focused protection” is not new and was proposed by the authors of the highly criticised  Great Barrington declaration . They suggested: “The most compassionate approach that balances the risks and benefits of reaching herd immunity, is to allow those who are at minimal risk of death to live their lives normally to build up immunity to the virus through natural infection, while better protecting those who are at highest risk.” The problem is, even if we accept this idea (I don’t), it is not feasible. How do we keep about 15 million people (the estimated number of people in England with a chronic health condition) away from the virus, look after them in a Covid-safe manner, and keep society running? It would be near-impossible. Would they need to live separately from their families? Who would ensure they were fed and cared for during their isolation? Chris Whitty was correct to  describe  this approach as “flawed and operationally impractical”. Accepting that we cannot protect millions of at-risk people from Covid, any virus circulating in the low-risk groups will rapidly transfer to those who will require healthcare when sick. If a health system (this is not an NHS-specific issue, as was seen in New York) becomes overwhelmed, it cannot provide healthcare for anyone. Reducing the transmission of the virus protects us all, whether we have pre-existing health conditions or not. If there is less Covid, the health system is more able to treat non-Covid illnesses to which we are all susceptible. Death is not the only Covid outcome that matters, to individuals or the economy. The Office for National Statistics  estimates  that there are currently about 186,000 people living in households in England with symptoms relating to Covid that have persisted for five to 12 weeks: one in 10 people has symptoms 12 weeks after infection. Although preliminary, the data also hints that patients who were hospitalised with Covid may have increased rates of new diagnoses of serious cardiac, kidney and lung conditions, as well as diabetes. We still have much to learn about this new disease. In the end, either everyone’s health matters or no one matters. Where do we draw the line? The narrative of “them” and “us” is a dangerous one, and the idea that Covid-19 will not impact us all is foolish. Dr Charlotte Summers is a lecturer in intensive care medicine at the University of Cambridge
The Guardian view on the storming of the US Capitol: democracy in danger:	W hat took so long? “When someone shows you who they are, believe them the first time,” Maya Angelou counselled. Donald Trump’s keenest supporters believed him. But too many others, even among those who reviled him, nonetheless assumed that there were limits. They can no longer be complacent. The American carnage of Wednesday night – the  storming of the Capitol  by an armed and violent mob, incited by the president, in an attempt to terrorise Congress and stop the peaceful transfer of power – marked an extraordinary moment in US history. “If the post-American era has a start date, it is almost certainly today,” wrote Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations. Yet this was merely the ultimate and undeniable proof of what was always evident: that this man is not only unfit for his office, he is also a danger to democracy while he retains it. He built his political success on lies, contempt for democratic standards, the stoking of divisions – most of all racial – and the glamorising of force. They were evident when he campaigned for the presidency, and more blatant when he talked of “very fine people” among the white supremacists of  Charlottesville . When the House impeached him for abusing power for electoral purposes. When he lied that the election would be stolen, and then lied that it had been. When he called supporters to Washington. When he told them that they would “never take back our country with weakness” and urged them on to the Capitol. The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and others deserve no credit for belated pieties about the state of the Republic. All those who helped or  “humoured”  Mr Trump’s election-stealing attempts are culpable. Already expert in more genteel endeavours, such as voter suppression and gerrymandering, the Republican elites have enabled and encouraged Trumpism: standing at his side, acquitting him when impeached, staying silent, or amplifying his lies. Having invited in an arsonist and supplied him with accelerant, they offer a cup of water to douse the inferno. The urgent issue is how to deal with Mr Trump. No faith can be put in his last-minute promise of an orderly transition when he continues to foment rage. The Democratic leader in the Senate, Chuck Schumer, has called for his immediate removal. Cabinet members are reportedly now  discussing the use of the 25th amendment , which allows the replacement of an “unfit” president. But this is not about mere failings or incapacity: a better choice would be to begin impeachment proceedings. Action must be taken against Mr Trump, as it must against those he incited, to prevent him from running again and send a clear message to anyone tempted to follow. For the truly important issue is how to salvage democracy in America. While Wednesday may prove a wake-up call for some Trump voters, many are already explaining away events, or excusing them through false equivalences with the Black Lives Matter movement. Divisions run deep through American society and even its institutions. A full investigation is needed of the failure to protect the Capitol when extremists had openly talked of such a plan – in  stark contrast  to the intense security and aggressive treatment that greeted peaceful BLM protesters. Tens of millions of Americans now believe that the election was stolen: one report suggests that  only a quarter of Republicans  trust the result. Rightwing media have fostered lies, and social media allowed people to dwell in alternative political universes. Though Facebook has  finally suspended the president’s account , the stable door is shutting long after disinformation galloped off into the distance. None of this will end when Joe Biden is inaugurated on 20 January. Democracy exists not in the provisions written down on paper, but so long as it is practised, which is to say, defended. The remarkable  twin victories in the Georgia runoffs  on Wednesday, giving the Democrats control of the Senate via the vice-president’s casting vote, were a welcome testimony to what is possible. But their importance is dwarfed by the threat looming over the system itself. The struggle is only just beginning. America has shown its people what it is. They should believe it – and act accordingly.
Optimism may be irrational, but it's helping me get through this pandemic:	Looking back on when my mum died several years ago, it would be easy for me to count every time I thought she might live as a moment of stupidity. She had stage four lung cancer. Even with the best treatment in the world, her chances of getting through it were minuscule. But that didn’t stop me from crying tears of joy when, a few weeks after she started immunotherapy, I saw a scan showing that the tumour had shrunk. I tried to stop myself, but images of her – strong, and loud, and cackling her head off again – flooded my mind. Anxious people know what it is to be a slave to the eternal “what if?”, but what if the “what if” is about everything going  right ? Even as I held her limp hand in the ambulance to the hospice, a microscopic but irrepressible part of me thought a 180-degree turn was possible. She was still my mum; she still said “fuck” a lot, and loved us aggressively, and had red hair, even though the grey roots were slowly taking over. But yes, it was deranged – at this point – for me to hope for anything other than an end to my mum’s pain. But sometimes “deranged” is exactly what you need. Optimism gets a bad rap. Sometimes rightly so. This year, obviously, optimism has been partially responsible for a lot of idiocy. “It’s just flu,” said the optimists, as they continued to lick handrails well into April. And of course, there’s been a lot of dangerously optimistic rhetoric (sincere or otherwise) from Boris “let the plebs die of Christmas” Johnson. Optimism can be a gateway drug to either recklessness or passivity. But the year my mum died – and once again this year – I couldn’t have survived without it. In the last month of the cursed year that is 2020, the urge to tell myself that everything is basically going to be OK has become a need. Unfortunately, this does mean (internally at least) screaming “SHUT UP” at every well-meaning, scientifically minded person who brings up potential difficulties in the  post-vaccine  Covid world. But it also means being able to get through days, and even weeks, with the minimum number of depressive breakdowns. “I have a good feeling about next year,” I heard myself say to the dejected looking barista at a local cafe. As much as hearing those words come out of my mouth was like an out-of-body experience (and as much as I immediately regretted it as thoughts of the virus developing the ability to shoot guns seeped in) I clearly needed to get my optimism off my chest. Even if the barista didn’t seem convinced, and I had to panic about having come across like someone who had recently joined a cult. After all, Boris Johnson did kick off this hell year with that “This is going to be a fantastic year for Britain”  tweet . Which quickly became a meme about how precisely un-great a year this has been for Britain (or the rest of the world). His double thumbs up in the accompanying picture crystallising the irony into something truly grotesque.  This is going to be a fantastic year for Britain.  pic.twitter.com/dLQUVauCKg But if optimism is a drug, then using it sensibly is really all about the dosage. Like my antidepressants, optimism should be taken daily, in the correct amount. Too much could kill me, and too little would send me into a ditch of withdrawal. Optimism needs to be balanced out with reverence for bad news, but it also needs to be enjoyed for what it is. Thoughts of hugging my friends, or masklessly huffing the smell of baked goods in Sainsbury’s, are medicinal. I also appreciate that actual medicine is medicinal, and if those making it are telling us to manage our expectations, we should probably listen to them. Is it true optimism, though, if you know you’re deluded? Well, no one would buy lottery tickets if there wasn’t a teeny bit of them that thought they might win. Optimism, I find, is often about the fantasy of things going right. When I buy a lottery ticket, I essentially pay £2 to spend a few days living – in my head – the life of someone who just won tens of millions of pounds. I buy a house and some incredibly expensive kitchen knives. I eventually have an existential crisis about having been allocated a vast sum of money at random (optimism is fairly new to me, and I’m not always good at it). When my mum was very ill, my thoughts would often take me to the darkest places imaginable. It was only fair then that sometimes I also allowed them to take me to a deranged fantasy land, where my mum had colour in her cheeks, and cancers shrivelled like old grapes. When everything goes to shit, thinking we can smell roses doesn’t make us stupid, it makes us human. Eleanor Margolis is a columnist for the i newspaper
Giving people false hope about the pandemic isn't 'balanced' – it's dangerous:	P rofessor Karol Sikora, an oncologist at the private Buckingham University, has become a social media star and a regular on TV screens, thanks to his viral tweets. You can see why the “Positive Professor” has developed such a wide fanbase: in an era of death, disease, economic turmoil and suspended freedoms, he offers desperate – often vulnerable – people the one thing they crave most: hope. His formula is simple: contrary to the misery peddled by the doom merchants, the measures strangling our economic and personal lives might actually be unnecessary. But there is nothing so cruel as false hope, and during a pandemic in which people’s lives depend on adherence to social distancing measures, it can be dangerous. Sikora is not a virologist or an epidemiologist: he is a cancer specialist. That should not preclude him from commenting on coronavirus: newspapers and TV programmes abound with non-specialists discussing the government’s response to the crisis, which is as it should be in a democracy. What matters is that he dissents from the medical consensus on how the virus should be defeated. Back in 2018, the  BBC sent a briefing note  to its staff asking them to be aware of false equivalence, accepting the BBC had got coverage of climate breakdown “wrong too often”, and telling them they did “not need a ‘denier’ to balance the debate”. This is the correct position: just because a fringe grouping of scientists endorse climate denial does not mean it should be treated as the legitimate, valid “other side” of the argument. But Sikora has the title of Professor before his name, and was saying very different, and reassuring, things compared with other, apparently panic-stricken experts with the same title. “Panic and fear will only make the situation worse,” he  tweeted , two days after the first lockdown began and a fortnight before a thousand or more Britons were dying from Covid-19 a day. “If government rules are followed, we will be back to normal by June.” By May, Sikora felt vindicated, and hubris had set in. “Some laughed at my prediction at the end of March that we would start edging back to normality around the second week of May – it was right!” he  declared . “I think by August things will be virtually back to normal, perhaps sooner.” He added a weak caveat: “We should still prepare for the worst, but hope for the best!” As autumn set in, he began to overstretch his optimism and expertise.  Speaking to the BBC , he favoured a prediction   that the “the thing just fizzles out, it causes very few deaths, very few hospitalisations” and it “just gradually drifts” into something like flu or the common cold. It was a suggestion  condemned  by one leading scientist as “very dangerous”; another declared that “This is not fizzling out in any sense. Minimising the seriousness of this disease risks resurgence on a troubling scale.” Sikora dug his heels in. As the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) recommended a circuit-breaker lockdown to avert “catastrophe”, Sikora signed a letter calling for the current approach to be abandoned in favour of targeted measures for the old and vulnerable,  described  by one scientist as a “thinly veiled return to a herd immunity strategy”. Even more damningly, just 15 days ago, Sikora penned a  column  for the Daily Mail lobbying for restrictions to be eased for Christmas, and ridiculing talk of a more infectious strain – “as though we are living out a chapter of John Wyndham’s Day of the Triffids.” We know what came next: more than 50,000 infections in one day alone. And yet, as I type this, Sikora is  appearing on BBC Radio 2  as an informed guest. Why has Sikora been so systematically signal-boosted by media outlets throughout the crisis? Any cursory exercise of due diligence should have set off alarm bells. Back in 2009, Imperial College London took legal advice to prevent Sikora from claiming he had an honorary professorship there, with its rector  declaring : “This individual has been warned before by the college for making claims that he is employed by us” In the past, he has  appeared  in rightwing attack ads in the United States condemning the NHS, in which he claims patients have “lost control over their own destiny in the health system”. He has even  denounced  the NHS as “the last bastion of Communism”. Sikora has protested throughout that he is driven by the “ unfolding disaster ” of cancer patients not getting the treatment they need because of coronavirus. But without strict measures to suppress coronavirus, our healthcare system would become overwhelmed and unable to treat cancer patients or indeed other desperately ill people. We can see that playing out in our hospitals now, with the NHS facing the prospect of “ horrendous choices ” over who gets treatment – and that’s before current case numbers translate into higher deaths in the coming weeks. There will always be people such as Sikora who dissent from consensus thinking, and challenging hypotheses is all part of the scientific endeavour. But we’ve lived with the virus for long enough to test and establish the facts: this virus spreads through social contact, it has mutated into a  more transmissible strain , it is at least  10 times deadlier than the flu , and it is pushing our NHS to the brink. Whether the aim is balance or sensationalism – or perhaps the latter hidden under the guise of the former – the producers and editors who provide Sikora with a platform should pause to reflect on the consequences of their decisions. They are responsible for helping to spread disinformation and discrediting the legitimate voices of scientists, doctors, nurses and paramedics who have understood the scale of the crisis from the start. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist
With the Covid vaccine comes hope, but this is no time to let our guard down:	It feels like watching the stars come out at night, punching their tiny brilliant holes in the darkness one by one. Every vaccine given, every story of some friend’s elderly father or previously housebound great-aunt getting the call-up, is another small victory. One less potential victim for the virus. One more family spared a tragedy. Even the proposed handing out of “I’ve been vaccinated” stickers, like the ones dished out to small children for being brave at the dentist’s, seems only mildly toe-curling. It’s a lovely thing to hear that someone you know has been plucked to safety, like a shipwrecked sailor hauled on board a lifeboat. What’s wrong with spreading the joy? Yet while this week’s long-awaited decision to approve the rollout of the  Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine  is indisputably a breakthrough, it also takes us closer to a decision Boris Johnson cannot afford to get wrong. When Matt Hancock, the health secretary, was  asked in parliament  on Wednesday exactly how far down the  vaccination priority list  we have to get before restrictions could be lifted, he tap-danced around the question. But it isn’t going to go away. If all goes to plan, the over-80s and a fair few over-75s ought to have been vaccinated by February. So what happens when a critical mass of lockdown sceptics take that as their cue to start arguing it’s time for everyone to resume a normal life, no matter what the doctors say? We are headed, in other words, for a potentially dangerous moment in the politics of the pandemic. Already a handful of the usual rightwing suspects have spent the week noisily demanding that old and ill people be confined to their homes (sorry, “shielded”) so that everyone else can get on with merrily going to restaurants. With each older person vaccinated, they’ll redouble their demands to be set free, and the fact that they have been wrong at every other critical stage of the pandemic won’t stop them heaping scorn on anyone who disagrees. They will argue that with the vaccine beginning to shield the most vulnerable people, everyone else should now be trusted to make their own decisions. And as the economic damage done by a year of successive lockdowns mounts up, they may well carry more of the public with them. The last thing desperate people will want to hear is that it’s not that simple, even if it isn’t and never has been. Hancock hinted as much when he said that the timetable for lifting restrictions would depend on observation of transmission rates, as well as on the numbers who have or haven’t had the jab. Translation: even with a vaccine, the R number must still be low before we can all plunge back into crowded pubs, restaurants and theatres, throwing masks and caution to the wind. Even once the nation’s older people have all gone under the needle, rampant unchecked spread among those who are unvaccinated could still potentially be dangerous. Even 50-somethings can get sick enough with Covid to need intensive care – ask Boris Johnson – and if hospitals are sufficiently swamped that there are no ICU beds free at the time, then they can also die for lack of it. The threat posed to younger people by  long Covid , the mysteriously disabling condition that for some can follow the virus, isn’t to be treated lightly either, given that we don’t yet understand what causes it or how to treat it. Nor do we know yet how long the protection offered by the vaccine lasts, or whether it stops people unwittingly spreading the virus, which is why the deputy chief medical officer for England, Jonathan Van-Tam, warned this week that even those who are newly vaccinated shouldn’t be behaving with “ wild abandon ” just yet. (Judging by the questions friends are starting to get asked by recently jabbed parents, that’s a message that has yet to cut through in some quarters). Yet still the prime minister sticks to his line that the war will be more or less over by April, sparking sunny headlines about freedom now being within our grasp. Given his previous prediction that it would be all over by Christmas, it would probably be wise not to make any ambitious plans for Easter. But there’s a risk here of failing to prepare people for the reality ahead. Time and time again, this government has chosen not to level with the country about what may be coming, only to end up frantically raising the alarm at the last minute. It’s no way to convince even those trying to engage in good faith with their advice, let alone those with their fingers still jammed firmly in their ears, insisting things aren’t that bad even as hospitals start running out of oxygen. So here’s what ministers struggle to say out loud; that social distancing and all the disruption it brings to daily life is probably here to stay for longer than anyone wants to think, even if the harshest elements of lockdown can be lifted by spring. That the higher numbers climb this January, the longer it will take to get them down again, especially if the government remains allergic to the very idea of another national lockdown. That we can still look forward to gradually emerging from hibernation this spring, but that it could be 2022 before things are properly back to normal in Britain (and longer before that’s true globally). And, above all, that scrapping all the rules prematurely would be a terrible waste of both the sacrifices made so far and the gift science has given us. Vaccines have given us a precious chance, for once, to get ahead of this horrible virus. We owe it to those who have brought us this far not to fritter that chance away. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist
The UK and the US need to learn from countries that better handled Covid-19:	I n October 2019, in those halcyon pre-Covid-19 days, a chart was published that ranked 195 countries according to their capacity to deal with outbreaks of infectious disease. Drawn up by the Washington DC-based Nuclear Threat Initiative and the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security in Baltimore, Maryland, the  2019 Global Health Security Index  (GHSI) placed the US and UK first and second, respectively. South Korea came ninth, New Zealand 35th and China 51st, while a number of African countries brought up the rear. Well, that was droll. Either the authors of the chart got their  colour key inside out  or our definition of health security needs an overhaul – and given all the fancy data visualisation software available these days it’s unlikely to be the former. Of course, the pandemic is not over. But back in March, when the index was already looking about as accurate as a 2016 US election poll, Johns Hopkins health policy analyst  Sarah Dalglish wrote in the Lancet : “The pandemic has given the lie to the notion that expertise is concentrated in, or at least best channelled by, legacy powers and historically rich states.” And she hasn’t changed her view. Many factors contribute to good epidemic management, but perhaps what the sorry fate of the GHSI teaches us is that while many of them are measurable – disease surveillance arrangements, emergency response plans, intensive care unit capacity – some are more ephemeral, or hard to discern until the chips are down. And yet good leadership, public trust in government and experts, and a sense of solidarity also powerfully shape a population’s vulnerability to infectious disease. You may also need a dose of luck, such that all these things align in the moment, but that’s no reason to stint on praise for the countries that have come through well. Each one took different weapons into the fight: Vietnam is relatively poor but learned lessons from the 2003 epidemic of Sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) and now has a world-beating epidemiological workforce; Senegal is even poorer but, remembering Ebola in 2014, used travel restrictions and testing well; New Zealand was untouched by both Ebola and Sars (apart from a single probable case of the latter) but had the competent and charismatic Jacinda Ardern in charge. One thing the leaders of all these countries have in common is that they know an outbreak can grow exponentially, and that their best hope of containing Covid-19 was therefore to act fast and in a coordinated, data-driven manner. In a sense, each government sacrificed its population’s present for its future, but only because it understood that the sooner the sacrifice was made, the smaller it would be. They spared themselves agonising dilemmas down the line, such as whether to let the elderly residents of care homes die of Covid-19 or loneliness, or what to do about the generation of young adults facing mass unemployment. The ones that did best knew that offering support to those hit hardest by the containment measures would require a much smaller investment than would be required to stimulate recovery if they didn’t put those measures in place. In contrast, the wealthy countries that topped the GHSI sacrificed their future for their present, arguing as US president Donald Trump did that the cure must not be worse than the disease, or in UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s immortal phrase, that “Our country is a freedom-loving country” – to which the only possible response is this line from Albert Camus’ The Plague: “They fancied themselves free, and no one will ever be free so long as there are pestilences.” Thinking back now on how these leaders failed, when according to a colourful chart they had so much going for them, it’s hard not to be reminded of the marshmallow experiment. If you aren’t familiar with this classic test of a child’s ability to delay gratification,  watch this YouTube video  posted by the Canadian newspaper the Globe and Mail. Four preschoolers do their best not to scoff a marshmallow left alone with them for 15 minutes, because they’ve been promised two if they pull it off. The marshmallows look pretty soggy and dog-eared by the end, but they survive the encounter and the children get their reward. Encouraged by their leaders, the US and UK chose instant gratification instead, and will now pay the price. Luckily, societies have built-in counterweights to such present bias – ways of investing in the future that they call research and education. Though both have suffered this year, the fact that they have a long investment horizon means that previous generations’ efforts have tided us over. Hence a pandemic that for 11 long months has felt ancient, because our only shield against it was the age-old one of social distancing, suddenly slipped through a wormhole and became postmodern. The Covid-19 vaccines that have recently been approved mark a technological watershed – one from which the world is unlikely to look back. Those vaccines offer us the possibility of herd immunity and a return to something approaching normality – but only if enough people take them. Unless governments make them compulsory for some or all of the population – which hopefully won’t be necessary – this will be an individual decision, which means our collective future lies in every individual’s hands. Getting in line for a dose seems like a no-brainer, given that our regulators have deemed the vaccines to be safe and effective, and not only our future but potentially that of the next generation is riding on them. At any rate, we are the ones staring down the marshmallow now. Once the pandemic has receded, there will be lessons to digest and implement. One of them is that experts should be treated once again with the respect they deserve. They are, after all, the dividend of our investment in research and education – our guides to the future. They should be allowed to disagree, to say they don’t know, to fail, as all human beings occasionally do. But we should keep them on their toes too, and point out their blindspots, because it’s not really droll that more than 300,000 Americans have died of Covid-19 to date, or that, when judging by deaths per million of the population, the UK is the  ninth  most lethal country in the world at the time of writing. It’s a tragedy of dimensions that would have been literally inconceivable a little over a year ago, when the GHSI was published. Key to preventing any recurrence is understanding why that coloured chart got it so wrong, because hindsight is all very well but it should at least sing for its supper. As Dalglish pointed out, 85% of global health organisations are headquartered in Europe or North America, and half of all global health leaders are UK or US nationals. The community of experts that seeks to protect us from future pandemics needs to open up to Vietnam, Senegal, China, New Zealand and all the other countries that learned from their diverse past experiences, and learned well – in many cases, with fewer resources. It may seem like another no-brainer, but global health should be truly global. This article was amended on 3 January 2020. An earlier version said that the UK had the sixth highest number of deaths in the world. Although the statistic was correct, when judging by deaths per million of the population the UK is the ninth most lethal country in the world, which provides a better reflection of the relative impact of Covid-19. Laura Spinney is a science journalist and author. Her latest book is  Pale Rider: The Spanish Flu of 1918 and How it Changed the World
Covid has made 'voice notes' the perfect way to stay connected:	A s the pandemic transformed the world in 2020, we leaned further into our reliance on technology, which continued to alter and tweak how we engage with each other. There were obvious winners; the  Zoom app  thrived; another  app called Houseparty  was the biggest thing for all of two weeks before it was never heard of again. Amid all these crazes, however, a quietly unassuming communication tool also flourished – the small but mighty “voice note”. First introduced by WhatsApp in 2013, and later adopted by iMessage, Facebook and Instagram, the voice note – a short recorded message – became an instant success among millennials. Initially its rise was spoken of as a passing fad, but time has shown it has in fact become a major communicative asset.   Seen by many as the perfect medium between phone calls, texts and unwanted voicemails, the voice note fits seamlessly into the modern world in a way that its cousins the phone call and voicemail do not. At some point in the past five years, “let me voice note you” has become one of my most-used phrases, as I try to explain something in detail and depth. Communication fatigue last year manifested itself like never before. The pandemic proved a challenging time for most, burnout was real, angst was high, and being “Zoomed out” became a very real thing. When at home (which for many of us was almost all the time), the desire to hear people but not necessarily see them grew; how many of you were reminded that your  Zoom  camera was not on, after intentionally switching it off? The voice note proved itself to be the perfect pandemic companion. As people’s homes became their offices, the need for communication that respected boundaries became all the more important. Herein lies the genius of the voice note – it maintains intimacy, being able to hear that friendly voice, while not being intrusive. In an era of pressured fast replies, voice notes gave people their technological agency back; and in lockdown, one of the most pressured periods in the modern age, this was essential. We have all been there: someone sends us a voice message and we simply don’t have the energy to play it. Thankfully voice note etiquette does not demand that people reply straight away; the power lies with the recipient, who can play the voice note and reply to it in their own time. And unlike with voicemails, there’s no plodding automated procedure to go through to get to the messages. And you can keep them as long as you like, and go back to them in an instant. The joys of communicative flexibility! There is of course voice note etiquette that not all abide by, and I admit I have left a message or two longer than the one-minute mark. Technological connectivity naturally increased during lockdown, but this has not necessarily meant people have felt more connected – in fact, there has been a growth in the “ loneliness epidemic ”. According to the  Mental Health Foundation , the lockdown left millions of people across Britain feeling increasingly isolated. Of course, no one is claiming that voice notes are complete remedies for loneliness, but one cannot deny the value of their uninhibited nature. The ability to convey tone, nuance, emotion and idiosyncrasies – to hear the shriek in a friend’s laugh, or the gasp of shock in a family member’s voice – these are things that any number of texts, even with emojis and gifs, cannot convey. The voice note, unlike written messages, leaves little room for misinterpretation; what you hear is what you get. The unedited flow of a voice note permits a means of communication that feels more genuine to both participants. The pandemic also transformed the world of dating; the app Bumble added a new feature, and the popularity of “ voice-note dating ” has risen. In a time of lockdown and social distancing, this seems to be a natural evolution in communicating romantically. Interestingly, this reliance on audio comfort and communication has fed into the success of the new audio app  Clubhouse , which in many ways is the development of the voice note. As most of the country has entered the new year in tier 3 or tier 4, the lack of social activity looks set to continue for months. So if you’re not already using voice notes, the chances are that in 2021 they’ll be impossible to avoid. Magdalene Abraha is a writer and publisher at  Jacaranda Books . She runs the  A Quick Ting On  series
As a teacher during the pandemic, I've realised that a school is a genuine community:	I f you haven’t been  in  one since the last time you were  at  one, you might not appreciate that a school can often feel like a bad theme park: way too exciting, over-stimulating, and liable to produce headaches. It’s what you get if you put hundreds of kids and dozens of caffeinated adults under one roof. It’s a hive of human activity and constant, emotional interaction – buzzing with movement, noise, rapid changes, ups, downs and, in many cases, actual bells to tell everyone when to stand up and go somewhere else. For teachers, it’s a bit like hosting an eight-hour Zoom call with nobody on mute and your camera always switched on. That’s a comparison that wouldn’t have made sense a year ago, but the pandemic has ushered in a whole new reality that we’re all struggling to deal with. Not to sound too much like a football score, it’s starting to feel like Covid-19, everyone else – nil. As it stands, amid unprecedented levels of Covid cases, the government has announced a  staggered return  to school in January, depending on local infection rates.   Until there’s a readily available vaccine and infection rates become stable, teachers will continue facing the warped reality of teaching under Covid. I’ll tell you what it’s like: in a word, weird. During that first lockdown – the sunny one – many schools became empty shells, open only to vulnerable children, the children of key workers and teachers. We rattled around empty corridors and abandoned rooms. It was like the opening credits of a post-apocalyptic dystopian movie; the first time many of us had worn face masks in public places, stuttering in our steps when we met in stairwells. Was this two metres? Did he just touch that door handle? Can I touch it? Is there any hand sanitiser left? We soon regrouped.  Schools  worked out how to be Covid-secure: one-way systems, no-go zones, policies and protocols. Still eerie, but inching slowly back to something close to normal. Sort of. My first time teaching online was anxiety-inducing. Like trees that fall in a forest with no one around to hear, my students were there but not there, absent but present. Without all the usual sensory input that makes a school a school, I became a disembodied deliverer of content, my classes only able to communicate through the chat function – a sidebar full of textspeak. (We’d been advised to not let them unmute. Welcome to the future.) But even when they can’t be seen or heard, children are never truly absent. If nothing else, a teacher is a constant in a child’s life. We’re there, every day, every week, every term, part of the furniture. It was a panic to see so many kids drop off the radar, unable to access this brave new world due to a lack of tech, a lack of will, or both. We could ask where they were and send work home, but we couldn’t drag them in. And what’s a school without pupils? I felt myself missing the interactions – good, bad and ugly – and becoming grateful when anyone turned up at all to my online lessons. In a job that’s all about communicating with people for extended periods of time, Covid is a reminder that a school is a deeply communal entity – a genuine community. Teaching  under Covid isn’t without fear. As school populations have fluctuated, the threat of transmission has grown increasingly tangible. I’ve watched the staff room thin out as colleagues have been taken ill or been forced to self-isolate, while student outbreaks have led to  bubble closures –  another piece of Covidspeak that we didn’t have last year. I caught it myself in October. Being black and part of the so-called BAME cohort that has been disproportionately affected by the outbreak, I was already at “medium risk”. This came with a risk assessment outlining what I could, should and shouldn’t do, but it’s impossible to teach and be 2 metres away from all students at all times. Not to mention wiping down every shared keyboard, mouse and photocopier display panel, or the constant handling of hundreds of exercise books. I can’t say for certain that I caught Covid at school but since my illness, I’ve been a lot more wary of the risks. It isn’t only the disease that’s to be feared, either. We’ve all seen this year how pupils’ exam results, and thus their futures, can hang in the balance of  government algorithms . How social inequalities can so easily lead to material deprivation and financial instability. A generation of young people are staring down the barrel of an exam system that Covid has shown to be precarious. When students have put their faith in your promises as a teacher, you start to wonder if you’re part of the problem or the solution. But it’s not all doom and despair. You may not believe me, with my 13 weeks’ holiday and “early” finishes, but teachers want to be at school. We want to teach. Covid has exposed the vulnerabilities of the education system but it’s also revealed what’s at the very core of being a teacher: relationships. It’s in our nature just as much as it is in our job descriptions to be there for our students when they need us. My job has always been much more than talking about books and telling kids how to pass exams. Now, more than ever, I’ve become part of the ballast for the Covid generation in deeply uncertain waters. And when the only thing that seems certain is more uncertainty to come, that’s a privileged position to be in. Jeffrey Boakye is the author of Black, Listed: Black British Culture Explored and Hold Tight: Black Masculinity, Millennials and the Meaning of Grime
To exhausted healthcare workers like me, Covid conspiracies are a kick in the teeth:	W e are nearly a year into the pandemic, yet widespread denial of the pathogen and the crisis still persists. The hard objective truths are undeniable: millions infected globally, hundreds of thousands dead and a lightning-quick scientific breakthrough with vaccines now beginning to be rolled out around the world. For most healthcare workers, life is split into two: the outward reality we share with our family and friends (the Instagram fodder of home-cooked meals and time with loved ones), and the peculiar and often traumatic inner world of working in healthcare, where supposedly once-in-a-lifetime events such as births, deaths and life-changing illness occur daily. Right now, this second world feels darker, more chaotic and uncertain. Covid is ripping through hospitals at an unprecedented rate, while an  exhausted workforce , already running on fumes not from “just another winter surge”, but due to a second wave of Covid cases worse than the first, attempts to battle it. For us, the objective truth is undeniable: patients are desperately sick. Patients who often decline quickly and suddenly, needing intensive care, ventilation and specialist support. And yet in the outer world, our social media and even newspapers amplify a different “truth”. That there is no major emergency, that it’s misdiagnosis or global hysteria, which every major country, and their established academic and medical bodies, has inexplicably and simultaneously fallen prey to. Perhaps it was too much to ask that the brief period of trusting and listening to experts during the early days of the first spike might last through the winter. These two worlds are difficult for healthcare workers to reconcile. We go to work on packed trains, rammed with maskless faces, only to arrive at hospital to treat the consequences of this lack of responsibility. We come home from wards filled with patients, faces sore from hours of wearing PPE in high-risk environments, to tweets from Covid deniers and internet trolls saying they “walked around a hospital and it wasn’t that busy anyway”. To actually do this would be idiocy, not to mention impossible – an evening sojourn would not allow access to the areas of intensive clinical care where patients with the infection are being treated. It is perhaps worth exploring a few more of these Covid myths, so that we can enjoy catharsis, if not put the issue to bed. “Patients are dying ‘with’ Covid, not ‘of’ it.”   The death certificate data from the  Office for National Statistics , which provides us with the most reliable figures on Covid deaths, records causation. But even more obvious is what a patient with Covid pneumonia looks like clinically. They have very low oxygen levels, a dense white shadow in both lungs on their X-rays, a particular pattern of low platelets and specific white blood cells, and very high marker of clotting called D-Dimer. This is a clinical pattern doctors all over the world have seen time and time again. Trust us, they are dying  of  this disease. Another bizarre claim is that our hospitals are empty. This despite  several trusts  now recording major incidents as they risk being overwhelmed, and the national database showing  England and Wales has more Covid patients  admitted than at the spring peak, and climbing. And, the worst myth of all: “Covid only kills the infirm and the elderly.” While age is a significant factor, we are routinely seeing patients in their 30s and 40s on ICU. Data from Scotland shows the  average age of admitted ICU patients  is 61, and more than 85% were living completely independent lives before they were sick. It could be any of us, or someone close to us. “My GP is still closed, so I have to go to hospital.” Your GP’s office is open. It has had to adapt to an airborne virus to protect you and its staff, but it remains open. They may triage you over the phone. If you need to be seen and examined they will organise this. Perhaps most confusingly: “It’s just like every winter for the NHS.” Firstly, winter in this country for the health service is no garden of delights. It is an ever-worsening pandemonium resulting from an underfunded, understaffed and under-resourced health service grinding on, fuelled by the goodwill of its workers. That being said, now that we face a virus that can cause such rapid deterioration on top of our annual cataclysm, and can so utterly overwhelm intensive care departments, we are indeed facing an altogether worse proposition. On Wednesday alone,  981 people died  of Covid. The virus has returned in full and terrifying force. But public goodwill seems not to have done so to the same degree as in spring. The attacks from Covid deniers are a kick in the teeth. Their claims cause outrage among staff exhausted by shifts, only to have their lived experience, their sacrifice and their suffering, and the suffering of the patients in front of them, denied. In our role as trustees of the Healthcare Workers’ Foundation we are doing all we can to support the welfare and wellbeing of staff through counselling and PPE support where we can. Where we can’t, we support their bereaved families with respite and practical and educational support for their children. We see the impact on healthcare workers not just of the virus but of myths like those above. No one is immune: by August  620 health and social care workers had died  from Covid-19. All left families and loved ones behind. This pandemic is gruelling. The measures to control it impinge on our quality of life, hurt our freedoms, undermine our rights. But to demand rights and deny responsibilities isn’t rebellion, it’s adolescence. The inner world of medics is fast becoming a war zone. And once again it is hidden from public view, except for those unlucky enough to find themselves on the inside, as patients. For those sceptics demanding to see this world with their own eyes, I hope your demands are never met for your own sake. Jeeves Wijesuriya is a junior doctor working at a London hospital and a member of the Healthcare Workers’ Foundation
Another lockdown was inevitable. We have to get this one right:	A   third lockdown  for England was inevitable. Pressure on the NHS is growing as it deals with new infections from a variant of the coronavirus that scientists estimate is 50-70% more transmissible. New infections continue to climb past 50,000 each day, and daily deaths are in the hundreds. A few weeks ago, many felt optimistic that vaccines could return England to normal by the spring. Instead, it seems we are entering a dangerous new chapter of this pandemic. It’s easy to feel frustrated by the government’s response to this pandemic, and wonder why it hasn’t acted sooner. Ministers wasted an opportunity to suppress the virus in the summer when cases were low, and instead chose to open up quickly and recklessly after the first national lockdown. The government  subsidised people to eat out  in restaurants and bars, and encouraged holidays abroad via “ travel corridors ” without any kind of testing or quarantine restrictions for when travellers returned. It was always likely that, if uncontrolled, the virus that causes Covid-19 would mutate. High prevalence created more opportunities for a variant to emerge that now appears to be spreading at a worrying pace. Where does this leave the UK? Among scientists, optimism about several approved vaccines is tempered by serious concerns about the new variant, and what the next weeks have in store. Sage experts note that even with restrictions in place, it will be a challenge to stop the  spread of this new variant  over the next few weeks.  Several fringe scientists have argued that this builds a stronger case for the government to allow the virus to spread through younger, healthier members of the population.   Aside from the opportunities this would create for more mutations to emerge,  new data  from Manaus, Brazil, shows just how catastrophic an uncontrolled epidemic would be. An estimated 76% of people   have been exposed to Covid-19, and the epidemic is still continuing. Applying age-specific infection fatality rates from Manaus, a 76% attack rate would mean 350,000 deaths in the UK and 1.58 million deaths in the US. Manaus has a particularly young population, so the fatality rate is likely lower there than it would be in the more elderly demographics of western Europe and North America. The substantial rate of serious illness associated with Covid-19 also underlines the risks of exposing a large percentage of the population to a virus that is still not fully understood. Even a plan to allow the virus to run through the population would require restrictions, because the high rate of hospitalisation that results from Covid infections is dangerous to everyone. If hospitals are full, patients of all stripes – whether they’re suffering from a heart attack or a road traffic injury – can’t get the necessary treatment. And without spare beds, Covid-19 patients can’t get access to the ICU care they need to stay alive. The opposite response to this is what has been called a maximum suppression or “zero Covid” model. But at this stage, with the Office for National Statistics estimating that England is  around 100,000 infections a day , and the new variant putting pressure on the NHS and the test-and-trace system, pursuing this strategy no longer seems feasible. The immediate priority should be surviving the next few months without the NHS collapsing, and planning for a robust response to eliminate Covid in the spring and summer. Vaccinating as many people as quickly as possible will be key to this. The UK has decided to  vaccinate more people with one dose  rather than fewer people with two. This is an ethical and political judgment rather than a scientific one; waiting for follow-up doses to be delivered carries huge costs. But vaccinating everyone will take time, which is why a national lockdown was necessary. Schools will be closed until mid-February, except for the most vulnerable children and those of essential workers. This will reduce community transmission and allow scientists to gather new evidence about the variant. As always, mass testing and supported isolation are central to controlling the virus. Both during the lockdown and after these new restrictions are lifted, we should be testing people rapidly to identify those who are carriers, and ensuring those who must isolate have the resources – both financial and practical – to spend 10 days alone. That isolation is an act of goodwill is something the government has repeatedly overlooked during this pandemic, and those who are isolating need to be compensated for doing so. The government has spent many months and billions of pounds on its testing-and-tracing strategy. So it’s surprising that, despite these efforts, its approach to visitors arriving from overseas is still so lax. Preventing the import of Covid-19 cases and variants requires robust testing and quarantine procedures at our borders. Yet people are allowed in to the UK without a negative Covid test result, and pictures of crowding at airports – in contrast to the carefully planned approach of countries such as South Korea – do little to instil confidence in the safety of this approach. Finally, and most importantly, we need to follow these new restrictions, continue to distance from each and avoid crowded spaces and public transport, wear face coverings, and do our best to avoid getting infected and passing the virus on. We must deprive it of any opportunities to survive and infect others. In the spring, longer days and mass vaccinations will give us another chance to eliminate Covid and prepare for the coming winter. The UK’s health and economy depends upon it. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh
Britain could be mass-producing its Covid shot. Shame we junked our industrial base:	E verything now hinges on a vaccine: how many more Britons die, whether the NHS finally breaks, how long the UK stays locked down. All depends on how fast the country can get vaccinated against this plague. Yet we’re in this position in large part because of government failure. When the prime minister imposes lockdowns late and with a sulky grumble; when we haven’t  fixed our £22bn test-and-trace system  (which, by the way, now  bankrolls more outside consultants and contractors  than the Treasury has actual civil servants); and when the  Dominics  and  Stanleys  are allowed to carry on as if rules are for the little people. If Boris Johnson blunts every political instrument he can lay his pale and meaty hands on, pretty soon a syringe is the only resort. Vaccines were always going to be how the world limped out of this pandemic; but as Taiwan and New Zealand  show , even without inoculation it is possible to drive the number of Covid cases significantly down. Compare their record with the UK – which is on course to hit 100,000 Covid-related deaths before January is out, and where a staggering  one in 30 Londoners  is today infected. The lecterns from which Johnson and his top advisers gave their press conference this week read “Stay Home. Protect the NHS. Save Lives” – exactly as they did at the start of all this last March, as if to confirm how little progress they have made in almost a year. For all the anger and anguish caused by this week’s lockdown, modelling suggests it is simply too late to make much difference. Analysis from the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine shows that shoving all of England into tier 4 and shutting its schools will  barely dent  the total number of Covid deaths. The only major impact will be immunising 2 million people a week. That’s the kind of goal this prime minister loves to punt at, before missing by miles. This serum could be a similar story. Last summer the health secretary, Matt Hancock, boasted to parliament that “we have  already secured 100 million doses  of the Oxford vaccine”. This became “30 million doses  available by September ”, which was swiftly halved to “ aiming to deliver  up to 15 million doses … in 2020”. Those millions were nowhere to be seen on Monday morning, as Johnson posed for the cameras at a London hospital delivering the first doses of the Oxford vaccine. His government had only 530,000 shots ready to go, with another 450,000 due this week. Compare that with the Serum Institute of India, which already has  50 million doses  ready to ship, and plans soon to make double that each month. Meanwhile in the UK, Chris Whitty and his fellow chief medical officers jointly warn: “Vaccine shortage is a  reality that cannot be wished away .” So: another Boris balls-up? It is more troubling than that, and reveals more about the state of this country. In many respects, the UK goes into this mass inoculation as well-prepared as possible. Standing ready to deliver the doses are not only NHS staff but, remarkably, a  volunteer army  of retired medics. The regulator moved speedily to approve both the Pfizer/BioNTech and the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccines. And Britain is blessed with world-class scientists, which is why we have a homegrown shot. But if the UK’s future depends on a vaccine, where are its vaccine factories? It is a fundamental question, yet one that only scientists appear to be asking. And their answer is utterly damning. Listen to John Bell, regius professor of medicine at Oxford and key figure in its partnership with AstraZeneca to develop a British vaccine. This weekend he told the Times: “The government has been  completely disinterested  in building onshore capacity for any of the life-sciences products … And it turns out that manufacturing is a strategic asset for health security when stuff gets tough.” Like now. The UK lurched into this pandemic with only one injectable-vaccine factory of any size, a situation described by the head of the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, Peter Piot, as “a national security risk”. What does he mean? The Serum Institute of India was ordered on Sunday to surrender  all of its Oxford/AstraZeneca shots  to the Indian government. Its contracts to make 1bn shots for the rest of the world could go hang. This is vaccine nationalism, and there is no guarantee that the UK, currently relying on other countries for its vaccine supply, will not be caught on the wrong end. As Piot says: “It will be your own people first.” His nightmare scenario has long been known about. For years, the threat of a pandemic has topped the government’s risk register. For almost as long, Whitehall has commissioned papers bemoaning the UK’s lack of vaccine and medicine manufacturing. Yet pharmaceutical companies, which often draw heavily on subsidy from the British taxpayer, have continued to run down their manufacturing in the UK and to stick their factories wherever they get tax breaks: Ireland, Belgium, Singapore. In 2018, the government invested public money in a Vaccines Manufacturing and Innovation Centre. It is due to open by the end of this year, just after the entire country has already been injected. Had it been running now, the UK would almost certainly be a lot further along in the mass vaccination programme. As it is, Whitehall and the private sector have had to cobble together a domestic supply chain by repurposing other factories. Amid all this, ministers have carried on slapping their own backs over “the  extraordinary bioscience sector ”, as Johnson called it in his first speech as prime minister, without looking too closely at what it does and where. When Hancock hails the Oxford vaccine as “a great British success story”, who but the stony-hearted would deny him a celebration? Yet the UK pharmaceuticals industry is neither great nor especially British. It is really two giant companies – AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline – sitting atop a flotilla of biotech research firms. And more than half of its world-leading research happens in just three cities: Oxford, Cambridge and London. As Prof Richard Jones of Manchester University says: “[The industry’s] priorities are  not set by the needs  of the UK healthcare system, or the burdens of ill health faced by the UK’s population.” Instead its main focus is producing expensive drugs to be paid for by private US healthcare providers. Each stage of this pandemic has revealed another British pathology. We were late to lock down because of an inept political class chronically unserious in the face of a serious threat. We handed over our vital test-and-trace system to a bunch of pirates in pinstripes because we think the private sector is magic and ignore the public realm’s expertise. And now we rely for our vaccine programme on an industry that has run down its manufacturing in this country. Such are the UK’s underlying conditions, ignored or accepted for so long, and they are being preyed upon by this killer virus. •  Aditya Chakrabortty is a Guardian columnist and senior economics commentator
How modelling Covid has changed the way we think about epidemics:	T hink back on some of the things you learned about Covid-19 in 2020: information such as “fatality risk” and “incubation period”; the potential for “ super-spreading events ” , and the fact that transmission can happen before symptoms appear. There were  the suggestions  in mid-January that the Covid-19 outbreak in Wuhan was much larger than initial reports suggested, and we learned how Wuhan’s subsequent lockdown led to a reduction in transmission. What links these early insights? All of them involved epidemic modelling, which would become a prominent part of the Covid-19 response. In essence, a model is a structured way of thinking about the dynamics of an epidemic. It allows us to take the knowledge we have, make some plausible assumptions based on that knowledge, then look at the logical implications of those assumptions. We can then compare our results with available datasets, to understand what might be driving the patterns we see. Models can help us make sense of patchy early data and explore possible outcomes – such as future epidemic waves – that haven’t happened yet. During prior disease epidemics, such as  swine flu in 2009  and  Ebola in 2014–15 , the public rarely got to see modelling insights until they were later published in scientific papers. In contrast, Covid-19 researchers have routinely built online dashboards so people  can track  transmission levels and compare possible scenarios, while also making pre-print reports rapidly available. In their efforts to   understand the new coronavirus variants detected in the UK and South Africa, researchers have shared real-time modelling analysis of genetic data and case trends, with  platforms such as Nextstrain  making it possible to see how these variants are spreading globally. Despite these developments, the pandemic has shown there is still more to do. Outbreak research should ideally be fast, reliable and publicly available. But the pressures of real-time Covid-19 analysis – which many academics have done in their spare time without dedicated funding – can force difficult choices. Should researchers prioritise updating scenarios for governments and health agencies, writing detailed papers describing their methods, or helping others adapt the models to answer different questions? These are not new problems, but the pandemic gave them new urgency. In the US, for example, the  most comprehensive Covid-19 databases  have been run by volunteers. The pandemic has flagged inefficient and unsustainable features of modelling and outbreak analysis, and illustrated that there is a clear need for change. Alongside coverage of specific modelling studies, mathematical concepts have also become part of everyday discussions. Whether talking about reproduction numbers, lags in data, or how vaccines might protect the non-vaccinated through “herd immunity”, journalists have started to think more deeply about epidemic dynamics. Prior to the outbreak, I never thought I’d end up fielding media requests to discuss a statistical parameter such as “K”, which quantifies the potential for super-spreading. Unfortunately, there have been challenges with coverage too. Some modelling results – particularly in the early stages of the pandemic – were widely misinterpreted, like the  headlines in March suggesting  half of the UK might have already been infected. Throughout summer and autumn, research groups also had to contend with media critics who misled the public with claims that the pandemic was over, dismissing warnings about the potential for a large second wave. Given the European epidemic waves to date, there can be little doubt that in the absence of control measures, Covid-19 would have been catastrophic for our health systems. Across the world, populations altered their behaviour in response to growing epidemics, but the extent of this unprecedented shift – and its effect on spread – was extremely hard to predict at the start of last year. Although infections such as  Ebola  and  Sars  have previously spurred behaviour change, Covid-19 triggered shutdowns of society on a scale unseen since the 1918 influenza pandemic. As well as modelling the spread of disease, researchers have had to track the dynamics of social behaviour. Because of  modern digital footprints , they have been able to do this in more detail than ever, providing unique insights into how individuals and communities respond to outbreaks. These behavioural changes, whether driven by explicit government policies or local awareness of infection risk, have in turn had complex social, economic and health impacts. Untangling such effects will no doubt be the subject of research far into the future. Covid-19 has cemented a growing trend for research teams that work across multiple aspects of disease dynamics, from modelling and epidemiology to immunology and human behaviour. In the UK, researchers involved in modelling the disease have set up studies of  social interactions  and  infection levels  within communities, with these datasets then feeding back into new models. As well as interdisciplinary links, there have also been new international connections. Political responses to the pandemic have been country-specific, but throughout 2020, scientific insights – including datasets, modelling results and code – were shared and built upon by teams across multiple continents. Past epidemics have brought mathematical tools to new audiences, but the scale of Covid-19 has resulted in epidemiological ideas being exchanged across disciplines and borders as never before. If sustained, such collaborations and networks could be hugely valuable in tackling other global epidemic challenges in future. The events of last year have altered the dynamics of many diseases, beyond Covid-19, as seen in  the disappearance  of certain seasonal infections or  the disruption  of vaccination programmes. Had the pandemic not happened, I would have spent much of 2020 abroad, setting up studies of influenza, Zika and dengue. When these projects eventually resume, will we see smaller outbreaks than before, or belated large epidemics? The pandemic has created a tragic “ natural experiment ”, a once-in-a-century jolt to disease ecosystems that could produce unexpected insights into immunity, social behaviour, seasonal effects and evolution. We’ve learned a lot about Covid-19 in the past 12 months, but there’s much more that modelling will help us discover in the coming years. Adam Kucharski is an associate professor at the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine and author of The Rules of Contagion
Covid has brought schoolchildren terrible stress – but they've also seen society at its best:	A nxiety about the current cohort of schoolchildren is now at the forefront of concerns about the legacy of the pandemic. Recent changes of policy on school opening and exams has focused attention on their mental health, the lack of formal learning and qualifications, and the long-term damage to social mobility. But, along with these difficult experiences, the pandemic may also be delivering another kind of education: an informal education in social connectedness and compassion. What’s happening to schoolchildren at the moment, particularly teens affected by the exam shambles, is as tough as it gets. Their social interaction has been drastically curtailed. Any freedoms they might have been gradually trying to negotiate with their parents have come to an abrupt halt. They are now mainly confined at home. Terrible stresses have been created by uncertainties and sudden reversals. One minute they are preparing for the new term. Next minute, school is out. One minute exams will “definitely happen”. Next minute, they are cancelled. If that wasn’t enough to create major anxiety, there’s the background threat of the disease, becoming ever more real as they personally encounter more cases. A friend gave me a picture of what this has been like for her sixth-former son who has studied hard for his exams for the last few weeks and now feels all his work is wasted and his motivation hard to recapture. Not only is his schooling disrupted but “normal” socialising is too. Just before Christmas he spent his birthday outdoors with five other friends and then a family meal at home. Christmas, normally a lively occasion, was just the family again. Her children, says my friend, “feel angry and frustrated”. However, she adds, “there aren’t tantrums. They do understand the wider implications. They are responsible and realise the consequences of their actions.” It’s striking that, along with disappointment and fear, this generation is also articulating thoughtfulness, wisdom even, about their situation. One 16-year-old girl from Huddersfield was asked on a radio news report what she felt about exam cancellations. She said she was personally hugely disappointed, having done so much work and believing she could do well. But she knew many children in the school didn’t have access to wifi and iPads at home so would be disadvantaged by exams. Cancelling them was therefore the only fair decision. In other interviews, schoolchildren have been asked what they most want when lockdown is over. Time and again the answer is “to see my grandparents”. The potential consequences of disruption to children’s education and socialisation are very serious indeed. Divine Charura, professor of counselling psychotherapy at York St John University, says Covid has resulted in much existential angst for schoolchildren, who are experiencing disconnection from their friends and family. In addition, “their normal process and rituals have been disrupted – rituals like exams, results, celebrations – which often have positive outcomes on development”. The interruption to these normal experiences and processes can affect them like loss and bereavement. Yet Charura has also noticed that children are showing “resilience”. “There’s a development of their awareness which is quite stark,” he says. “Children are demonstrating a real capacity for empathy with others. Love and compassion for others has been evident.” The discourse of the pandemic, with its instructions to stay at home and save lives, to protect the vulnerable and the elderly, and to save the NHS, has developed an awareness, says Charura, “that we are interconnected, that my actions impact on others and others’ actions are not without impact on me”.  Children  have also become aware of others’ circumstances. They realise others don’t have access to technology, or have parents who are vulnerable. Nor is it unusual for children to spontaneously reinforce social bubbles, to remind adults to wear masks, or to express indignation at those who, like Dominic Cummings, break the rules. In dark moments of the pandemic, it’s been easy to imagine that social collapse induced by extreme selfishness is imminent. So far that hasn’t happened. Instead, this generation of schoolchildren have witnessed, in real time, a society moving as one, where most people are acting in the interests of the common good. In other words they are seeing the glue that holds society together but which, at best, is often invisible and, at worst, is undermined by extreme individualism. Successive Conservative governments, especially this one, take this social glue for granted while doing everything they can to undermine it – for example, cutting back on citizenship classes and public information campaigns. Whether children strongly espouse it or wearily accept it, they now have an awareness of this common good based on empathic understanding of others. This offers the possibility that an emotionally wise and public-spirited generation might emerge from these hardest of possible circumstances. But how this generation turns out will depend on the way the stresses and anxieties of their current distressing situation are managed. Ros Coward is professor emerita of journalism at Roehampton University
How can the BBC be the voice of the nation when no such thing really exists?:	T he secret of Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour, according to its outgoing co-host  Jane Garvey , is that its listeners are unshockable. Nothing fazes them, so the show could get away with everything from smuggling feminist ideas into the ears of bored 1960s housewives, to the kind of gynaecological taboo-busting that saves lives. A female MP once told me she’d been banned from saying the word “vagina” during a local radio discussion about women’s health, and thus spent the whole interview fearing listeners wouldn’t understand her Victorian-sounding references to “the pelvic region”. Well, not on Woman’s Hour. Yet even the unshockable have their limits, and in her cheerfully professed willingness to put on air guests that “you could write off as sexist”, the show’s new lead presenter Emma Barnett may be testing them. This week she wrapped up a long and thoughtful discussion on the #MeToo movement by allowing the author  Lionel Shriver  to argue that calling out sexual harassment around the world had somehow “diminished women in the eyes of men”. Outing Harvey Weinstein as a rapist was one thing, Shriver said, but moving on to more minor incidents of sexual harassment was too much. To add insult to millennial injury, she then suggested that Black Lives Matter had also gone “off the deep end” when it moved beyond  George Floyd’s murder . And in the ensuing minor rumpus lies a bigger warning for the BBC as a whole, as it struggles to come to terms with a post-Brexit cultural landscape in which its right to exist is no longer taken for granted – all fuelled by an onslaught against it in the rightwing media. The corporation is coming under increasing political pressure to change what Oliver Dowden, the culture secretary, called its “ narrow urban outlook ” – widely seen as code for being too liberal – and engage with the very far from woke .  Its new director-general, Tim Davie, has already confirmed his intention to broaden the BBC’s audience and   this week its new chair was confirmed as  Richard Sharp , a Brexit-supporting board member of the hard-right thinktank Centre for Policy Studies and an ex-adviser to Rishi Sunak who has donated £400,000 to the Conservative party. The message from Downing Street is clear: times are changing, and if the corporation wants to continue being funded by increasingly bolshie licence-fee payers, it had better keep up. With what, exactly? Well, according to polling commissioned and published by the Times (which now has its own dog in the fight thanks to its new broadcasting arm, Times Radio), 44% of Britons no longer think the broadcaster reflects their values, rising to 58% of Brexiters. Men living outside London and the south-east were most disgruntled. This isn’t so much about party politics as a set of socially conservative world views – that feminism has gone too far, that you can’t say what you think about immigration – and if the BBC won’t cater for them, then commercial rivals will. This week,  GB News  – a new venture fronted by the former BBC interviewer Andrew Neil – announced that it had raised £60m to fund a “boldly different” channel targeting “communities outside London”. All of which leaves the BBC delicately balancing its own survival against its journalistic duty to the truth. And given the extraordinary scenes in Washington this week, there are many viewers who already think it’s pandering dangerously far to the right. The classic journalistic answer is not to deny a platform to those whose views make us uncomfortable, but to debate them right out in the open; to accept these arguments aren’t going away, and confront them. Yet if that was the intention of the #MeToo Woman’s Hour, featuring two of Harvey Weinstein’s victims and a campaigner against gendered violence as well as Shriver, it only illustrated the possible pitfalls. The black actor  Kelechi Okafor , who might well have pulled up Shriver on her remarks, dropped out minutes before the programme went live after overhearing Barnett and her producers discussing how to handle Okafor’s past defence of allegedly antisemitic comments. (Some wondered why the only black guest had to be challenged about her past while Shriver’s own history of inflammatory remarks about race went unmentioned.) It’s only the  first week  of the new-look Woman’s Hour, and it may well soon settle down; Barnett is a brilliant interviewer who ate politicians for breakfast on her BBC 5 live show, and I’d bet on her finding her stride. But the broader question for the BBC remains. It is being asked to become the voice of the nation at time when no such thing really exists, if it ever did; when we have merely a cacophony of squabbling voices, some of them barely coherent. Viewers and listeners need our national broadcaster not simply to reflect the din back at us, but to identify the voices that really need to be heard. Somehow it must find the signal again, growing increasingly lost among the noise. Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist
If Boris Johnson had any vision he would invest in people, not buildings:	W hat do politicians desperate for headlines always promise? They promise to build something. On the day I heard my penniless local youth club was about to close, Boris Johnson offered a staggering £100m every week for 20 years to build just one new railway, HS2. Last weekend it was  announced  that two-thirds of small youth clubs in England were facing closure, with 20% already closing or closed and 30% likely to go by June. According to the charity UK Youth, these groups are in the absolute frontline of social work, at a time when an estimated 1.5 million young people are at risk of domestic upheaval, school rejection, gangs, drugs and prison. While the nation can worry over children and students facing the loss of exams, most will survive. It is those who fall through the net who may not – and the costs to society will greatly exceed the amount needed to support them now. The chief reason for the apparently imminent collapse of youth clubs is that they are not a priority. Those who use them only become a charge on the state when such services have failed and young people are formally taken into custody or care. Even then they are not safe, given recent publicity for  unregulated care hostels  and cuts to probationary care. To me, a youth club comes before a school in priority, as a homeless shelter comes before a council estate. Of the £750m supposedly assigned to charities under the Covid spending splurge, just  £34m is going on youth care . This is after an extraordinary  23% fall  in money for those services over the past 10 years of austerity. This is the result not just of Whitehall’s hostility to localism but of services such as youth clubs being seen as a discretionary luxury. They are as vital to community security as neighbourhood policing, but prime ministers never pledge them billions. The political bias in favour of physical infrastructure against money for people is universal. Joe Biden’s most lavish gesture to his voters at the recent election was a  pledge to spend  $2tn  on “roads, bridges and electric-car charging points” – though these are not even federal responsibilities. Spending huge sums on construction is customarily the action of autocrats and those craving immortality. Egypt is now planning an entire  new capital city  in the desert. President Modi of India wants to surround Lutyens’ majestic Rajpath in Delhi with the  blocks of his vast bureaucratic estate . China’s leaders spent $1.3tn on infrastructure in 2019, despite the Economist reporting that more than half of such spending is estimated to have “destroyed” economic value rather than created it.  Since I have never known a well-paid accountant to declare a government project loss-making in advance – not even HS2 – there is no sensible check on this extravagance. Future not current generations of taxpayers will usually have to find the money to pay for it. Ever since he was London mayor, Johnson was as mesmerised as George Osborne by the machismo of the hard hat. His fixation was on estuary airports, Olympic cities, super-sewers, zip-wires and garden bridges. He spent almost as much on not building the  Thames garden bridge, £43m , than was needed just  to prevent Hammersmith Bridge from rotting  into disuse. The difference was that one was a headline, the other not. A classic of Johnson’s infrastructure syndrome is the Nightingale hospitals. It beggars belief that no one in Downing Street asked if they could ever be adequately staffed. The answer was no, but no one dared give it. We now face precisely the capacity crisis the hospitals were intended to avert, while any doctor or nurse eager to come out of retirement is  turned away by NHS bureaucracy . When Johnson then announced his way out of the coronavirus recession last summer, he put on a hi-vis jacket and  promised £5bn  to “build back better”, pledging 29 road projects, 50 schools and countless colleges, prisons and hospitals. In today’s Whitehall it is a sin to be a human being rather than a concrete mixer. The emphasis of government is on hospitals rather than doctors, on schools rather than teachers, on museums rather than their contents.  Urban economists such as Richard Florida  have pleaded for years for cities to be seen not as constructs but as hubs of creativity, as places where people can find excitement, companionship and safety. This vision must underpin the revival of cities after the pandemic. Johnson’s legitimate concern for the resurgence of the north requires awarding its cities the ability to attract and retain human talent. This must lie in the quality of life and culture, the reduction of deprivation and care for the environment. It means reviving the boring things that are now being starved of money – gardens, pubs, concerts, day centres, youth clubs; not bridges, hard hats and headlines. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist
What happened in Washington DC is happening around the world:	J ust one day after black women, once again, protected US democracy in Georgia, white men were attacking the very symbol of that democracy in Washington DC. The first attack was actually mounted from inside, by a group of Republican congressmembers, who challenged Joe Biden’s election victory. The second attack started outside, as a pro-Trump and “Stop the Steal” rally, and ended inside, with a mob of far-right protesters breaking through the remarkably weak police cordon and illegally entering the US Capitol. I have been studying the international far right for almost 30 years now and have never seen them as emboldened as in the last years. To be clear, this is not just about Donald Trump or the US. Just last year mostly far-right anti-vaccine protesters tried to  storm the Reichstag , the German parliament, also facing remarkably weak police resistance. And in the Netherlands,  angry farmers , often led by the far-right Farmers Defence Force, have been destroying government offices and threatening politicians since 2019. Even further back, in 2006, far-right mobs stormed the Hungarian state television headquarters and battled the police for weeks in the streets of  Budapest  – in many ways the start of the radicalization and return to power of current prime minister Viktor Orbán. How and why did we get here? First and foremost, through a long process of cowardice, failures, and shortsighted opportunism of the mainstream right. Already in 2012, in the wake of the deadly terrorist attack on a Sikh temple in Wisconsin, by a longtime prominent neo-Nazi,  I wrote , “the extremist rhetoric that comes from so-called law-abiding patriots should be taken more seriously”. I advised Republican leaders to “be more careful in choosing their company and insinuations”. What happened, however, was the opposite: far-right ideas and people were mainstreamed rather than ostracized. As in so many other things,  Donald Trump  has been a major catalyst of this process, but not its initiator. The radicalization of the US right wing predates Trump by decades. It even predates the Tea Party, which mostly helped to bring the far right into the heart of the Republican party. Obviously, racism and racist dog-whistling have been key to the party since they launched their infamous “southern strategy” in the 1970s, which brought white southerners to the Republican party, but this goes far beyond that. The radicalization is not just ideological, it is anti-systemic. In the past decades rightwing politicians and pundits have opportunistically pandered to the far-right electorate by defining them as “the real people” and declaring this loud minority to be an allegedly victimized silent majority. While this is again a much broader process, it has played out very strongly in the US, where it was amplified by a booming “conservative” media network, from talk radio to Fox News, as well as the still formidable infrastructure of the religious right. It was so successful that, already before Trump won the presidency, a majority of  white evangelicals  believed that “discrimination against whites is now as critical as discrimination against non-whites”. A year later,  a poll  found that a majority of white evangelicals believed they are more discriminated than Muslims in the US. It is high time journalists, politicians and pundits see the far right for what it is: a threat to liberal democracy The discourse of “white victimhood” is no longer a purely rightwing phenomenon, however. Whenever far-right successes take mainstream media and politics by surprise, they overcompensate, and go from denouncing or ignoring “the racists” to defending or even exalting them. For years now, journalists and politicians have been minimizing the importance of racism and pushing the narrative of “economic anxiety”. Racists became “the left behind” or simply “the people” – even in countries where the far right barely polled above 10% of the national vote. Undoubtedly, some rightwing politicians and pundits really believe their own propaganda, but the vast majority knows very well that the far-right electorate constitutes only a minority of the population and that white people – whether Evangelical or not – do not face anywhere near as much discrimination as Muslims, or other non-white and non-Christian groups. And if they don’t believe it, then ask them this question: do you really think these protesters would have made it into the Capitol if they had been African American or Muslim? Most politicians and pundits probably initially pandered to these groups for opportunistic reasons, hoping to win far-right support. But as the far right got more and more emboldened, and violent, the mainstream right became more and more afraid. Many mainstream politicians and other elites no longer dare to speak out against the far right, afraid to be personally and politically threatened by their mob. The increasingly bold and open political violence of far-right gangs and mobs should be a wake-up call to all enablers of, and peddlers to, the far right. You don’t control them. They control you. And while these gangs don’t represent the broader part of the population that holds far-right views, or supports far-right candidates and parties, fundamentally they share a similar worldview. And in this view there is no space for nuance or compromise. You are either an ally, on their terms, or an enemy. And there is no mercy for enemies, not even for former allies. Just ask Georgia Governor Brian Kemp, or Brad Raffensperger, the secretary of state. It is therefore high time that liberal democratic journalists, politicians, and pundits finally see the far right for what it is: a threat to liberal democracy. A formidable threat, for sure, but also a threat can only succeed with the tacit help of the mainstream, either by opportunistic coalitions or by cowardly non-responses. We are not in the 1930s. Today, the vast majority of Americans and Europeans support liberal democracy. But they have become the silent majority, increasingly ignored and unprotected by its representatives. It is time to stand up to the far right and for liberal democracy. It is time to call out the racism and undemocratic discourses and behaviors of the far right. And it is time to clearly and openly reject the toxic narrative of white victimhood. Of course, we should acknowledge the struggle of parts of the white population, notably the farmers and workers, but not at the expense of the non-white population or of liberal democracy. •  This article was amended on 7 and 8 January 2020. A reference to a phrase being shouted by protesters was removed, due to the phrase not being entirely clear in the relevant footage. And it was the headquarters of Hungarian state television that protesters stormed in 2006, rather than the Hungarian parliament as an earlier version stated. Cas Mudde is a Guardian US columnist
During lockdown, I’ve found solace in online recipe comments:	O n a recipe for  spicy butternut squash pasta with spinach , posted by the New York Times in October of last year, a commenter did not mince their words. “This recipe turned out horribly,” they wrote. “The timing was incorrect and the spice quantities questionable. Honestly why throw jalapeno rounds on top of red pepper flakes (and I like spice) without rounding it out with other flavors? Wish I had gone curry… but with that profile the cheese flavors don’t mix and you’d have to sub in something more appropriate. The result, compound by two competing Presidential town halls, has basically sprained my marriage.” As I scrolled idly through the recipe comments, wondering what to do with an impulse-purchased butternut squash, that final sentence stopped me in my tracks. The recipe’s flavours, according to this commenter, had not only been wrong, but had apparently contributed to a “sprained marriage”. This figuration of a relationship –not broken, but bent badly out of joint – was strangely charming. It was also poignant: one wondered, after all, what had gone on with the duelling presidential town halls? Was the marriage able to recover from the squash-bake-gate? It was a compelling story, one without an ending, just a fragment of someone else’s life that was caught in the mix of a complaint about flavours. Over the past few months, I have been lurking increasingly in the comments sections on recipes and coming on stories like these. Comments sections, like much of the social internet, can be explosively hostile, especially when only lightly moderated or left to run their course. This hostility can and does spill over into recipe comments, of course. Fights break out over whether recipes are culturally appropriative, the ethics of eating animals and, of course, whether another commenter has followed the recipe. Like the rest of the world of food and cooking, recipe comments are not a sacrosanct space apart from or above the fray, and nor should they be. But I am interested in the way in which these spaces form a kind of makeshift, loose community, one that reminds me more of the early internet than social media. Recipe commenters are a group of people, most of whom have followed the same set of instructions and then returned to report on their results, to ask questions and to opine on the experience. Unlike social media platforms such as Twitter and Facebook, which can feel like millions of strangers posting into a contextless void, having millions of separate conversations that occasionally overlap, recipe comment sections confer a built-in common interest, at the very least, in pursuing the same cooking project. As such, recipe comments are often practical: this requires much more salt. Miso makes a good vegan substitute for anchovies. Will it still taste good without the parsley? In providing verdicts on the recipe itself, commenters are often brutally honest: “Even the look was unappealing – was embarrassed just serving the family,” someone wrote, on a recipe for  chicken tetrazinni . And they are also often heartwarming, as on a recent Rachel Roddy recipe for  roast pumpkin, mushroom and chestnut pie  published in the Guardian: “What a lovely expression, ‘keep expectations flexible’. Yesterday my sister and I were discussing any memory of the quality of what we ate at Christmas as children. We concluded that we probably didn’t assess the quality, the meals simply needed to have the expected components. I also love the ‘at some point’ aspect of this article. My younger sister and I long ago latched onto the ‘do what happens next’ aspect of flexible family life. Our plans are practically never etched in tablets of stone. This pie looks delicious and we have everything bar the ricotta which didn’t figure on today’s amazing Christmas slot delivery. We do have plenty of suitable substitutes though and I really fancy having this at some point in the ‘12 days’.” I originally came to reading recipe comments in large part for their use value. But now I also find myself scanning them for something else – the glimmers of the personal, perhaps, the funny and sometimes snarky voices of the commenters and the running conversations. On a recent set of  Yotam Ottolenghi recipes , one commenter wrote that he was looking forward to making it but had sliced his thumb while cooking on New Year’s Eve; another responded, “Oh Thomas. I hope the thumb isn’t too bad” and recommended a pair of cooking gloves. Elsewhere, on Rachel Roddy’s recipe for  rice and cabbage soup , someone wrote: “Lovely food but I am depressed that anyone might need a recipe to produce this. Surely anyone with any feeling for food as something that nourishes the body and soul should be able to put this together without being told how to do it?” This inspired a lengthy thread on the value of recipes, even for the simplest of foods. The recipe comments function like a virtual watering hole where strangers swap tips and stories and occasionally the stray insight. (On a  stuffing recipe , someone wrote, cryptically: “People threaten revolt all the time, but it never really happens.”) There are even, occasionally, missed connections. On the same squash pasta recipe where one commenter complained of bad flavours and marriage troubles, someone else wrote, poignantly, “I added a carrot to the squash for more color and I wish I had a family to which I could serve this.” The next day, a few comments down, someone wrote, “Where do you live? I’ll swing by for a to-go order.” It seems improbable that these commenters – stymied by a lack of direct “reply” function, perhaps, and also by the fact of being two strangers on the internet likely many miles apart – were able to meet, in the end, over butternut squash pasta with spinach. But there is something moving in imagining that meeting, and seeing strange sparks of possibility that can still exist in digital communities – and in the comments. Sophie Haigney writes about technology and culture for the New York Times, the New Yorker and the Atlantic
Key workers are fighting coronavirus on the front lines. They must be protected:	T he news that NHS staff have administered  1.2m inoculations  is a really positive moment in an otherwise devastating week for our country. There is immense pride among health workers able to protect the most vulnerable and witnessing at first hand the enormous gratitude and relief of patients. This light is so important amid the darkness. But in the past week over 230,000 cases have been recorded, including  more than 60,000 in a single day , a new dismal high; 30,000 have been admitted to hospital. Almost 3,000 are fighting for their lives  in ICU ventilation . Per capita, the UK has more  new cases than any other major country  in the world. Our health service has been under-resourced and understaffed for years under the Tories. Now it is pushed to the limit. Oxygen supplies are under pressure, important operations have been cancelled, ambulances are backed up, and hospitals warn they  could be soon overwhelmed . Questions about emergency rationing are starting to be tentatively raised. The NHS is in its hour of greatest need, and it cannot dial 999. No one should be surprised we are in another lockdown, the real question is: why did the government not take action sooner, saving lives and limiting the growth of the next wave? Matt Hancock reported a  new strain had been identified  on 14 December, the prime minister  learned of its infectiousness  on 18 December. The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage)  raised the prospect  of lockdown on 22 December. Where was the urgency and focus from the prime minister? Yet again the government was slow to act, outpaced by the exponential growth of this deadly virus. How come the prime minister, with all the scientific expertise at his disposal, all the power to make a difference, keeps on getting it wrong? The government hasn’t been short of data, it has been short of judgment. It is as though the prime minister has been allowing the virus to make all the big decisions. With  almost 80,000 dead , we can’t have more tragic delay. Breaking chains of transmission, squashing infections and rapid vaccination rollout are all now fiercely urgent. First, on transmission, there are  10 million key workers  across the UK, the vast majority of whom aren’t able to work from home on laptops. Our key workers are the backbone of our country, yet the Tories take their efforts and their health for granted. Many are low paid, use public transport to get to work and, by the nature of their jobs, experience social mixing. By going to work to keep society functioning they are exposing themselves and their families to greater risk. They deserve so much better. Making every workplace Covid-secure must be a national priority. The TUC is urging workplace safety guidance to be updated to include greater use of mask wearing, social distancing and, crucially, the introduction of safety standards for ventilation. This crisis has brought society’s fractures into sharper focus. Covid  exploits inequalities , with those from poorer backgrounds being disproportionately impacted by it. Is it really any wonder that fewer than 20% of those who  need to isolate  do so fully? Many of the lowest paid have been placed in an impossible situation. Too often they feel they have no option but to continue working while infected with Covid, because inadequate sick pay and isolation support would otherwise mean unpaid bills or going into debt. These holes in our defences must be fixed so that transmission is reduced. Chronic staff shortages across the NHS are now exacerbated by this rampant virus that has sent  30,000 NHS off sick . NHS staff left undefended without adequate PPE in the first wave now feel unprotected while waiting for the vaccine in the face of a raging second wave. While the government intends to vaccinate all frontline staff, given the current situation, this is not urgent enough. We’re demanding that ministers offer vaccinations to all frontline staff over the next 14 days. It is the very least they deserve. The NHS will start publishing daily vaccination figures from Monday. I urge ministers to publish daily figures of numbers of  NHS  staff vaccinated as well. Over the coming weeks we will see progress towards  the government’s target  of 14 million people being offered a jab by mid-February. But 2m injections a week shouldn’t be the limit of our ambitions – if we could vaccinate 29.6 million people,  deaths and hospitalisation will be reduced by 99%  – we should be aiming for that now. That means vaccinations being rolled out at pace. We have already seen two worrying variants emerge, with  the UK B117 strain  and the  South African strain . Put simply, the more virus there is circulating, the more opportunities it has to mutate further – mutations that could give it an advantage in evading the immune response. We are therefore in a race against evolution. For all our sakes, we need to make this lockdown work and go further and faster, both at home and across the globe, to roll out vaccination now. There isn’t a moment to lose when so many lives are on the line. Jonathan Ashworth is the Labour MP for Leicester South and shadow secretary of state for health and social care
Brexit may spell the end of the tabloid version of Englishness. Can Labour redefine it?:	F or too long, one version of Englishness has dominated British politics. Proud, white, both confident and defensive, often xenophobic, always anti-Europe, this Englishness has changed as little as the tabloid front pages that have bellowed it out for decades.  Brexit  is one of its greatest victories. The continuing Conservative ascendancy is another. Even formidable politicians of other parties have struggled to popularise a different national identity. Gordon Brown got lost in well-meaning but unconvincing generalities about the British national character:  in 2007 , he praised our “tolerance”, “decency”, and love of “fair play” and “liberty”. Tony Blair tried to adopt the language of conservative patriotism for Labour’s own purposes. One of his  election broadcasts  in 1997 intercut promises of a national revival with footage of a waking bulldog. Labour won the election, but the idea that national pride could only be expressed through such dated Churchillian symbols was left unchallenged. For anyone alienated – or worse – by the right’s continuing hold on our national identity, one of the frustrations is that for a long time, and in many ways, much of the country hasn’t resembled the tabloid England, if it ever did. Increasingly multicultural, globally connected and socially liberal, not reverent about the nation’s imperial past, and immersed instead in our cosmopolitan popular culture, tens of millions of people have been living out new forms of Englishness ever since the 1960s. The black British historian Paul Gilroy, no romantic about England, calls this the country’s  “convivial” side . The components of this alternative Englishness have been there for decades – right under our noses. And yet they have rarely been put together by politicians. Paradoxically, Brexit could change that. The disappearance of the EU bogeyman, or at least its diminution, removes much of what has energised conservative Englishness and held its factions together. Some predict that the right will simply replace its campaign against the EU with culture wars against liberal  England . With all the recent rightwing attacks on anti-racism and “wokeness”, that shift in strategy appears well under way. And yet, politically potent and socially destructive though such culture wars are, it may prove hard to define and maintain conservative Englishness purely by attacking English people rather than foreigners – by attacking the imperfect but clearly functional multicultural life of our towns and cities rather than caricatured bureaucrats in Brussels. And such culture wars risk making the diverse other England appreciate more clearly what it has in common. At the  Black Lives Matter marches  last summer, which were larger and more multiracial than many expected, you could sense the demonstrators and speakers looking round and thinking, “There are more of us than I thought.” If this other Englishness is, finally, going to be properly represented at Westminster, then the  Labour  party is for now at least the only plausible vehicle – thanks to its size, relative diversity, and continuing strength in many of England’s towns and cities. Yet making Labour think afresh about Englishness won’t be easy. So much of the party’s energy and talent has historically come from Scotland and Wales – and so associated has the politics of Englishness been with the right, and sometimes the far right, that often Labour leaders have avoided the subject of Englishness altogether.  But Brexit has made it harder for Labour to duck the issue.  Scottish independence  feels closer now that Britain has left the EU. If it happens, Labour will become even more dependent on English voters and MPs. And even if the Conservatives manage to deny Scotland another referendum, the battles required are likely to make them even more the party of aggressive English nationalism. Labour can’t realistically be that too – however much the party’s more right-curious figures, disproportionately focused on winning back patriotic voters in the “red wall”, may want to try. Trying to outbid the Tories on nationalism is likely to be as futile as trying to out-tough them on crime. Instead, Labour will probably need to offer a different vision of England. At three of the last four general elections, the Conservatives have won at least 100 more English seats than Labour. One of the Tories’ most effective tactics has been to warn that, in the event of a hung parliament, Labour would  form a coalition with the SNP  – in other words, that a Labour government would be insufficiently English. If the Tories wheel out their Labour-SNP scare stories at the next election, Labour could do with having a story to tell about modern England. The Cool Britannia phase of Tony Blair’s government, when Noel Gallagher was  invited to Downing Street  in 1997 and “creative industries” became a ministerial cliche, is usually remembered now as a cautionary tale about the danger of mixing politicians with pop stars (Gallagher later bragged that he’d taken cocaine in a Downing Street toilet). But at the time, it also felt like a breakthrough. At long last, a government was recognising the importance of popular culture – and by implication, of modernising what our national identity was about. Cool Britannia certainly did New Labour no harm at the ballot box. At the 2001 election, it won 158 more English seats than the Conservatives. During the best moments of Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, there was again a sense that Labour was taking energy from alternative forms of Englishness – not just the old dissenting tradition that Corbyn embodied, but the modern lives of many young people and minorities. In the crowd at a Corbyn rally, you saw a  different England  to the one idealised by the tabloids. Yet this England wasn’t big enough for Labour to win. And the other England is resilient: a large minority of voters still crave Boris Johnson’s English nationalism, despite all the disappointments and disasters it brings. Social change, such as the increasing ethnic-minority population, may decisively weaken the old Englishness in the end. But social change can be slow and unpredictable. A new Englishness will probably only displace the old if there is enough political will. In the middle of a pandemic, with US democracy under attack, and the UK visibly fragmenting, the future of Englishness may seem an irrelevance, especially if you’re a Scot anticipating independence. But the attempted insurrection in Washington shows what can happen when the right considers its version of what a country is to be both seriously threatened and sacrosanct. England isn’t that divided yet. But the nature of Englishness matters – not least because a less prickly and entitled version would be better for our neighbours. And it might even stop a lot of the English from feeling like foreigners in their own land. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnist
Now is the perfect time for Labour to reupload its free broadband pledge:	F ree full-fibre, publicly owned broadband was never supposed to be the flagship policy of Labour’s doomed 2019 election campaign. Earlier in the year the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, had been touring the country and hearing people complain that poor broadband was at least as much of a problem as poor transport links, and possibly a bigger one. Back in 2017, a report by  University College London  had explored “universal basic services” – that is, where the rights of citizenship include unconditional access to free services funded by progressive taxation. “This would enable access to work opportunities,” the study noted, “as well as participation in our democracy as informed citizens.” Working closely with the Communications Workers Union, the team that was commissioned to examine the policy had to keep it under tight wraps: broadband was technically under the purview of the then shadow cabinet minister Tom Watson, whose team was hostile to the idea. It was only signed off on the eve of the election campaign itself, and there was a heated debate about whether to launch it at all. But things were clearly going badly, and the leadership was desperate to shift the political debate away from Brexit, and this was the only policy that succeeded in doing so for a brief period. It faced much media ridicule, with the BBC straplining one discussion with the “Broadband ‘communism’”, a description taken from one of BT’s executives. After the election, free broadband was presented as totemic of Labour’s bewildering scatter-gunning of far-fetched commitments. “Offering people free broadband was just not believable” ahead of other priorities, as  Jess Phillips  put it, before her leadership bid crashed and burned. Who is laughing at “broadband communism” now? At the best of times, the fact that Britain has just  14% full-fibre broadband  coverage – compared with  99% in South Korea  and 97% in Japan – is inconvenient to the individual and damaging to the economy. In the midst of the pandemic, with our lives now more dependent on the internet than ever before, the consequences are starker. With schools emptied of most children because of the government’s multiple failures to suppress the virus, education depends on remote learning. But Ofcom estimates that up to 1.78 million children have no home access to a laptop, desktop or tablet: overwhelmingly these are the poorest children, for whom a lack of schooling is most damaging. Demands by the  National Education Union  to provide broadband and laptops for all children who need them have gone unmet. With so many business meetings dependent on video calls and leisure time increasingly revolving around streaming, the impact of poor-quality internet does not have to be spelled out. People are living it. Much media attention focused on the “free” aspect of Labour’s policy. The notion of universalism in economic policy – services being delivered to all, without means-testing – has been undermined for years, and so-called freebies are the easy targets of media ridicule. But the policy was about something far more profound: modernising a country trapped in the 20th century because of failures of the free market. As McDonnell saw it, it was a policy akin to the opening of libraries in the 19th century. And it would come after a decade of failure by the private sector to deliver on connectivity, and despite billions of  taxpayers’ money  thrown at companies. Broadband isn’t a luxury: it’s a necessity, without which it is impossible to be a citizen integrated into modern society. Were a publicly owned, full-fibre network to be introduced, it would boost economic growth, create jobs – not least in communities widely described as “left behind” – and have important environmental consequences. The more meetings that can be conducted online, after all, the less need for people to make emission-producing journeys. Rather than rely on failed market approaches, why shouldn’t the state – which, after all, has lower borrowing costs than the private sector – take charge, deliver it, and then own it without having to pay dividends to shareholders? Labour had envisaged the policy should be funded by taxing digital giants: as the likes of  Amazon  make record profits off the back of the pandemic, who could possibly now object?.  Rather than being abandoned as an embarrassing reminder of a calamitous election campaign, here is a policy that is more relevant than ever. During the leadership campaign, Keir Starmer promised to uphold the  commitment . It has, alas, not been heard of since, with the leader instead suggesting that companies remove  data charges  while children are learning from home. While a welcome small step, it shows a cautiousness of political imagination. In a flagship speech in September,  Starmer declared  that while “what we say at the next general election isn’t written yet … it will sound like the future arriving.” Few other policies can lay such a bold claim on the future, echoing former Labour prime minister Harold Wilson’s signature “white heat of technological change”  speech  in the 1960s. There are, of course, siren voices arguing against Labour making policy commitments so far in advance of an election. But one of the flaws with the 2019 broadband policy was precisely that it was dropped in the middle of a general election without the foundationsbeing laid. Labour has until perhaps 2024 to draw on the experiences of pandemic Britain to make an unambiguous case for this most modernising of commitments. With all of us locked in our homes, the internet has never been more central to our lives.  Labour  should show courage and salvage this policy from the wreckage of its recent past. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist
The vagina dialogues: 33-metre artwork draws far right's ire in Brazil:	A 33-metre reinforced concrete vulva has sparked a Bolsonarian backlash in  Brazil , with supporters of the country’s far-right president clashing with leftwing art admirers over the installation. The handmade sculpture, entitled Diva, was unveiled by  visual artist Juliana Notari  on Saturday at  a rural art park  on the grounds of a former sugar mill in Pernambuco, one of Brazil’s most culturally vibrant states. In  a Facebook post , Notari said the scarlet hillside vulva was intended to “question the relationship between nature and culture in our phallocentric and anthropocentric western society” and provoke debate over the “problematisation of gender”. “Nowadays these issues have become increasingly urgent,” the artist added in what appeared partly to be a reference to the increasingly intolerant climate in Jair Bolsonaro’s Brazil. That comment was immediately borne out by the angry and often obscene reactions to Notari’s art, as thousands of critics – many seemingly Bolsonaro supporters – flooded the artist’s Facebook page with their ire. “Who do you lefties think you’re fooling? Apart from useful idiots on the left, of course,” one of the more restrained detractors wrote. Bolsonaro’s US-based political guru, the professional polemicist Olavo de Carvalho, weighed in with  a customarily foul-mouthed tweet . Many responded more positively to Notari’s resin-covered sculpture, which took 11 months to build. “There’s a lot to think about in this work,” tweeted the celebrated trans cartoonist Laerte Coutinho. Another fan wrote: “I loved it! An intimate part of us exposed with such beauty. We need more such works that elevate feminism and its nuances.” Kleber Mendonça Filho, a film director from Pernambuco,  praised Notari  for responding to such a conservative moment in Brazilian history with a gigantic vulva. “The reactions to your work are a mirror [of society], a success,” he tweeted. Since taking office in 2019, Bolsonaro has repeatedly maligned culture, painting artists –  many of whom oppose his government  – as decadent spongers who milk public funds to peddle communist garbage. A succession of renowned artists died last year, many from Covid-19, and  Bolsonaro responded with silence. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021 because an earlier version, in two instances, referred to the sculpture as of a vagina, when vulva was the correct term.
Waste not, wontons: innovator recycled 32m restaurant chopsticks:	The idea was born over trays of sushi. Felix Böck, then a PhD student at Canada’s University of British Columbia, was venting his frustration over the scant interest in his proposal to use waste wood from demolition and construction sites. How, he wondered, could he convince people that there’s no such thing as waste, but rather just wasted resources? Chopsticks in hand, Thalia Otamendi, the woman who is now his fiancée, looked at him. “She said: ‘Felix, maybe you just have to start with something small,’” said Böck. “And maybe it’s the chopstick.” He started working on the idea the next day, sketching out plans for ChopValue, a startup aimed at creating a second life for used chopsticks. The plans soon coalesced into actions; recycling bins were dropped off at restaurants across Vancouver, methods were perfected to clean the utensils and a process was developed to transform the chopsticks – most of which are made from bamboo – into sleek household items that  range from tablet stands to tabletops. Four years on, ChopValue has recycled more than 32m chopsticks – diverting them from landfills and creating employment for 40 people. “These chopsticks travel 6,000 miles to arrive on your dining table for 20 to 30 minutes,” said Böck, 31. “You can’t possibly feel good about throwing them out afterwards.” The startup has expanded its footprint across North America, with its process – which uses heat, steam and pressure to transform the chopsticks into wooden tiles – now also being used in Calgary, Montreal and Los Angeles. Chopsticks are sourced from hundreds of restaurants as well as locations such as shopping centres, airports and universities; in Vancouver alone ChopValue said it collects around 350,000 used chopsticks a week. “When you walk into a restaurant and you ask them to place a recycling bin for chopsticks, they still give you the exact same look as they gave me on day one,” said Böck. “I think it’s because it’s one of these little things that we neglect. But the moment someone reminds us of that problem that’s right in front of us, it creates that immediate Aha! moment.” Among the first companies to collaborate with ChopValue was Pacific Poke, a chain of restaurants based in western  Canada . “We thought it was a great idea. We were like, why didn’t anyone else think of this?” said co-founder Dong Lam. “We’re selling a couple of hundred bowls a day so you can imagine how many chopsticks that adds up to over time.” The restaurant chain has become a fine example of the circular economy that ChopValue is seeking to foster, with most of its locations featuring  artwork and tabletops  made from chopsticks once used at the restaurant. At ChopValue, the focus is now on exporting their model. “We do want to mass produce, just on a local scale,” said Böck. His aim is a network of franchises where chopsticks could be sourced from local restaurants and transformed in nearby microfactories with the finished products sold locally. Currently the company’s products  are sold on its website  and through partnerships with retailers such as Nordstrom in the US. With each item comes a hint of its previous life, detailing the 886 chopsticks that went into making  a butcher’s block  or the 9,600 chopsticks used for a  work-from-home desk. “We’ve made money since day one,” said Böck. “We obviously reinvested every dollar we made into growth because we feel that the responsibility right now is to expand the concept globally.” His hope is that ChopValue – and the “crazy idea” behind it – will prompt people to reconsider what they see as waste. “There’s this cheesy saying that every small action matters,” he said. “But I think we’re proving that in a fairly practical and exciting way.”
Canada: politicians punished for holiday travel despite Covid warnings:	Seven members of Alberta’s provincial government have been punished for taking vacations outside  Canada  despite guidelines urging people to avoid nonessential travel during the pandemic. Alberta’s premier had previously declined to sanction the officials over their holiday trips, but on Monday, Jason Kenney reversed course, announcing he had fired his chief of staff and accepted the resignation of his municipal affairs minister. Kenney also demoted five other members of his United Conservative party (UCP) for taking flights abroad in recent weeks. The growing scandal has cast the UCP into further disarray as Alberta battles the  highest rate  of active coronavirus cases in Canada. Ahead of the Christmas holidays, officials across the country, including in Alberta, had begged residents to remain home to prevent a surge in cases. But a string of politicians at federal or provincial levels have admitted to having taken vacations outside of the country, raising fears that their behaviour could undermine confidence in Canada’s fight against the pandemic. Conservative lawmaker David Sweet announced his resignation as chair of a parliamentary committee on Monday after admitting he travelled to the United States and “for leisure” without informing party officials. Last week, Ontario’s finance minister  resigned  after taking a secret Caribbean vacation to St Barts, and  attempting to cover his tracks  on social media. A similar scandal broke in Alberta, when it emerged that Tracy Allard, minister of municipal affairs – and a key figure in the province’s Covid-19 vaccine strategy – had taken a family trip to Hawaii. Kenney’s chief of staff, Jamie Huckabay, also admitted spending time in the UK over the holidays. Huckabay had been forced to return via the US because flights between the UK and Canada have been suspended over the variant Covid strain first detected in the UK. Kenney further stoked outrage over the weekend after initially declining to sanction any party members, arguing that there was “no public health order or legal barrier” barring vacations. On Monday, however, he was forced into a U-turn and accused his scofflaw party members of “demonstrat[ing] extremely poor judgment”. “Millions of Albertans have made real sacrifices over the past 10 months to help keep each other safe. They are right to be angry about people in positions of leadership vacationing outside of the country,” Kenney wrote on Facebook.  Over the weekend #ResignKenney trended in Canada as political opponents on the left seized on Kenney’s refusal to dole out punishments. “This is a complete failure of leadership,” said the New Democratic (NDP) leader, Rachel Notley. Even right-of-centre newspapers  have condemned  the premier. “The moral authority and credibility that the Kenney government must wield in convincing Albertans to obey public-health recommendations are now severely diminished by the apparent double-standard followed by UCP politicians and staffers,” said an editorial in the Edmonton Journal. More broadly, the violation of rules without consequence risks undermining a sense of collective action in fighting the virus, said political scientist Lori Turnbull. “Does the government actually believe their own messaging? Do they think that it’s OK to travel? Do they not think that the guidelines are worth following?” she said. “It’s not about one person using bad judgment. It’s a systemic lack of adherence to the guidelines that the government itself is putting out.” On a federal level, two Liberal parliamentary secretaries – Kamal Khera and Sameer Zuberi – have stepped aside from their roles after attending memorials for family members or visiting ailing relatives. NDP member Niki Ashton has stripped of her shadow critic roles in parliament after travelling to visit her ill grandmother in Greece without telling the leader, Jagmeet Singh. But even travel out of compassion can send the wrong message when residents have made personal sacrifices during the pandemic, said Turnbull. “There are people who are living close to family members and who haven’t been able to be with them when they die. Being separated from one another has been one of the most haunting, miserable parts of this pandemic,” she said. “For many it feels politicians are breaking this rule – but we can’t.” As the federal government warn that a surge in new cases is likely following Christmas and New Year’s celebrations, Turnbull cautioned there could be long-term political fallout. “Being in elected office is a privileged position. You are holding that office, but it’s not yours. That office is connected to democracy … and have to be really, really careful, because your actions might have lasting consequences.”
Squatters issue death threats to archaeologist who discovered oldest city in the Americas:	Illegal squatters have invaded the ruins of the oldest city in the  Americas , and made death threats against Ruth Shady, the celebrated Peruvian archaeologist who discovered the 5,000-year-old civilization. The threats came via telephone calls and messages to various workers at the archeological site at the height of Peru’s Covid-19 pandemic. They followed reports to the police and prosecutors about the invasions of the ancient ruins of Caral. “They called the site’s lawyer and said if he continued to protect me they would kill him, along with me, and bury us five metres below the ground,” said Shady, 73. “Then they killed our dog as a warning. They poisoned her, as if to say, look at what will happen to you,” she said. It is not the first time Shady has been threatened or attacked. In 2003, she was shot in the chest during an assault on the 626-hectare (1,546-acre) archaeological complex which was declared a  Unesco  world heritage site in 2009. After nine invasions of the sacred city during the pandemic period, Shady and her team repeatedly asked the authorities to intervene. “There is a feeling that there is no authority dedicated to the protection and defence of our heritage. It’s a huge worry,” she said. In July, squatters using a heavy digger knocked down adobe walls and tore up the ground destroying ancient ceramics, tombs containing mummies, textiles and household remains, before police and the site’s staff were able to stop them. As a result of Shady’s pleas, a police car now patrols the archeological site day and night but nothing has been done to punish or evict the land invaders. The squatters are believed to belong to a single extended family, and claim the land was given to them in the 1970s during Peru’s controversial agrarian land reform which was pushed through by a leftist military dictatorship. Shady denies the claim: “They do not have a single land title. The owner of the land is the Peruvian state.” A planned eviction of one of the squatters was thwarted in December when a local prosecutor and official failed to give the order to proceed despite having the support of police officers, Shady said. Land prices in the area have risen from around $5,000 per hectare to as much as $50,000 per hectare, as outsiders rush to buy land around the prestigious archaeological site which is surrounded by a 56 sq mile buffer zone. Shady, who was named on the  BBC’s 100 Women list  last year, first visited Caral in 1978. But it was not until 1994 that she discovered the ancient city and began to properly excavate the site, which is situated on a dry desert terrace overlooking the Supe river valley nearly 200km (124 miles) north of Lima. What she uncovered was the “oldest centre of civilization in the Americas” which Unesco describes as “exceptionally well-preserved” with a complex architectural design with “monumental stone and earthen platform mounts and sunken circular courts”. Organic material found at the site has been carbon-dated back to 2627 BCE Shady and her team continue to investigate and excavate a dozen former settlements, half of the  24 situated in the Supe valley  which form part of the Caral-Supe civilization. Their findings have revealed musical instruments such as flutes made of animal and bird bones and evidence of the cultivation of multi-coloured cotton used in textiles. “We can’t allow archeological sites to continue being invaded and destroyed because it is an unwritten history and we recover that history through our investigation,” said Shady. “If we can’t do that it is like burning a book which no one will ever read.” “I hope we can continue to investigate and continue to recover our history because it has such an interesting message,” she added. “It was a very, very peaceful society. We have not found even a single walled settlement.” “There is message there that we, human beings, should live in harmony between ourselves and nature,” Shady concluded. “We are living through this pandemic, in part, due to our mistreatment of nature.”
Reparations row MP adds plantation to his register of members’ interests:	The Conservative MP Richard Drax has now added the plantation he has inherited in  Barbados  to the parliamentary register of members’ interests after the  Observer  revealed omissions and errors in his declaration. Three weeks ago, the  Observer  revealed that Drax, the MP for South Dorset since 2010, had taken control of the 250-hectacre Drax Hall Plantation, where his ancestors had a slave workforce from 1640-1836. We also revealed that he is the wealthiest landowner in the House of Commons worth as much as £150m, although he and his family draw a tight veil over their finances. Leading figures from the  Caribbean  Community (Caricom) Reparations Commission insist that Drax must acknowledge the wealth brought to his family from slavery and make reparations. Sir Hilary Beckles, the chair of the Reparations Commission and vice-chancellor of the University of the West Indies, said: “If Richard Drax was in front of me now, I would say: ‘Mr Drax, the people of Barbados and Jamaica are entitled to reparatory justice.’ “Black life mattered only to make millionaires of English enslavers and the Drax family did it longer than any other elite family.” David Comissiong, the Barbados ambassador to Caricom, said: “This was a crime against humanity and we impose upon him [Mr Drax] and his family a moral responsibility to contribute to the effort to repair the damage.” Noted for his  Downton Abbey  lifestyle, Richard Drax was gifted the Drax Hall plantation by his father who died in July 2017. He told the  Observer  three weeks ago that he had not added it to the register because it was still in probate. Under the “miscellaneous” section of the register, the new entry refers to Drax Hall only as a “business property” and suggests it is still in probate.  In the new register released last week, Drax has added other assets we had identified as previously missing. These include agricultural land in North Yorkshire that he now admits he inherited on 8 April 2019. The guidelines say he should have registered the property within 28 days. He does not say whether this includes both Swaledale estates, the Ellerton Abbey farming estate of 2,200 acres and the Copperthwaite Allotment, a grouse moor of 520 acres. Again remedying another long-term omission he refers to a “residential property in Dorset” – probably the £4.5m holiday let on Sandbanks he has owned personally since 2009 and lets out at £6,750 per week in peak season. He has now declared that his trust in Surrey owns a commercial property which has never appeared in the register before. He also refers to the overarching family business by name for the first time. He says he is the “beneficiary of a family trust” that forms part “of the wider family property businesses known locally as the Charborough Estate”. He has also now provided a first reference to the Drax Dorset property empire. “There are a significant number of properties in each category and some are in joint ownerships with family members and other trusts.” Our research has shown that the Charborough estate has at least 5,600 hectares owned by five trusts. This includes “the R G Drax Accumulation and Maintenance Settlement” through which the MP is the beneficiary of income from the estate and some 125 properties in Dorset. The new detail provided is still the minimum required by the register and does not give a big picture of the wealth and holdings of Drax and his family. Drax has also corrected the entry errors that he made under the shareholding section of the register including adding a company that should have been registered several years ago.  Drax told the  Observer : “Following discussions with the registrar, which I initiated, I have updated my register entries to include the business property in Barbados, although that disclosure is not necessary until it has been legally transferred to me. In reviewing the entries I realised that an agricultural property in Yorkshire transferred from my mother to me after my father’s death had not been included on the register. My parents died in short succession and the administration of both estates is still ongoing. The process has been complicated which led to this accidental oversight.” Vince Cable, the former leader of the Lib Dems, says Drax should consider paying reparations.  “I hope … Mr Drax pays some attention to the very polite representations from the Caribbean Community Reparations Commission. He could, after all, donate his inheritance to the island on which it stands and still have plenty of property – including a hefty chunk of British land – left over.”
Nicaragua’s Covid story far from truth:	John Perry ( Letters , 31 December) suggests that we should learn from the Nicaraguan government’s management of Covid. He doesn’t mention that 700 Nicaraguan health professionals wrote an  open letter  begging the government to acknowledge the extent of the crisis, or that at least 10 health workers have been fired for  criticising  the government response. In the absence of accurate government data, an independent citizen observatory has been established, which attempts to keep track of the rate of infection. They estimate 11,935 cases in the period to 23 December, nearly double the official number. On 21 December, Nicaragua’s national assembly passed a law that gives President Daniel Ortega the right to unilaterally declare that citizens are “traitors to the homeland” and  ban them  from running for office. The new legislation ensures that elections, scheduled for November 2021, will not be free and fair. There are no lessons to be learned from Ortega’s policies, but Nicaragua’s descent into dictatorship demands much closer attention.  Dr Hilary Francis  Northumbria University
Argentina legalising abortion is a victory for women over the abuse of political power:	T he women looked like my grandmothers, at least as I remember them. Every Thursday, they would sit on benches in the square, white headscarves covering their hair, and together they would wait or march. The scarves represented nappies, as if their children were still babies, whatever their age. They were the mothers – and later the grandmothers – of the  Plaza de Mayo , in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in the 1970s and 1980s. Once strangers to each other, they occupied the square to wait. They met at police stations and churches, where they went in search of information about their children. What exactly were they hoping to find? Their children – young men and women, students and workers – who had been disappeared by the military dictatorship, which lasted from 1976 to 1983. What they found instead was an unbearable truth: their children had been tortured and killed by the government. Only later did it occur to me that I must have looked like their disappeared granddaughters, orphaned soon after birth inside the dictatorship’s prisons. These women searched for the truth in the Argentine style of politics from below: they took to the street, occupied the square, made their own bodies into a monument to the struggle.  I grew up far from glamorous Buenos Aires, in a rural town in Córdoba. My father is a Catholic deacon there. I was baptised, took first communion, and was confirmed; later I got married – a Catholic woman from the interior of  Argentina . In the faith community where I was raised, not much was said about feminism or the sexual revolution ignited by the pill. In the early 2000s, as an immigrant to the United States, I met women who challenged the Catholic faith based on the lived experience of everyday women. They were Catholic, like my mother, grandmothers and aunts, but they talked about sexuality, contraception and the equality of men and women. One of the movement’s leaders was  Marta Alanis , a Catholic who told the story of her own clandestine abortion. In 2003, at the close of the National Women’s Meeting in Argentina, she tore off a piece of green cloth and put it on her head. Reviving the legacy of the mothers of the Plaza del Mayo, these feminists were the ones who went on to fight for the legalisation of abortion in Argentina. It was the dawn of the  Green Wave , a movement of millions of girls and women of all ages and faiths in the streets of Argentina. On Wednesday 30 December 2020, Argentina’s national congress  decided that abortion  should no longer be a criminal matter. Women will be allowed to terminate pregnancies up to 14 weeks – for free in public hospitals – with exceptions made after this point for rape and situations in which a woman’s health is endangered. After 17 years of waiting and 13 draft bills, girls who look like my own daughter are occupying the streets to celebrate this transformative moment for such a sensitive issue in Latin American politics. I was in Argentina when a  bill nearly passed  in 2018; while lawmakers proclaimed their votes in the form of long-winded statements, the mood outside the building was one of joy. As I walked the streets around the congressional palace, where Argentina’s past wealth is on display, I revelled in the immoderate hope of women who could have been the granddaughters of the mothers of the Plaza de Mayo. Like their forebears, they too donned handkerchiefs, now hope-green and sported anywhere – around necks and wrists, hanging from backpacks. The Covid-19 pandemic kept me from joining the women on the streets last week, but I have watched from abroad as the Green Wave swept across Latin America. The green handkerchief has been used in pro-choice mobilisations in Oaxaca, Mexico, Brasília, Brazil, and Santiago, Chile. If the scarf has long been the symbol of women’s fight against abusive political power in Argentina, now it is also a symbol of hope and feminist transformation. Abortion has already been approved by women; it is something we practise regardless of a country’s criminal code or our own faith.  Abortion  has already been approved in the streets, by generations of women. And now it is law. Giselle Carino is the director of the International Planned Parenthood Federation, western hemisphere region
'Life goes on': Mexico City house featured in Roma up for sale:	Save for the small metal plaque affixed to its facade, 22 Tepeji Street, looks like almost any of the older houses in the unfashionable part of  Mexico City’s Roma neighborhood : painted stucco, a wrought-iron grille over the front windows and its flowerpots, thin metal slats arrayed geometrically over the frosted glass of the garage door. But the plaque commemorates the most celebrated Mexican film in decades:  Roma,  a tapestry of memories woven by director Alfonso Cuarón that enfolds the viewer in the dense images and sounds of the Mexico City of his childhood. In the 2018 film, 22 Tepeji stood in for Cuarón’s boyhood home, and its facade and patio featured in some of the most memorable scenes. And now it is up for sale. “Life goes on,” said Adriana Monreal, the third of four generations of the family that has lived in the two-storey house for more than half a century. Cuarón spent the first years of his life in the house across the street, 21 Tepeji, but preferred the light in the house opposite to shoot his film and the Monreal family agreed. The production designer, Eugenio Caballero, changed the window grilles and retiled the patio, which serves as the set piece for the film’s first scene introducing the film’s protagonist, Cleo, the family’s maid, as she washes dog mess from the floor with soapy water. Cuarón and Caballero reproduced the house’s interior on a set, painstakingly recreating the details of Cuarón’s memories. In a  Netflix documentary  about the making of the film, Cuáron describes how he tried to find as much of the original furniture as he could, contacting relatives across Mexico to ask them to borrow pieces. The Monreal family welcomed tourists when Roma was nominated for 10 Oscars (it won three, including  one for Cuarón as best director ) and film buffs tracked the movie’s locations through Roma and the rest of the city. Monreal’s grandparents moved into the house when her mother, Gloria Silvia Monreal, was a child and raised her along with five brothers and sisters there. Soon after Adriana Monreal was born, her mother moved back home with her parents and raised her only daughter in the house. She recalls a houseful of people as her aunts and uncles returned for visits. Now she lives there with her mother, her husband and two young children. “It hurts,” said Monreal of the decision to sell the house, preferring to keep the reasons for the sale private. “It has given us great satisfaction, we love it. You can’t measure everything that we have lived through here, everything this house has given us: shelter, closeness, a united family. “We love it and we will love it always.” Citing rumors that have begun to fly over social media, Monreal would not share the asking price for the house. A  listing  for a four-bedroom house on the same street, which is only two blocks long and not much changed since the 1970s, cited an asking price of about US$760,000. The Monreal family reflects the  Roma  that Cuarón portrays in his film, of middle-class families who live in the comfort that Mexico’s stratified society offered even though they were not wealthy. A few blocks north, early 20th-century mansions and elegant squares have turned Rome Norte into a global hipster retreat filled with edgy boutiques and gourmet restaurants. But in the section called Roma Sur, a few blocks from a community garden and the historic primary school where Monreal’s mother studied, the traditional neighborhood endures. It is a place where local shopkeepers still hang on against the odds, houses accommodate multi-generational families and evening walkers acknowledge each other with a nod. When the Monreal family leaves, another hairline crack in that Roma will open.
Nine killed in gun attack on wake in central Mexico:	Nine people have been killed and one wounded when gunmen opened fire at a wake in the central Mexican state of Guanajuato, in one of the worst outbreaks of violence to hit the country during the past few weeks. Public safety officials in the city of Celaya said in a statement the gunmen arrived late on Thursday night. Local press reported that the wake was held for a man murdered a day earlier. Heavy, rapid gunfire  could be heard ringing out  in video footage shot close to the attack which was widely shared on social media, and images from the scene showed bodies strewn in the street. Guanajuato is at the center of the bloody turf war between rival organized crime groups. There was no immediate report of who was responsible for the killings. Thousands have been killed in Guanajuato since the local Santa Rosa de Lima gang faced off with the ultra-violent  Jalisco New Generation cartel  in 2017. Authorities captured the leader of the Santa Rosa de Lima gang in August, but the bloodshed has continued. The Santa Rosa gang grew up in a farming hamlet of the same name by stealing fuel from government pipelines and refineries and robbing freight from trains. But after authorities stepped up security around trains and pipelines over the last two years, the gang turned to extortion and kidnapping. The Jalisco New Generation cartel has been Mexico’s most violent in recent years, aggressively expanding its reach across the country through bold attacks against its rivals and government forces. Their conflict has made Guanajuato – home to San Miguel Allende, a popular retirement spot for Americans – Mexico’s deadliest state. In September, gunmen killed 11 people in a bar in Jaral del Progreso near the border with Michoacán state. More than two dozen people were killed in an unregistered drug rehabilitation center in Irapuato in July.
Canada: activists sue province over refusal to fund abortions in private clinics:	Human rights activists in Canada have  filed a lawsuit  against the province of New Brunswick for its refusal to fund abortion services in private clinics – as they are in the rest of the country. The lawsuit suit filed by the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) argues that the refusal violates both the law and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms – Canada’s constitution. Canadian provinces and territories have a variation of different policies and regulations that facilitate abortion access, but New Brunswick is the only province that does not cover the procedure outside of hospital settings. The provincial government has not made it clear why it refuses to cover abortion access in non-hospital settings and refused to comment on the lawsuit. Last year, the federal government withheld more than $100,000 to the province for violating federal law by refusing to cover abortions outside hospitals. Those funds were paid later that year due to the Covid-19 pandemic, although the province has not taken action towards changing its current policies. Jessi Taylor, spokeswoman for  Reproductive Justice New Brunswick , said that with only three hospitals in the province offering abortion services, abortion-seekers face many obstacles. “Depending on where a person lives, driving to the hospital can take up to 17 hours,” she said, adding that having so few hospitals provide these services also causes safety and confidentiality concerns. The CCLA sent a formal notice and statement of claim to the province’s attorney general in November, warning that if Regulation 84-20 – the legal document that allows non-hospital abortions to go without funding – was not repealed within two months, the association would take legal action. But CCLA’s director of equality, Noa Mendelsohn Aviv, said she was worried the New Brunswick government’s legal strategy will be one of attrition, delaying public access to abortions for as long as possible. “I hope they will do the right thing,” Mendelsohn Aviv said. “[But] so far they have refused to do so.” According to Mendelsohn Aviv, the government said nothing about the timeframe, “which is effectively refusal”. “I would like to think that in 2021, no government would think it’s remotely feasible to deny a group their basic equality rights,” Mendelsohn Aviv said. “And abortion is a basic equality right, for women and trans people.” The CCLA aims to repeal a section of Regulation 84-20 that lists non-hospital abortion as a procedure that is disqualified from government funding. The out-of-pocket costs of an abortion in the province range from C$700-850, according to  local Clinic 554. The province has 20 days to respond to the statement of claim which was filed on Wednesday. If it does not, the court could rule in the CCLA’s favour without trial. “Right now we have a system built on luck and privilege,” Taylor said. “And luck and privilege is not actually an adequate approach to policy.”
Remain in Mexico policy needlessly exposed migrants to harm, report says:	The incoming US president, Joe Biden, has been urged to scrap a “devastating” migration program that activists say has exposed tens of thousands of asylum seekers – many of them children – to violence, abduction and rape in some of the world’s most dangerous cities. The Trump administration created the “Remain in Mexico” program in January 2019 in an effort to deter asylum seekers trying to enter the US through is southern border. The initiative – which is officially called the  Migrant Protection Protocols (MPP)  - stipulated that asylum seekers would have to await their court hearings in Mexican border towns such as Ciudad Juárez, Mexicali and Matamoros, and not in the US as before. But activists claimed that exposed highly vulnerable migrants, mostly from Central and South America, to physical harm and illness in unfamiliar and dangerous surroundings with some of the highest murder rates on Earth. In  a report  published on Wednesday, Human Rights Watch described how Trump’s policy “needlessly and foreseeably exposed [asylum seekers] to considerable risk of serious harm”. The group said those interviewed for its report, including children, “described rape or attempted rape and other sexual assault, abduction for ransom, extortion, armed robbery, and other crimes committed against them”. “In some cases, Mexican immigration officers or police committed these crimes,” the group added. Michael Garcia Bochenek, Human Right Watch’s senior children’s rights counsel, said its researchers had heard “really devastating” testimony from asylum seekers about their plight back in  Mexico . He said the interviews had left him impressed with the resilience of those affected but “completely devastated about what the US government was doing to people”. “The really shocking thing given  the consistent reports  of really, really serious risk to people who are placed in the MPP – or returned to Mexico after attending hearings in the US – is that US authorities have continued to place people in the MPP, including through the pandemic, and have consistently refused to pull people out of the [program] when they present proof of these harms,” Bochenek said. “I can’t help drawing parallels to other contexts that I’ve seen,” he added, citing Australia’s longer-lasting  offshore detention scheme . “There’s a similarity there. The offloading of people who are only traveling to a country to seek safety – and not only offloading them but deliberately, or at least knowingly subjecting them to harm.” Donald Trump defended policies such as Remain in Mexico – which has sent more than 69,000 people back over the border, sometimes into ramshackle refugee camps – as a way to protect US citizens from “thugs” and “bad hombres”. Biden has pledged to scrap the program but, apparently wary of triggering a sudden surge of border arrivals, members of his transition team have sought to lower expectations they will do so immediately. In  a recent interview  with the Spanish language news agency Efe, Biden’s domestic policy adviser, Susan Rice, said: “Migrants and asylum seekers absolutely should not   believe those in the region peddling the idea that the border will suddenly be fully open to process everyone on Day 1. It will not.” Biden’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan, told Efe that Remain in Mexico had “been a disaster from the start and has led to a humanitarian crisis in northern Mexico”. “But putting the new policy into practice will take time,” he added. Bochenek said campaigners did not want to see “a rush to the border” after Biden took office. “But it is reasonable to expect a managed and orderly wind-down of the [MPP] system. “It doesn’t need to take months. That can be done in relatively short order with the proper planning,” he said. “I’m hopeful that we can take the [Biden] campaign promises at face value and see the kind of orderly yet expeditious end to the program that we are hoping for.”
Brazilian beef farms ‘used workers kept in conditions similar to slavery’:	Brazilian companies and slaughterhouses including the world’s largest meat producer, JBS, sourced cattle from supplier farms that made use of workers kept in slavery-like conditions, according to a new report.  Workers on cattle farms supplying slaughterhouses earned as little as £8 a day and lived in improvised shacks with no bathrooms, toilets, running water or kitchens, according to a  report from Brazilian investigative agency Repórter Brasil . Since 1995, the report said, 55,000 Brazilian workers have been rescued by government inspectors from “situations similar to slavery”. While the number of investigations has fallen in recent years – 118 workers were freed in 2018, compared with 1,045 a decade earlier – that does not mean the situation has improved, just that inspections have been reduced, it noted. “We see this as an urgent problem that the big companies have to resolve,” said Marcel Gomes, executive secretary of Repórter Brasil and the report’s editor. The report challenges meat companies such as JBS, which has faced criticism over its inability to  control its supply chains of cattle farms  in the Amazon. A series of investigations by the  Guardian, Repórter Brasil, the Bureau of Investigative Journalism  and  others   have found the company  bought cattle from so-called “direct supplier” farms that had sourced from “indirect suppliers” – farms that supply cattle to be fattened and slaughtered – that had been involved in illegal deforestation. In September, JBS promised to control its entire supply chain by 2025 – 14 years after it and other Brazilian companies Minerva and Marfrig originally promised to do so. The three companies  signed a deal in 2009 with Greenpeace  in which they agreed not to buy cattle from farms “engaged in slavery”. Similar  deals signed with federal prosecutors  stopped them buying from farms included on a rolling government “dirty list” for keeping workers in slavery-like conditions. In August 2019, government inspectors found nine unregistered workers clearing pasture on the Copacabana farm in Mato Grosso do Sul state were being paid £8 a day, the report said. They lived in improvised shacks made of logs, plastic, palm fronds and corrugated iron without toilets, kitchens or running water. The farm and its controller, Fernanda Thomazelli, were later included on the 2020 “dirty list”. The farm had sold cattle directly to two JBS slaughterhouses in 2019 and 2020. In an out of court settlement with labour law prosecutors, Thomazelli’s father, José, representing his daughter, agreed to register the workers and provide proper living conditions. Notes from a meeting with prosecutors recorded he did not admit the existence of “work similar to slavery”. When contacted by the Guardian, he declined to comment and his daughter did not respond to an email. JBS said it blocked Copacabana and two other farms listed in the report as soon as they appeared on the “dirty list”, following protocols agreed with prosecutors. “We have a zero-tolerance approach to forced labour and also urge anyone who suspects or has evidence of individual or farm-level malpractice to report it,” the company said. The report also cited a farm in Tocantins state that sold to another farm in December 2018, two months after being included on the “dirty list” for keeping a 65-year-old worker in “deplorable conditions”. The second farm supplied a Minerva slaughterhouse in the state, the report alleges. Minerva, Brazil’s second largest beef exporter, said it never did business with the offending farm and that the direct supplier farm was “qualified” to supply cattle. The company is investigating the case. “If any irregularity is found,” Minerva said, “we will take appropriate action.” Minerva is testing a tool called Visipec to control indirect suppliers. Sign up for the  Animals farmed monthly update  to get a roundup of the best farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at  animalsfarmed@theguardian.com
Quebec to enter full lockdown as Covid cases spiral:	Quebec  will enter a full lockdown on Saturday, becoming the first Canadian province to enact a curfew as coronavirus cases once again spiral out of control. The premier, François Legault, announced the sweeping rules on Wednesday, describing them a “shock measure” intended to blunt a steady growth in cases. “This pandemic has been the battle of our lives” said Legault, who had resisted calls for stricter measures in recent weeks, citing a negative impact on families and the economy. “But the battle is not over.” Quebec’s decision to enter a lockdown came as the province announced 2,641 new cases of the virus and 47 deaths on Wednesday. Residents will not be permitted outside of their houses from 8pm until 5am. Workers will be permitted to travel to and from work. Non-essential businesses will close until 8 February – effectively extending Quebec’s partial lockdown. Legault said the province planned to reopen primary schools on Monday, telling reporters “we owe it to our children” to ensure in-class learning was possible. High school students would study online for an extra week, the government said. Quebec’s decision followed an  open letter  from at least 100 doctors calling for the province to keep schools open, calling it “ethically and scientifically the best decision” for the students’ mental and academic wellbeing. Officials said visits between households were the main driver of new infections. “The portrait of COVID-19 in Quebec is not what we would have hoped for after the holiday break,” the health minister Christian Dubé wrote earlier in the day. “We must therefore redouble our efforts to curb the virus.” Quebec has been the worst-hit province throughout Canada’s Covid-19 pandemic. The province has  recorded  217,999 total cases and 8,488 deaths— more than half of the 16,233 nationally. Of the fatalities most were in long-term care homes. In neighbouring Ontario, which has also seen cases grow since the Christmas holidays, the premier, Doug Ford, said he would make the decision whether to extend the province’s lockdown “over the next few days”. Primary school students are expected to return to in-person classes on Monday, with high school students returning at the end of January.
Stowaway tells how he survived 11-hour flight to UK in new film:	A South African man who survived an 11-hour flight from Johannesburg to London after hiding in a plane’s undercarriage has told of the last words he exchanged with a friend whose body fell from the same British Airways flight as it came in to land at Heathrow. “He said: ‘We made it,’ and then I passed out with the lack of oxygen,” said the man, who was then known as Themba and who has spoken publicly for the first time about the desperate journey both men undertook in 2015. While he survived and has been living for the past five years in Liverpool, where he goes by the name of Justin, the young Mozambican migrant who came with him died from multiple injuries after falling 430 metres (1,400ft) from the flight in June 2015. The man who died  was named in the Guardian in 2016 as Carlito Vale , who had grown up in an orphanage in Mozambique’s second city, Beira, and who had ventured to Uganda and South Africa before attempting to find a new life in London. The men had prepared to stow away on a BA flight on the runway in Johannesburg by studying aircraft designs in a book, Justin told the Guardian. This week, his story and that of Vale will be told in a  Channel 4  documentary, The Man Who Fell from the Sky. “We thought we could go for Delta, but we thought let’s go for a shorter [flight] … let’s take one to London,” said Justin. Neither had any idea how dangerous their plan was. While it has long been believed that the men may have had inside help to gain entry to the airport, he insists that they did it alone, jumping over perimeter fences and putting on layers of clothing in preparation. “I was not far from the engine. You could feel it outside when it was rotating,” he told the documentary-makers. He sustained burn marks after wrapping his arms through cabling, which ultimately prevented him from falling out. “You could even see the houses down there when the plane was flying.” The next thing he can remember is waking up on the runway in London, with a shattered leg. Vale and Justin, who grew up in a poverty-stricken township in Johannesburg and suffered violence at the hands of gangs while living on the streets, had dreamed of a fresh start in Europe. Vale planned to bring his family members over from  Mozambique  after a few years. “I remember when I spoke to Carlito … he said that he wanted to be a DJ and that he was going to go back and get his daughter after a few years,” said Justin. “I really wished the best for him, and so I thought it was a good idea for us because we were looking for a better future.” He recalled the moment, after waking up in a hospital bed, when police investigators showed him a photograph of Vale. “When the plane landed, I fell out and remember thinking that Carlito must still be in it,” he said. “But then later they showed me the passport and said: do you know this guy? I said yeah. They told me that he didn’t make it, and I was shocked.” Justin has embraced a new life in Liverpool and is slowly building up a new circle of friends while harbouring hopes of pursuing a musical career. “I find it is easy here, because the people here are gentle and nice,” he tells documentary-maker Rich Bentley in the film, after they first meet on a street corner in Liverpool. “Everyone has their own situations and they leave because of something that is happening in their backgrounds,” he says, as immigration once again makes headlines with the deaths of people crossing the Channel in small vessels. The Man Who Fell from the Sky is on Channel 4, 10pm, Monday 4 January
France arrests former DRC rebel leader for role in 'crimes against humanity':	French anti-terror prosecutors have announced the arrest of the former head of a rebel group in the  Democratic Republic of the Congo  on charges of “complicity in crimes against humanity”. Roger Lumbala, 62, is a former opposition lawmaker who led the RCD-N party, an armed group suspected by UN investigators of carrying out extrajudicial killings, rapes and cannibalism  during the country’s civil war from 1998-2002 . The charges concern his actions in 2002 in the north- eastern Ituri region predominantly against the Nande and Twa ethnic groups, the prosecutors told AFP. A United Nations report published in 2003 first pointed the finger at Lumbala, who became a minister in his country’s transition government between 2004 and 2005. Lumbala, who rejects the allegations, was arrested last week following a police investigation launched in December 2016. The French judiciary has the right to arrest and prosecute suspects in cases of crimes against humanity committed abroad. After mounting a failed presidential bid in a 2006 election, Lumbala had his lawmaker’s mandate invalidated in January 2013 for repeated absence, as he was reported to have spent much time in Uganda and Rwanda. Democratic Republic of Congo authorities accused him of “high treason” and complicity with M23 rebels, who were defeated in November 2013 after an offensive by government and UN forces. But he was allowed to return home in 2017 after a deal to end a political crisis in the vast African country, one of a few accused figures whose freedom or return from exile was agreed.
Wedding guests killed in Mali airstrike, local sources say:	More than 20 people, including children, were killed in airstrikes during a wedding ceremony in a remote desert area of central  Mali , according to local sources. It was not immediately clear who carried out the attacks but the reports emerged as French military sources said its forces in the country had carried out an airstrike in the area on Sunday that killed “dozens of fighters” from Islamist groups. Witnesses said the attacks appeared to target men on motorbikes in the villages of Bounti and Kikara who were believed to be Islamist militants. But civilians were caught up in the attack as people gathered for a wedding ceremony on Sunday. One man who was wounded in the strike told the Associated Press that the extremists had approached a group of civilians who were celebrating a wedding and demanded that the men in attendance separate from the women. “We were in the process of carrying out the orders when I heard the sound of an airplane and immediately a strike from above. Afterward, I didn’t see anything because I was unconscious,” the man said from a health centre in Douentza, speaking on condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. Other villagers in Bounti said a lone helicopter opened fire in broad daylight, sowing panic among a crowd gathered for a wedding. “It was ‘run for your lives’,” said Ahmadou Ghana, who said 19 people died, two of whom were his brothers, and several others were seriously wounded. “We were surprised by the intensity of the strike,” said another villager, Mady Dicko, adding: “The helicopter was flying very low.” On Sunday, Tabital Pulakuu, an association that promotes the culture of Mali’s Fulani ethnic group, reported an “airstrike that claimed the lives of at least 20 civilians” during a wedding. Confirmation of reports is difficult in a remote area where many jihadists are thought to operate. A French military spokesman, Col Frederic Barbry, denied a connection between the strike and a wedding party, saying such a link “does not correspond to information collected prior to the airstrike”. Barbry told the Associated Press the operation followed an intelligence mission of several days that showed a “suspicious gathering of people”. The French military was able to conclude it was a “terrorist armed group” based on individuals’ attitudes, their equipment and other intelligence information, he said. France  has more than 5,100 military personnel based in the region to help counter Islamist militants. But a seven-year intervention has come at a cost as forces struggle to contain jihadists in the open desert. Offensive aerial operations in Mali are mainly conducted by the Malian military or by the French anti-jihadist force Barkhane. Bounti lies in the Mopti region, about 370 miles from the Malian capital, Bamako. There are many jihadists operating in the area. The region is the centre of a deadly Islamist offensive that began in northern Mali in 2012 and then advanced into neighbouring Burkina Faso and Niger, inflaming ethnic tensions along the way. Thousands of soldiers and civilians have died in the conflict to date and hundreds of thousands of people have had to flee their homes. But the Bounti deaths come during an apparent increase in bloodshed across the Sahel. On Saturday in western Niger, jihadists killed 100 civilians in one of the single largest massacres of non-combatants in the history of the insurgency. France also lost five soldiers to roadside bombs in recent weeks.
Developing economies need a fairer way to help them decarbonise:	W ith the US president-elect Joe Biden’s incoming administration promising a fresh, rational approach to climate change, now is an ideal time to make the case for a  World Carbon Bank  that would transfer and coordinate aid and technical assistance to help developing countries decarbonise. The proposed  Green New Deal  in the US and the European commission’s  European Green Deal  have laudable environmental goals but are too inward-looking. When an entire building is burning, to concentrate firefighting resources on one floor would only delay, not prevent, its destruction. According to the International Energy Agency, almost all the net growth in carbon dioxide emissions over the next two decades will come from emerging markets. Although China recently pledged to achieve zero net emissions by  2060 , it is sobering to consider that it accounts for half of the world’s coal output and half of its coal consumption. India, too, is  highly dependent  on its plentiful coal reserves, and will likely remain so despite strong advances in solar power. For all the fanfare accompanying the 2015  Paris climate agreement , the share of clean energy in global energy investment is still only  about 34% , almost exactly the level five years ago. Wind and solar account for only 8% of global energy. The IEA estimates that allowing existing power plants to operate for the remainder of their expected lifespans in their current form would by itself cause global temperatures to rise by  1.7C  relative to pre-industrial levels. Right now, the  most widely discussed approach  to encouraging developing economies to cut their CO 2  emissions is a carbon border tax on imports from countries without adequate carbon-pricing systems. The EU is  considering  such a measure and the Climate Leadership Council (whose members include the incoming US Treasury secretary Janet Yellen) also has  advocated  it. Economists almost universally favour  carbon taxes  (Europe’s carbon-pricing system is a clumsier version) so that producers and consumers take account of how their actions affect the global commons. A border-tax adjustment is aimed at prodding developing economies to introduce their own carbon taxes. The policy is conceptually sound but is too static and difficult to implement. Developing economies have neither the resources nor the technology to transform themselves overnight For starters, developing economies have neither the resources nor the technology to transform themselves overnight. Part of the reason advanced economies have been able to mitigate their CO2   emissions is that global manufacturing has migrated to emerging markets that have invested heavily in energy. The average age of coal plants in Asia is  12 years , compared with 43 years in advanced economies. Given that the lifespan of a coal plant is about 50 years, and coal is one of the few natural resources that China and India possess in abundance, the cost to developing Asia of decommissioning its coal plants is huge. And then there is Africa, where the number of people lacking access to electricity has risen during the Covid-19 pandemic, to almost  600 million . The gap between the developing world’s ability to deal with climate change and the ambitious plans being discussed in advanced economies is just another example of the huge disparity in wealth and resources between the global north and the global south. In response to the coronavirus crisis, for example, advanced economies  marshalled  fiscal and credit support in 2020 averaging over 16% of GDP, compared with 6% in emerging markets and 2% in developing economies, according to the International Monetary Fund. And this wide gap does not take into account the potential for pandemic-related debt build-ups to morph into a full-blown developing-country debt crisis over the next couple of years, making decarbonisation even more difficult. Global carbon pricing is an essential part of any long-term solution to the climate crisis but advanced economies need to provide the developing world with a carrot and not just a stick. This should come in the form of highly concessional financing, combined with technical expertise and sharing of best practices – all guided by a World Carbon Bank. The IMF, the World Bank and regional development banks have an important role to play but their mandates are too diffuse for them to deal effectively with the climate challenge on their own. Meanwhile, those who think that government-to-government assistance should not play any role in climate solutions need to bear in mind that state-owned firms, which are not terribly responsive to economic incentives, increasingly  dominate  the global coal industry. Is it too optimistic to think that inwardly focused advanced economies will ever be willing to earmark large amounts of aid – at least $100bn to $200bn a year – to help the developing world meet climate goals? The response to the Covid-19 crisis so far offers little encouragement; the G20’s Debt Service Suspension Initiative has delivered a  few billion dollars  of relief to 40 very poor countries but that pales in comparison to the trillions that rich countries have spent on their own citizens. An enhanced carbon tax or pricing regime could be one source of sustainable funding over the longer term but the problem is too urgent to wait for this to fall into place. The goal of achieving zero net CO2 emissions by 2050, which the EU has adopted and the US is likely to do soon, is praiseworthy. But not-in-my-backyard, or nimby, environmentalism is no way to solve a global problem. •  Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard University and was the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund from 2001 to 2003. ©  Project Syndicate
Why the world's biggest mammal migration is crucial for Africa – photo essay:	D avid Mubiana will always remember the day he was shot. It happened in 2002, when his unit was ambushed by poachers with AK-47 rifles and a shotgun. He was wounded in the arm and stomach; one bullet rupturing his spleen. As a wildlife police officer in Zambia’s Department of National Parks and  Wildlife , his job is inherently risky. “Even if you fall down, you have to stand up and continue fighting. If we finish our wildlife, [our children] are not going to see what we are seeing today,” he says. David Mubiana puts his life on the line to watch over straw-coloured fruit bats and other wildlife in Kasanka national park Like other wildlife protectors, he puts his life on the line every day. But not every animal needing protection is a big beast. Following the incident in 2002 in a park bordering Angola, Mubiana was transferred to  Kasanka national park  in central Zambia, where he now protects one of nature’s mysteries – and the biggest mammal migration in the world – from poachers and land encroachment. These poachers may be after antelope and elephants, but their actions also pose a threat to the straw-coloured fruit bat,  Eidolon helvum . The straw-coloured fruit bat is listed as near threatened by the International Union for  Conservation  of Nature Every year, between October and December, 8–10 million straw-coloured fruit bats descend on the park to feast on an abundance of fruit. From west  Africa , over the forests of the Congo basin and on to Zambia, the bats migrate thousands of kilometres over savanna and open land, dispersing seeds into deforested areas, and reforesting and regenerating landscapes on their journey. Scientists are still trying to fathom why these fruit bats, or “flying foxes”, gather at Kasanka in numbers not seen anywhere else. Each night they leave their evergreen swamp fig roosts to fly up to 55 miles (90km) in search of wild berries and fruit. Listed as  near threatened  on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s red list, the straw-coloured fruit bat is one of the largest fruit bats in Africa. There are fears that if their numbers drop below a certain amount, the colony may not be able to keep going. “If that turns out to be true, we might be in trouble,” says Dr Dina Dechmann of the Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior, whose team has studied the bats for 12 years. Wildlife scouts use watchtowers and patrol the park on foot to stop poachers and illegal acts of deforestation While sightings have revealed where the bats have been spotted, the precise route they take is unknown. Dechmann’s teams is about to deploy satellite trackers to follow the migration. “I think this bat is crucial for Africa – more than most other species in that [they] cover long distances,” says Dechmann. “If you think about seed dispersal, antelopes, monkeys, birds, you name it – even most other bats – they will not leave the protection of the forest canopy, so they are not as effective as seed dispersers. If you have a colony like in Kasanka with several million bats, if each disperses one seed every night – that’s huge.”  If you have a colony with several million bats, if each disperses one seed every night – that’s huge With the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, the bats have faced a new threat from humans seeking to attack them. “These bats are being persecuted because of ongoing publicity about their role as virus hosts. Their importance completely outweighs the potential threat,” says Dechmann, adding that their role in transmitting viruses such as Covid-19 directly to humans has not been scientifically proved. Helen Taylor-Boyd at Bats without Borders, a conservation group in southern Africa, says: “We’ve got to put this in a larger context: the context is the risk is increased by humans encroaching into animal habitat … [Wild animals] are best left well alone, and human encroachment is not a wildlife-caused problem.” Kasanka Trust has employed 30 new scouts to prevent illegal deforestation and stop poaching in the park But habitat loss is fast becoming the park’s chief threat. As forests where bats roost and feed are lost, they are increasingly being forced out. “Bats will either need to forage farther, or they will remain in the same location and overuse resources. So it’s a habitat and wildlife management issue just as much as an urban-human bat conflict issue,” says Taylor-Boyd. Deforestation across Zambia is  alarmingly high  at 250,000 to 300,000 hectares (620,000 to 740,000 acres) of forest a year. According to Kasanka Trust, which manages the park, 10,000 hectares of commercial farming has already encroached into a prohibited buffer zone around the park. The trust, which has lost 70% of its revenue due to the pandemic, has employed 30 new scouts to patrol with police officers like Mubiana to prevent illegal deforestation and encroachment. Since the outbreak of Covid-19 the bats have faced a new threat: they are being attacked because of their perceived role in the spread of the disease The Kasanka Trust’s general manager, Richard Peel, says: “Emerging threats from commercial agriculture around the park are extremely dangerous and could bring an end to the bat migration if it’s not brought under control. This migration depends on healthy and intact forests within and around the park. The [bats] utilise more than 10 times the size of the national park, which highlights the importance of protecting the areas [within it].” Areas surrounding the park are also critical for people who rely on the forest for food and income. The trust has helped communities gain legal ownership of 60,000 hectares of surrounding forest, supporting income-generating activities such as beekeeping. Churchill Musungwa, a voluntary forest guard, says his community decided to work with the trust after seeing land nearby destroyed. Commercial agriculture is causing habitat loss, which threatens the future of the straw-coloured bat “If [we] protect the forest, we can benefit as a community in the coming years,” he says. “When we put up beehives we are going to sell the honey; have money to educate our children. We can push [for] our lives to be better.” Community forest guards have put up beehives in the areas they manage to generate income for local people Find more  age of extinction coverage here , and follow biodiversity reporters  Phoebe Weston  and  Patrick Greenfield  on Twitter for all the latest news and features
At least 100 die in Niger attacks blamed on jihadists:	“Terrorists” have killed around 100 people in two villages in western  Niger , the latest in a string of civilian massacres that have rocked the jihadist-plagued Tillaberi region, a local mayor has said. The attacks on the villages of Tchoma Bangou and Zaroumadareye occurred on Saturday just as first-round presidential election results were announced. They were waged by “terrorists who came riding about 100 motorcycles”, said Almou Hassane, the mayor of the Tondikiwindi commune that administers both villages. “There were up to 70 dead in Tchoma Bangou and 30 dead in Zaroumadareye,” he said, adding he had just returned from the scene of the attacks. The two villages are 120km (75 miles) north of the capital, Niamey. “There have also been 75 wounded, some of whom have been evacuated to Niamey and to Ouallam for treatment,” Hassane said. The attackers split into two columns to carry out simultaneous attacks on the two villages, which lie seven kilometres (four miles) apart, the mayor said. The prime minister, Brigi Rafini, led a delegation to the area on Sunday while President Mahamadou Issoufou would hold an extraordinary security council on Monday, his office said. Local elected officials first reported the raids on Saturday but the death toll was unclear, with one source putting it at around 50. Issoufou Issaka, a former government minister who comes from the region, said the jihadists carried out the double massacre after local people had lynched two of their number. He gave an estimated death toll of 83. One senior regional official said the attack was carried out at midday, at the same moment the results of the first round of legislative and presidential election were announced. Election officials announced that the ruling party candidate and former minister Mohamed Bazoum won the first round of Niger’s presidential vote, which was held the previous weekend. Bazoum has promised to step up the fight against the jihadists. Bazoum said his thoughts were with the victims’ families, adding in a video message that the attacks showed that “terrorist groups constitute a serious threat to cohesion within our communities and a danger unlike any other”. Issoufou earlier expressed his condolences in a statement in which he also condemned the “cowardly and barbaric attack”. The two villages are in the vast and unstable Tillaberi region, which is located in the “tri-border” area, where the porous borders of Niger, Mali and  Burkina Faso  converge. The area has suffered jihadist assaults for years. Four thousand people across the three nations died in 2019 from jihadist violence and ethnic bloodshed stirred by Islamists, according to the UN. Seven Nigerien soldiers were killed in an ambush in Tillaberi on 21 December. Travel by motorbike has been banned in Tillaberi since last January in a bid to prevent incursions by jihadists riding them. A landlocked state located in the heart of the Sahel, Niger is also being hammered by jihadists from Nigeria, the cradle of a decade-old insurgency launched by Boko Haram. Boko Haram claimed responsibility for an attack on 12 December that left 34 people dead in the village of Toumour, in south-eastern Niger near the border with Nigeria. Last month 34 villagers were massacred in the south-eastern region of Diffa, also on the Nigerian border, the day before municipal and regional elections that had been repeatedly delayed because of poor security. The second round of the presidential election is scheduled for 20 February.
'I passed out with the lack of oxygen': truth of Heathrow stowaways' tragic journey:	A n almost unbearably painful moment comes halfway through a new  Channel 4  documentary about the extraordinary story of a man who survived stowing away on a flight from Johannesburg to London – and his friend who didn’t make it. It happens when the daughter of the man who died is presented with the first photo of him she has ever seen by the makers of The Man Who Fell from the Sky. The film-makers had travelled to his native Mozambque, attempting to piece together the desperate bid for a new life he made in 2015. “She doesn’t recognise him,” says her mother, Anna, as 11-year-old Chemilla looks at a picture of Carlito Vale on a mobile phone. As tears flow, Anna adds: “I am very grateful to all the people who continue to recognise that he’s a human being.” Vale’s tragedy started to come to light when his body  was found on a roof below the Heathrow flight path  after he had fallen from a BA jet’s landing gear as it approached the runway after an 8,000-mile journey. But little has been known about the man who survived – until now. Like other journalists who  flocked to the area around Heathrow  in west London after Vale’s remains were found in the summer of 2015, I wanted to know more not just about him but about the survivor who remained in a critical condition. A few months later,  I learned more about Vale  after speaking to the founder of an orphanage where he grew up who wanted to thank those who had left flowers at the scene near Heathrow. Vale’s was a young Mozambican whose initial venturings abroad took him to Uganda and South  Africa . But despite the efforts of many journalists, the fate of his companion in the UK has remained untold. That changes in The Man Who Fell from the Sky when the documentary maker Rich Bentley finally meets Themba Cabeka – who now goes by the name Justin – on a street corner in Liverpool. Justin has been living in the UK for the past five years, and has been granted leave to remain. His story is all the more poignant at a time when men, women and children are drowning in the Channel, people who, like Justin and Vale, desperately try to reach Britain in search of a better life. “I thought it was worth it,” the 30-year-old told me in December. “Because of my situation, and what I was going through it was the only choice that I had to survive.” In The Man Who Fell from the Sky, the story of Cabeka and Vale’s journey to the UK slowly unfolds over the course of a five-year project undertaken by producer Bentley and director Sam Forsdike. In their previous documentary The Stranger on the Bridge,   the pair followed a man on his search for the stranger  who stopped him taking his life from Waterloo Bridge in London. Their latest – an impressive mix of gumshoe journalism and social commentary – has similar aspects but is more sweeping in its ambition. To begin, we are told that there have been up to 109 recorded stowaway attempts involving aircraft wheel wells and that London is the most common target destination. Since October 1996, there have been at least 16 reported instances of people stowing away on flights that have come through London. And those are the ones we know about. Interviews included feature west London residents who were abruptly reminded of the realities of the global south when a stowaway fell from the sky above them. The breakthrough comes on Christmas Eve 2019, when a man to whom Bentley had spoken three years earlier called to say he had “found” Cabeka. Before that is an interview with a pilot who was landing a flight from Delhi at Heathrow in 1996 when an Indian teenager fell from the wheel well. “In terms of warmth and in terms of oxygen, he might as well be outside,” says Bentley during a scene in which he climbs into the wheel well of a decommissioned jet while the same pilot looks up from the ground. That teenager’s name was Vijay Saini, and his body was only found three days later. His brother Pardeep, who was then 22, survived the 10-hour journey from Delhi in freezing temperatures and was given compassionate leave to stay in Britain for a year after appealing to the Home Office. Nineteen years after the brothers Vale and Cabeka put their plan to reach the UK into effect when they scaled the perimeter fence at the international airport in Johannesburg, climbing into a BA aircraft after selecting it in the belief that the journey would be shorter than alternative flights to the US. Coverage in 2015 had focused on the suspicion that the pair must have had inside help from a Johannesburg airport worker, but Cabeka insists they did it alone. “I was not far from the engine. The engine was opposite but outside. You could feel it outside when it was rotating,” he says, and sustained burn marks after wrapping his arms through cabling. He still remembers the last words that Vale uttered to him. “He said: ‘We made it,’ and then I passed out with the lack of oxygen.” It was the cabling that saved his life, as he managed to remain on board while his friend plummeted to the ground as the landing gear opened. His next memory was of lying on the tarmac at Heathrow, semi-conscious and with a shattered leg. “I could see the guards. They carried me up and the next thing, I woke up in hospital,” Cabeka recalls in the documentary. Six months of treatment following, according to Justin, after which a police officer showed him a picture of Vale. “He said: Do you recognise this person? I said: ‘He’s my friend, Carlito.’ He said: ‘No, he did not make it.’” He was a good guy who liked to do his own thing, quietly Cabeka, who never knew his mother and was brought up by his grandmother, was left alone at the age of 13 or 14 when she died in 2009. Years later, he met Vale on the street and offered him space in the tent where he lived. “He was a good guy who liked to do his own thing, quietly,” recalls Cabeka in the documentary. The plan to reach Europe by air started when Vale came back one day to their camp with a pile of books on topics such as engineering and aviation. “[The books] were talking about different planes and I took down all the details, so I knew if we want to go in the plane, there was another way you could use it. We had an idea now,” adds Cabeka. While proud of their plans, neither man was aware of the danger, including the very immediate threat of succumbing to a lack of oxygen. “It didn’t even matter to me. I just wanted to be out from where I was. Everything was just falling apart, so we decided: ‘Let’s just get out of the country. Let’s go somewhere else.’” Today, Cabeka lives with the life-changing injuries he sustained when he fell after the plane had landed. When we first see him, it’s a shot from behind as he moves on his crutches along the streets of Liverpool. After a period of homelessness in London, he has come to find some sort of happiness in Merseyside and has been able to begin slowly making new friends and and attempting to forge a career in hip-hop. “It’s easy here. The people here are gentle and nice,” he says after the film-makers finally meet him. But he is still haunted by memories of Vale, his “brother”, adding: “We’ve come a long way together. He’s gone but he’s still my friend because nobody else is going to take his place.” It is one of the final notes of sadness in The Man Who Fell from the Sky ,  though it leaves you in awe of the lengths to which humans will go in search of a better life for themselves and those they love. It’s no bad thing to be reminded of that. The Man Who Fell from the Sky is on  Channel 4 at 10pm on 4 January .
Covid vaccinations: slow start around world brings dose of reality:	T he global introduction of newly approved coronavirus vaccines has been marked by delays, shortages and bureaucratic errors as it has become clear that many governments will miss their targets for mass inoculation. The burst of optimism that arrived with  approvals of new vaccines  – encouraged by unrealistic expectations raised by politicians – is colliding with the reality of the challenge of vaccinating a large part of the world’s population. The vast scale of the effort by pharmaceutical companies to produce and package doses is already seeing strains through shortages of “fill and finish” materials such as the glass vials used for the vaccine. Other chokepoints involve the capacity of regulatory authorities to approve packaged batches of vaccine, the effectiveness of national systems for vaccination, and local requirements for advising, monitoring and then logging the data of recipients, most of which is more time-consuming than giving the injection. So how are individual countries doing? The US’s rollout of its vaccine programme  has struggled , echoing the country’s chaotic response to the pandemic under Donald Trump. Out of about 17.5m doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines that have been delivered around the country, only 4.2m have been administered, mainly comprising the first of two doses. That is far behind where the US planned to be at the end of 2020, when it had been hoped 20 million people would have been vaccinated. Reports have emerged of vaccines going bad due to poor organisation, lack of healthcare professionals to administer them or, in one case, sabotage. The biggest issue in the delays appears to be the fact that federal officials left delivery logistics  to local health officials and hospitals , even as they were struggling to deal with the impact of a pandemic that has killed more than 350,000 Americans. The US Food and Drugs Administration, however, has said it will not follow the UK and some other countries in giving as many people as possible a first dose of vaccine and extending the period to the second dose to speed up the process. Hailed as a success story for the initial speed of its vaccination campaign, Israeli media reported last week that the pace of the vaccination campaign means it is running low on purchased doses and may have to pause unless a new supply is negotiated. While Israel’s vaccination campaign – which has relied on the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine that needs to be stored at ultra-cold temperatures – has been among the fastest in the world, its health minister, Yuli Edelstein, said his ministry may stop administering first doses for a short period, telling Channel 12 “there will be no shortage of the second dose”.This week saw  Israel  also approve the Moderna vaccine, although doses may not be widely available for two months. A disconnect between different regulatory approval regimes for vaccines is also causing its own issues, not least a shortage of supplies in some countries. While the UK quickly approved the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for emergency use in the UK and has since  approved a second , the European Medicines Agency adopted a slower regulatory process and with Pfizer/BioNTech so far the  only vaccine permitted within the bloc  it has led to more demand from EU countries than the company can yet deliver. It has warned there will be gaps in the supply of its vaccines until other vaccines are rolled out, with Uğur Şahin, the BioNTech chief executive, telling Germany’s Spiegel: “At the moment it doesn’t look good – a hole is appearing because there’s a lack of other approved vaccines and we have to fill the gap with our own vaccine.” The European commission said on Monday it was in discussions with Pfizer and BioNTech about the possibility of ordering more doses of their vaccine, in addition to the 300m shots already covered under an existing contract. It was not clear whether this would compete with a German deal for more doses of the same vaccine. Underlining the problem of vaccine supply, Germany and Denmark are also looking into the possibility  of delaying administering a second dose  of the vaccine to make scarce supplies go further, after  a similar move by Britain  last week. Within the EU, France has had its own specific issues that have meant its vaccination programme has progressed at  a glacial pace  so far. With one of the world’s most vaccine-sceptical populations,  France  had by the weekend only managed to inoculate 516 people compared with the UK’s 1 million, despite having 500,000 doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. Critics have also pointed to the 200,000 people who have been immunised in Germany during a similar timeframe after the EU-wide rollout began a week ago. The figure in France rose to several thousand on Monday, according to the health minister, Olivier Véran. With a “hypercritical” public attitude towards vaccines – a survey at the weekend showed six out of 10 people intended to refuse one – France had settled on a slow and bureaucratic process, including a mandatory consultation with a doctor several days before receiving a jab. The president, Emmanuel Macron, has demanded a quicker rollout. Following criticism, the French health minister Olivier Véran announced on Tuesday plans to speed up the process including online registration and the administration of the vaccine by qualified health workers under the supervision of a doctor. One assumed advantage in national vaccination programmes is the presence of a well-developed manufacturing capacity, although that has not necessarily been the case in the US. While Indian regulators  have only just approved  the country’s first two Covid vaccines for restricted emergency use, one developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford University, and the other conceived locally by Bharat Biotech, India is home to the Serum Institute of India, the world’s largest manufacturer of vaccines that will eventually provide doses for  the Covax scheme  to supply the developing world. For now, however, India’s emergency use authorisation means the vaccines will only be manufactured and made available in India, which with about 10m Covid-19 infections is one of the world’s worst-affected countries behind the US. Brazil is in talks to secure doses from  India  before a possible export ban. The country plans to inoculate 300 million frontline workers, elderly and vulnerable people out of its population of 1.35 billion by August and has a stockpile of more than 50m doses. India also has considerable experience in running mass vaccination campaigns. China , where Covid-19 originated, has (like Russia) pursued a typically aggressive approach to vaccine development and inoculation that has raised eyebrows in the west over claims of a lack of transparency in testing data. Four and a half million Chinese received doses of Chinese made vaccines under trial even before  the approval last week  of a vaccine produced by the  state-owned Sinopharm  company, with Beijing alone setting up 220 pop-up vaccination sites and delivering more than 73,000 shots in the first two days of 2021. The country aims to vaccinate 50 million people by February’s lunar new year in an attempt to control the spread of the virus when large parts of the population travel. Other countries including  Egypt , which has approved Sinopharm’s vaccine for emergency use, and  Pakistan  have said they will use the Sinopharm vaccine as part of their response. South Africa , like other African nations, has found itself struggling to procure vaccines despite the global Covax initiative designed to ensure equitable supply of cheap vaccines to poorer countries. Although Pfizer and AstraZeneca have said they plan to supply doses, the US’s Moderna has no supplies for Africa, and the AstraZeneca vaccine may not be available before next year in South  Africa , the continent’s worst-hit country with 1.09m confirmed infections and 29,175 deaths. South Africa will get enough shots for 10% of its population of 60 million people through the Covax initiative, but with concern about the new  South African variant  of the virus mounting, that is a drop in the ocean. African countries will also face problems such as a shortage of ultra-cold storage for the Pfizer vaccine and logistical issues for distribution. Experts have said the absence of effective vaccination in the developing world could leave reservoirs of disease, including new mutations, that will continue to threaten global outbreaks.
Bobi Wine confronted by Ugandan police during appeal for ICC inquiry:	Police in  Uganda  have confronted the presidential candidate Bobi Wine during an online press conference where he announced a petition to the international criminal court to investigate rights abuses in the country. During the meeting with journalists on Thursday evening, a week ahead of tense elections in Uganda, officers appeared to haul Wine from a vehicle while he pleaded: “I am not even allowed to park on the side of the road.” Wine said police fired live rounds and teargas and arrested his campaign team in the latest episode of  an escalating crackdown  on him and his team by state security forces ahead of the elections. In a defiant statement posted on Twitter, Wine said his battle to unseat the Ugandan president,  Yoweri Museveni , would continue. “Today they arrested all the 23 members of our new campaign team & impounded the cars. They thought they had broken our back,” he wrote. “The wave is unstoppable! #WeAreRemovingADictator.” The God we serve never sleeps! Today they arrested all the 23 members of our new campaign team & impounded the cars. They thought they had broken our back. I literally went to Namayingo alone. But this is how we were recieved! The wave is unstoppable! #WeAreRemovingADictator   pic.twitter.com/uMv17SCWcq The confrontation played out hours after  the deadly riot in the US Capitol  led to questions about whether some governments would be emboldened to push back harder against people invoking democratic ideals like fair elections. Wine has drawn the ire of the 76-year-old Museveni, who has governed Uganda since 1986 and who he has repeatedly branded a dictator. The president retains strong support in Uganda, with decades of economic growth and subsidies winning him a mass following, particularly in rural areas. Yet Wine’s campaign has galvanised staunch opposition to Museveni, and his stand against an old ruling elite and inequality has inspired young people in urban areas, and many across the continent. In response to a strong challenge to Museveni’s rule, Uganda has experienced its worst political violence in a generation and there have been repeated arrests and attacks on opposition figures. Hours after Wine announced his candidacy in November, he was arrested, and  more than 50 people were shot dead by security forces  in the protests that followed. Those deaths form a critical part of Wine’s petition to the ICC to investigate alleged acts of torture, mutilation and murder of civilian protesters. The petition by Wine and two other alleged torture victims mentions Museveni, the security minister Elly Tumwine, and other security officials. Wine was a popular singer before he won a seat in parliament and attracted national attention as the beret-wearing leader of a movement known as People Power. In December, Wine  said one of his bodyguards was killed by military police  who ran him over as Wine’s convoy was taking a wounded journalist to seek medical help. Military police denied involvement, saying the bodyguard had fallen from a speeding car. Last week  Wine told the Guardian  in an interview that he is forced to wear a bulletproof jacket, describing the campaign as “like a war and a battlefield”. “The regime is after our lives. It’s after hurting and incapacitating us. Every day we live is as if it’s the last one,” he said. Authorities have clamped down on opposition rallies,  stating they are in breach of Covid-19 restrictions . Last month the government wrote to Google, asking it to shut down 14 YouTube video channels that often host opposition figures because it said they had incited riots. Fears have also grown that the internet could be shut down on election day, 14 January, after similar moves in the last election in 2016. The Associated Press contributed to this report
Papa Don's failed state: the US as seen from Kenya:	F or more than two months now, I have been regularly posting  quasi-satirical tweets  on the US elections and their aftermath from my home in Kenya, in the style of foreign correspondents reporting on events in the “third world”. My aim has been to puncture that widely accepted idea that the globe is divided between those who have achieved democratic nirvana and those of us still seeking enlightenment at the feet of western gurus, chanting their mantras of electoral reform and accountability. This week – for a moment – I worried whether the truth was now beyond satire. It’s now clear those gurus were simply fellow travelers, whose wealth had more to do with iniquity than nirvana. In many cases, “third world” elections were run better than elections in the US, and as one correspondent in Colombia  reminded  a US host puffed up with ideas of superiority: “We haven’t had any mobs storming the congress here for several decades.” While following the general thrust of this disastrous election, my Twitter  thread  has been taking some creative liberties, for example putting condemnatory words in the mouths of African diplomats and leaders in response to the latest outrage from Donald Trump. #BREAKING  Enfeebled far-white US dictator, Donald "Papa Don" Trump, who faces demands for resignation or removal from office just days before official defenestration from barricaded presidential palace, condemns his extreme Christianist anti-math supporters for doing his bidding. However, I would have had a hard time coming up with something to match the events and aftermath of 6 January, when a mob of what I have referred to as “Christianist, anti-math extremists” stormed the US Capitol during a joint session of Congress to certify the results of the US election. Filled to the brim with explosive Trumpian denials of loss, false allegations of fraud, and fired up by the president himself, the rioters were unstoppable.  #BREAKING  With collapse of presidential Republican Guard after failed attack on parliament, Donald "Papa Don" Trump, who has ruled the crisis-torn, oil-rich republic, one of the world's top banana exporters, with an iron fist for nearly half a decade, loses last vestige of power. The carnage tragically cost five people,  including a Capitol police officer , their lives. While it may have ended Trump’s – mainstream – political future, it poses a serious threat to my thread. The breathtaking speed with which the election script was flipped made it almost impossible for me, more than 12,000km away, to keep up. pic.twitter.com/ObAgffTIIv “Satire writes itself,” we are wont to say at times like this. It’s an easy thing to say when Trump sycophants like Senator Lindsey Graham are lining up to condemn the president in the hope that the blinding light from the regime’s supernova implosion will obscure their record. But it really doesn’t. We satirists still have to write it and we can become an endangered species when the news provides it for free. However, I need not have worried. Help was at hand. All that was called for was some perspective. Last year, President Trump extended painful economic sanctions placed on Zimbabwe, citing concerns about Zimbabwe’s democracy.  Yesterday’s events showed that the U.S. has no moral right to punish another nation under the guise of upholding democracy. These sanctions must end. You see, the reactions to the events, in the US and around the world - shock, anger, outrage, fear and in some quarters, such as  in the Zimbabwe state house , glee – were predicated on assumptions about what America was. And that idea did not stand up too well to scrutiny. We had all been bamboozled over the course of decades to believe the US really was what it said it was – a shining city on a hill, a beacon for the nations – not what it did. It was a first-world country that at times behaved like the third-world “shithole countries” (Donald Trump) where the rest of us live. The charade continued even after this with Joe Biden  proclaiming  that “the scenes of chaos at the Capitol do not reflect the true America, do not represent who we are”. Not true. In the light of Trump’s self-immolation, I experienced an epiphany. America was not a first world country behaving like a third world “shithole country” –it was a first world shithole country. #BREAKING  UNHCR chief, Filippo Grandi, warns of of fresh wave of American IDPs and refugees as the troubled oil-rich nation grapples with ethnically-tinged post-election violence that has claimed at least 4 lives, and a devastating pandemic which has killed over 370,000 people. The fact is the US had long been such. Its election system was an anachronistic mess long before the storming of the Capitol. Its imperial presidency is still the stuff of third world nightmares and its sycophantic legislature is reminiscent of our daytime realities. It may have more stuff and bigger guns, but at heart the west is simply a richer version of the rest. I came to see that my thread was not about reporting the US as an African country, as some have suggested. Rather it was about covering it as first world countries should be covered – whether diseased and ethnically divided, in North America or in sub-Scandinavian Europe, or beyond, whether nuclear-armed and oil-rich, with term limits or governed for decades on end by nonagenarian monarchs. We should forgo the propaganda and look at America as America truly is, with all its failures and hypocrisies. “When someone shows you who they are, believe them,” Maya Angelou told us. America had done just that. I just needed to believe it. With that, the world was put to rights. Patrick Gathara is a Kenyan political cartoonist, satirist and writer. His Twitter handle is  @gathara
Iran steps up nuclear plans as tensions rise on anniversary of Suleimani’s killing:	Iran has announced  plans to enrich uranium up to 20% purity , just a step away from weapons-grade levels, as tensions with the US ratchet up during the final days of Donald Trump’s presidency. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed it had been notified of Iran’s decision to increase enrichment at the Fordow facility, buried in a mountainside to protect it from military strikes, although Tehran did not say when the process would begin. The weekend also marks the first anniversary of a US drone strike that killed top general  Qassem Suleimani , with Washington apparently bracing for possible retaliation. After the US stepped up military deployments and threatening language, Iran’s foreign minister, Javad Zarif, accused it on New Year’s Eve of trying to set up a “pretext for war”. In an apparent attempt at de-escalation the Pentagon has abruptly withdrawn the aircraft carrier Nimitz from the region,   the  New York Times  reported. The US president-elect, Joe Biden, has made clear that he hopes to revive the 2015 Iran nuclear deal, known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, which was abandoned by Trump in 2018. The deal limited  Iran  to enriching uranium to 3.67%. It also called for Fordow to be turned into a research and development facility. Iran began violating the deal in 2019, in response to America’s withdrawal and imposition of sanctions. But it has also signalled a desire to rejoin the deal, in return for sanctions relief. November’s IAEA report, the latest available, said that Tehran was still allowing inspections, and although it was enriching uranium beyond 3.67%, it was not exceeding a 4.5% threshold. Other signatories of the deal, including the EU, France, Germany, UK, China and Russia, have been playing for time, hoping the agreement could be restored under Biden. The German foreign minister, Heiko Maas, has said the change of administration in the US means that there is “a last window” for progress that “shouldn’t be wasted”. But Biden will be managing a very high-stakes relationship – and attempting to rekindle an always-controversial deal in the face of significant opposition inside both countries – at a time when the domestic fight against Covid is sucking up huge amounts of government time and energy. Iran originally began 20% enrichment under former hardline president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, heightening concerns that it was pursuing a nuclear weapons programme, although Tehran has always insisted it has only peaceful aims. The 2015 deal aimed to extend the country’s breakout time for creating a nuclear weapon from a few months to at least a year. If Iran resumes the higher level of enrichment, the international tensions that preceded the agreement could return. The latest move came after Iran’s parliament passed legislation following the November assassination of a top nuclear scientist, in  an attack blamed on Israel . The new law calls for the country to produce at least 120kg of 20% enriched uranium a year – a key step towards weapons-grade, which is 90% enriched – and put an end to IAEA inspections designed to check its programme is only for peaceful use. Ali Akbar Salehi, the US-educated head of the civilian Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, offered a military analogy to describe his agency’s readiness to take the next step in uranium enrichment. “We are like soldiers and our fingers are on the triggers,” Salehi told Iranian state television. “The commander should command and we shoot. We are ready for this and will produce [20% enriched uranium] as soon as possible.” He said natural uranium in centrifuges at Fordow would need to be switched out for material enriched to 4% if the further enrichment was to proceed. “It should be done under IAEA supervision,” Salehi added. Fordow is nestled in mountains near the holy city of Qom, about 90km south-west of Tehran.
China tightens curbs as cases surge; Denmark restricts all travel – as it happened:	A quick recap of what has happened in the past few hours: We will be closing off this blog soon. You can find our ongoing live coverage  here  and our new blog  here . Viral fragments of Covid-19 have been detected at a sewerage plant in south-east  Queensland . Fragments were  detected at the Redcliffe wastewater treatment plant yesterday,  in a sample taken from the plant earlier in the week. Queensland’s chief health officer,  Dr Jeanette Young , said: This does not mean we have new cases of Covid-19 in these communities, but we are treating this detection with absolute caution.  A positive sewage result means that someone who has been infected was shedding the virus. Infected people can shed viral fragments and that shedding can happen for several weeks after the person is no longer infectious. She added: Given the recent case of community transmission in Brisbane and the regular detection of cases in other states, I am urging anyone who feels unwell in the communities of  Clontarf, Deception Bay, Kippa-Ring, Margate, Newport, Redcliffe, Rothwell, Scarborough and Woody Point  to get tested and isolate ... If there is a case we are not yet aware of, it is critical we detect it through our testing mechanisms as quickly as possible to contain any potential spread. Australia ’s federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , says he will be discharged from hospital in Sydney this afternoon. He spent the night in the Royal Prince Alfred hospital after a car accident in Marrickville yesterday. Will be discharged from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital this afternoon and continue treatment as an outpatient- thank you for all the good wishes and a huge thanks to the paramedics, police, doctors, nurses, orderlies, radiographers and other hospital staff - you are the best Back in  Australia , Labor’s Indigenous affairs spokeswoman,  Linda Burney , senator  Patrick Dodson  and  Warren Snowden  have said  a consultation report on creating an Indigenous voice to government  “fails” because the models it proposes would not be able to provide full and frank advice, and be protected against abolition. In a joint statement, they said:  Labor thanks members of the advisory groups who worked on this interim report under difficult circumstances. Many will be disappointed with the government’s refusal to consider a constitutionally enshrined voice to the parliament. Three and a half years ago, First Nations leaders clearly expressed our desire for a First Nations voice to the parliament enshrined in the constitution – through the Uluru Statement – while the government banned its advisory group from even considering this. It is also difficult to see any progress being made before the next election. It is critical to real and lasting progress for First Nations people that we have a say in the policies and laws that affect us. A voice must be able to provide full and frank advice. It must be secure and it should not be subject to the whims of the government of the day. This report fails in that context. Labor remains committed to all three elements of the Uluru Statement: a constitutionally enshrined First Nations voice to the parliament; a Makarrata Committee to oversee a process for agreement and treaty-making; as well as a process for Truth-telling. Mainland  China  reported 33 new cases of Covid-19  on Friday, down from 53 on Thursday.  Most of the cases were in Hebei province, where a coronavirus cluster has grown by more than 130 cases in the past week.  From Reuters: T he National Health Commission said in a statement that  14 of the 17 locally transmitted infections were in Hebei , the province surrounding Beijing which entered a “wartime mode” this week as it battles a new cluster of coronavirus infections. Shijiazhuang, Hebei’s capital, announced on Saturday it would suspend service on its subway . Earlier this week, authorities banned people from leaving the city in an effort to curb the spread of the disease. Shijiazhuang is launching mass testing across its population of 11 million. On 8 January, municipal authorities told residents they must stay home for at least seven days even after they complete a nucleic acid test. The commission also reported  38 new asymptomatic cases, down from 57 a day earlier .   China does not classify these patients, who have been infected by the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes the disease but are not yet showing any Covid-19 symptoms, as confirmed cases.  Speaking of cases of the UK variant in  Australia , New South Wales authorities have released a statement saying a woman who was carrying that strain, and was released from hotel quarantine on 5 January after completing an isolation period and going 72 hours without any symptoms, was  not infectious when she returned to the community . They said: The person had been medically assessed the day before, met all exit criteria in place at the time, and on the basis of those criteria were considered clear of Covid-19. On the 7 January, genome sequencing found the person had been infected with the new UK variant of Covid-19. As a precaution, the person was immediately contacted by NSW Health and asked to isolate for retesting.  The person returned a positive test with a high CT value, which indicates low levels of infection, and returned to the Special Health Accommodation . This person attended several venues in Burwood in Sydney’s inner west on 6 and 7 January, which, as a precaution, were included in a public health alert released by NSW Health on Friday night. The person has one household contact who has tested negative to date. The full list of NSW exposure sites is  here . The  UK variant of Covid-19 has been detected in a case at the Howard Springs quarantine facility in the Northern Territory  in Australia. It’s the first time the variant has been detected in the NT. It has also been detected in Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia and Victoria.  Genomic sequencing revelled that a 26-year-old woman, who arrived at Howard Springs on an Australian government repatriation flight on 30 December and tested positive to Covid-19 on 31 December, was carrying the variant. The NT government said the woman remains under the care of health officials and under isolation.  Passengers and air crew on the same flight have been tested twice already with no positive cases resulting, and will be retested today.  China has announced fresh lockdowns in Hebei province, which borders Beijing, in a bid to stamp out a resurgence in infections before Lunar New Year. From AFP: Two Chinese cities south of Beijing further tightened virus restrictions Saturday  as authorities race to stamp out a resurgence in infections. China has largely brought its domestic outbreak under control after the coronavirus first emerged in Wuhan in late 2019 – but a spike in Hebei province, bordering Beijing, has sparked fresh lockdowns ahead of the Lunar New Year next month. Hebei has reported over 130 confirmed Covid-19 cases in the past week, with more than 200 more asymptomatic infections. Most of the cases were in Shijiazhuang city, which along with its surrounding areas is home to 11 million people. Several other infections were reported in neighbouring Xingtai city, home to 7 million. Shijiazhuang suspended subway operations from Saturday morning to aid “prevention and control of the outbreak”, authorities said. Major highways leading into the city, around 300km (200 miles) south of Beijing, have already been closed and inter-city passenger travel halted. Overnight, Xingtai announced a week-long stay-at-home order to residents in order to curb its outbreak. The curbs come ahead of the Lunar New Year, when hundreds of millions criss-cross China to visit family and friends, with National Health Commission vice-minister Zeng Yixin warning Saturday the festival “will further boost the risk of transmission”. Authorities are racing to roll out vaccines, with more than 9m doses given so far, Zeng added. Health authorities recently gave conditional approval to a vaccine candidate by Chinese pharma giant Sinopharm, with emergency use jabs already administered in the later part of 2020. Health authorities in  Victoria, Australia , have added one new potential exposure site in Melbourne. Anyone who attended  Block 7 Dumplings in Ringwood on 29 December from 8.10pm to 8.45pm  has been advised to monitor themselves for symptoms and get tested and isolate should they appear. You can read the full list of Victorian exposure sites  here . T hree people in Queensland have been fined for not wearing a face mask , after face masks became mandatory in greater Brisbane at 6pm last night.  Police handed out “hundreds” of free masks in greater Brisbane on Friday night, the Queensland police deputy commissioner,  Steve Gollschewski ,   told reporters today. On three occasions those persons were actually offered the masks, refused to wear them, offered again and were given directions to go home because they shouldn’t have been out. Police were left with no alternative but to take enforcement action, which they did. A fourth person was fined for being in an unauthorised area, and all were hit with a $1,334 fine for failing to comply with the chief health officer’s directions. Future fines for failing to wear a mask will be $200, but Gollschewski said infringement notices were not yet ready to be issued. Police are handing out masks rather than fines – our officers have 40,000 masks that they can hand out, so I think they’ve got plenty. But we need the community to listen to the messaging and if the police officer engages with you and says, ‘You need to put this mask on’, you need to put the mask on, so it is a pretty good deal. Australia ’s chief nursing and midwifery officer,  Alison McMillan , has just given a coronavirus update in Melbourne.  She spoke about the new guidelines from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia, which I’ve mentioned a few times today, on getting rapid genomic testing for positive cases in hotel quarantine, extending the required isolation period to 14 days, and getting an exit test. The  United States has  set a new daily record for new coronavirus cases , with 290,000 cases reported in 24 hours, according to the Johns Hopkins global tally. Some 3,676 people in the US died with the virus in the same period.  There have been 21.8m cases and 368,685 deaths in the US since the pandemic began. Mexico has reported 14,362 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 1,038 deaths .  It is one of the highest daily case increases and brings the total number of cases in Mexico since the pandemic began to 1,507,931, with 132,069 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the health ministry has said.  Coronavirus  border restrictions are  also causing problems at the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe . Zimbabwe has reintroduced movement restrictions following a surge in Covid-19 infections, which have doubled to 18,000 cases since the start of November. South Africa is the worst-affected nation in  Africa , with more than 1.17m infections and 31,800 fatalities since the pandemic began and unprecedented daily figures of more than 20,000 cases reported several times this week. More on this from AFP: Zimbabwean truck driver  Wallace Muzondiwa  queued four days in his vehicle to enter neighbouring South Africa after thousands of people rushed to the border to escape new Zimbabwean movement restrictions this week. The surge overwhelmed immigration authorities at the Beitbridge border post, South Africa’s second-busiest entry port, where angry crowds were stranded by the backlog. “The situation is very, very, very hectic,” said Muzondiwa, desperate to get back on the road after officials finally approved his coronavirus test and additional pandemic-related paperwork. “The line is going very, very slowly and the sun is very hot,” he complained. Flustered travellers hurried past with their luggage, hopping into minivan taxis parked alongside sizzling barbecue stands selling chicken wings on the go. Coronavirus has complicated cumbersome land border crossings in southern Africa, where trucks can sometimes wait days to get through sluggish customs. “What causes the delays at the borders are the documents,” explained South African driver Sinki Tshangise, 44, who has criss-crossed between Botswana, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe for almost a decade. Negative Covid-19 certificates often expire before arrival, he added, forcing drivers to pay for more testing on the road. “I don’t think I can afford to pay at each and every border,” said Tshangise. “It’s a real struggle.”
Palestinians excluded from Israeli Covid vaccine rollout as jabs go to settlers:	Israel is celebrating an impressive,  record-setting vaccination drive , having given initial jabs of coronavirus shots to more than a 10th of the population. But Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza can only watch and wait. As the world ramps up what is already on track to become a  highly unequal vaccination push  – with people in richer nations first to be inoculated – the situation in Israel and the Palestinian territories provides a stark example of the divide. Israel  transports batches of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine deep inside the West Bank. But they are only distributed to Jewish settlers, and not the roughly 2.7 million Palestinians living around them who may have to wait for weeks or months. “I don’t know how, but there must be a way to make us a priority, too?” said Mahmoud Kilani, a 31-year-old sports coach from the Palestinian city of Nablus. “Who cares about us? I don’t think anybody is stuck on that question.” Two weeks into its vaccination campaign, Israel is  administering more than 150,000 doses a day , amounting to initial jabs for more than 1 million of its 9 million citizens – a higher proportion of the population than anywhere else. Vaccine centres have been set up in sports stadiums and central squares. People over 60, healthcare workers, carers and high-risk populations have priority, while young, healthier people who walk into clinics are sometimes rewarded with surplus stock to avoid the waste of unused vials. The prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has told Israelis that the country could be the first to emerge from the pandemic. As well as  a highly advanced healthcare system , part of the reason for the speed could be economics. A health ministry official said the country had paid $62 a dose, compared with the  $19.50 the US is paying . Meanwhile, the cash-strapped Palestinian Authority, which maintains limited self-rule in the territories, is rushing to get vaccines. One official suggested, perhaps optimistically, that shots could arrive within the next two weeks. However, when asked for a timeframe, Ali Abed Rabbo, director-general of the Palestinian health ministry, estimated the first vaccines would probably arrive in February. Those would be through  a World Health Organization-led partnership called Covax,  aimed at helping poorer countries, which has pledged to vaccinate 20% of Palestinians. Yet vaccines intended for Covax have not yet gained “emergency use” approval by the WHO, a precondition for distribution to begin. Gerald Rockenschaub, the head of office at WHO Jerusalem, said it could be “early to mid-2021” before vaccines on the Covax scheme were available for distribution in the  Palestinian territories . The rest of the doses are expected to come through deals with pharmaceutical companies, but none have apparently been signed so far. Despite the delay, the authority has not officially asked for help from Israel. Coordination between the two sides halted last year after the Palestinian president  cut off security ties  for several months. But Rabbo said “sessions” with Israel had been held. “Until this moment, there is no agreement, and we cannot say there is anything practical on the ground in this regard,” he said. Israeli officials have suggested they might provide surplus vaccines to Palestinians and claim they are not responsible for Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, pointing to 1990s-era interim agreements that required the authority to observe international vaccination standards. Those deals envisioned a fuller peace agreement within five years, an event that never occurred. Almost three decades later, Israeli, Palestinian and international rights groups have accused Israel of  dodging moral, humanitarian and legal obligations  as an occupying power during the pandemic. Gisha, an Israeli rights group, said Palestinian efforts so far to look elsewhere for vaccines “does not absolve Israel from its ultimate responsibility toward Palestinians under occupation”. The disparities could potentially see Israelis return to some form of normality within the first three months of this year, while Palestinians remain trapped by the virus. That may have a negative impact on Israel’s goal of herd immunity, as thousands of West Bank Palestinians work in Israel and the settlements, which could keep infection rates up. In Gaza, an impoverished enclave under an Israeli-Egyptian blockade, the timeframe could be even longer than in the West Bank. The strip’s Islamist rulers, Hamas, have been unable to contain the virus and are enemies with Israel and political rivals with the Palestinian Authority. Salama Ma’rouf, head of the Hamas-run Gaza press office, estimated vaccines would arrive “within two months”, adding that there was coordination with the WHO and the Palestinian Authority. Heba Abu Asr, 35, a resident of Gaza, jolted when asked how she felt about others getting the vaccine first. “Are you seriously trying to compare us with Israel or any other country?” she asked. “We can’t find work, food, or drink. We are under threat all the time. We do not even have any necessities for life.” •  The photo accompanying this article was changed on 8 January 2021. A previous image showed a man in the Israeli city of Ashdod receiving a vaccination; in versions where caption information was not displayed, this may have given the impression that he was among Jewish settlers in the West Bank being inoculated.
Lethal airstrikes in Yemen ‘left off’ confidential UK record:	The government is under pressure to explain why a series of air strikes in  Yemen , many involving civilian casualties, have not been recorded in its confidential log of alleged breaches of international humanitarian law (IHL). The existence of the database, which has been kept by the Ministry of Defence since 2015, emerged only when the government became embroiled in a legal challenge over its decision to grant UK arms manufacturers export licences to sell weapons to  Saudi Arabia  for use in Yemen. The challenge came amid claims the weapons were being used in breach of IHL. By last July  more than 500 possible  breaches had been recorded in the database. But human rights groups allege that the true number of breaches in a conflict in which Saudi-led forces have conducted more than 20,000 air strikes must be much higher. The government refuses to publish the database, making it impossible to know which incidents have been recorded. Defence sources suggest this is because it contains information from a wide range of assets, some of which are considered so sensitive they cannot be made public. However, parliamentary questions have established that  a number of air strikes  in possible breach of IHL, recorded by human rights groups and NGOs in Yemen, have not been included. Last October, Labour’s shadow international trade secretary, Emily Thornberry, tabled a series of questions about a range of incidents identified by the  Yemen Data Project , a not-for-profit initiative maintained by security, human rights, and humanitarian experts which is considered to be the most extensive record of air strikes available. Among the attacks identified by the project, which the MoD confirmed were not included on the database, were those in January 2018 on a bridge and a market in Al-Mufdhah area, Qaflah Athr district, resulting in the killing of 17 people and injuries to more than 20 others, and a September 2015 air strike on a funeral gathering in Khabb wa ash Sha’af district in which 30 people died. The MoD has confirmed that a majority of the incidents Thornberry asked about were not recorded on its database. “There must be a full investigation into why these incidents have not been included, especially when all of the attacks are on civilian infrastructure and have had a civilian death toll,” said Andrew Smith of Campaign Against Arms Trade. “These people deserve recognition and they deserve justice. This raises questions about the robustness of the UK’s processes, but also underlines the appalling way in which this terrible war has been conducted.” In July Trade Secretary Liz Truss insisted that any potential breaches of international law committed by Saudi-led forces did not constitute a pattern and were ‘isolated incidents’. But CAAT said the gaps raised questions about the MoD’s commitment to tracking the incidents and whether it was ignoring evidence that the Saudi-led attacks were part of a broader campaign. “Since this brutal war began, Saudi-led forces have shown a total disregard for the lives and rights of people in Yemen,” Smith said. “The civilian cost has been devastating, but that has not been enough to convince Boris Johnson and Liz Truss to end the arms sales that have fuelled the destruction.” The UK has supplied more than £5bn of weapons to Saudi Arabia since the conflict in Yemen began. In September a UN report claimed that the UK and other countries providing arms to Saudi Arabia were potentially “aiding and assisting” war crimes by the country’s forces in Yemen. “As we approach the sixth anniversary of the conflict, it is more important than even that these arms sales are stopped, and so is the UK’s complicity in this brutal war,” Smith added. An MoD spokeswoman said: “The UK is deeply concerned by the ongoing conflict and humanitarian crisis in Yemen. We fully support the peace process led by the UN Special Envoy and urge the parties to engage constructively with this process. “A political settlement is the only way to bring long-term stability to Yemen and to address the worsening humanitarian crisis.”
Zimbabwe journalist Hopewell Chin'ono arrested for third time in six months:	Police in  Zimbabwe  have arrested the prominent journalist Hopewell Chin‘ono, for the third time in six months, his lawyer said. Doug Coltart said he was en route to the police station to confirm the charges against his client. Chin‘ono  posted on his Twitter account  that police had taken him from his house and said they were charging him with “communicating falsehoods”. The arrest comes after Chin‘ono tweeted that police had beaten an infant to death while enforcing Covid-19 lockdown rules this week. Police later said the information was false. Before the latest arrest, Chin‘ono  was out on bail on separate charges  of inciting violence after he voiced support for an anti-government protest in July and also on contempt of court charges for allegedly claiming corruption within the country’s national prosecution agency. Chin‘ono is  one of Zimbabwe’s most prominent critics  of president Emmerson Mnangagwa’s administration, accusing it of corruption and human rights abuses. The government denies the charges. Before  he was arrested in July , Chin‘ono had published an expose on Twitter, in which he alleged corruption involving a $60m purchase of protective equipment for health workers. Mnangagwa later fired the health minister, who has been formally charged with corruption in the case. Chin‘ono and his backers say he is being targeted for exposing government corruption. The government and the ruling party accuse him of being out to tarnish Mnangagwa’s image.
Syrian detainees' families forced to pay huge bribes to corrupt officials - report:	Families of detainees in Syrian prisons are routinely forced to bribe officials to be allowed to visit them or to win their release, according to a  report  that reveals the vast scale of extortion in the detention system. The sums involved – rising as high as £2m in one jail - are likely to be helping senior members of the Assad regime avoid sanctions, a survey of more than 1,200 former prisoners and family members suggests. A report by the Association of Detainees and the Missing in Sednaya Prison (ADMSP) says guards, judges, members of the military and in some cases middlemen receive cuts as part of a corrupt network that feeds large amounts of cash into the country’s security apparatus. About a quarter of those surveyed said they had been asked for extortion money. Some paid a few thousand dollars or less, while others – particularly families living in exile – paid up to $30,000 (£22,000). Officials at one jail extorted about $2.7m in total, the report suggests. Diab Serrih, the report’s author and ADMSP co-founder, said the money ended up in the pockets of corrupt officials, warlords and what he called the “deep government ruling  Syria  behind the scenes”. “It’s an industry of detention,” he said. “The Syrian regime is built on security and intelligence branches. They pay poor salaries to encourage corruption and the bribes finance this infrastructure of detainment.” Serrih claimed the system was endorsed by figures within the regime, many of whom are subject to sanctions and unable to hold bank accounts abroad. The total amount in bribes is likely to be much higher than that revealed in the report.  According to estimates by humanitarian watchdogs, between 100,000 and 250,000 people were arrested or forcibly disappeared, beginning before the uprising against  Bashar al-Assad  in 2011. That number had sharply escalated by the end of 2012. Tens of thousands of people are believed to have been tortured or killed in Syrian jails since the Arab spring began. Sednaya prison, a military facility on the outskirts of Damascus, has long been considered one of the most formidable institutions in Syria. Serrih was detained in 2006 after forming a youth opposition group and spent five years as a political prisoner before being released in 2011 as the regime cleared jails of opponents to make room for an influx of activists and protesters. He spent his childhood in the Sednaya area before moving to Damascus. After first fleeing to Turkey, he now lives in the Netherlands. The report says forced disappearance is a major strategy of the Syrian state, designed to control and intimidate people. “Arrest and monetary extortion of the population constitute a great source of funding of the state, and its repressive apparatus specifically,” it says. The report calls for the international community to pressure supporters of the regime, particularly Russia, into revealing the fate of the disappeared and to allow families to visit those still alive. It also demands that officials reveal where the dead were buried and allow DNA testing of remains so that victims can be returned to their families. Ahmad is one former prisoner who thought he would never see his family again. He was detained in nine different prisons in three years and his family paid $30,000 in bribes to get him out. “Like many families, mine kept paying $1,000 here and $1,000 there, hoping they were giving it to a person who could get them information,” he said. “Eventually they paid a large sum to a lawyer who told them that some of it will go to a judge and some to the security forces.” Abdullah was 19 and planning to desert the army, where he was serving his compulsory military service, when he was stopped at a checkpoint in October 2012. He was taken to prison, tortured and interrogated. “Every day, four or five people would die and be taken out of the cell,” he said. “They mostly starved to death. Guards would enter the cell and carry out summary beatings, leaving the prisoners in a state of mental terror.” In court he was convicted of stealing weapons and terrorism charges, and sentenced to 15 years in Sednaya. Food was given to prisoners sometimes, he said, but not if guards were in a bad mood. Talking and reading was forbidden, and torture was meted out to prisoners who were Sunnis but not those from Assad’s Alawite sect. “My parents hired a lawyer to cut my sentence to six years,” Abdullah said. “The lawyer paid $10,000 dollars in bribes. Me and my three brothers are still working to pay off the debt.” Many families have spent thousands of dollars trying to obtain news of their loved ones but received nothing in return. Nadia, a Syrian refugee in Lebanon, said she last saw her husband when he travelled to Damascus in December 2012 to renew identity papers. “He was in a car with his father and seven others,” she said. “The last thing we heard was that they had reached Homs. All nine disappeared.” In 2016 a neighbour told Nadia that a nephew in the military could help release her husband and father-in-law in exchange for cash. To raise the money, she sold land and a house in Syria, borrowed money from relatives and even sold her jewellery. “We paid $5,000,” said Nadia. “Later, we were told that their release was imminent but that another $5,000 was needed. After the payment was made through a western Union transfer, they disappeared. It was a scam. “It felt like it was so close and all in my hands, and when it didn’t happen, I broke down.”
The world in 2021 – how global politics will change this year:	A  potent mix of hope and fear accompanies the start of 2021 in most of the world. Scientists have created several vaccines for a disease that didn’t even have a name this time last year. But many countries, including the UK and the US, are still stumbling through the deadliest period of the pandemic. The shadow of Covid will not begin to lift, even in richer countries, for months. Britain was the first to approve a vaccine and has secured extensive supplies, yet Boris Johnson’s suggestion that life might be returning to normal by Easter is widely seen as optimistic. Other countries, particularly in the south, face a long wait to get vaccines, and help paying for them. The rebuilding of economies shattered by Covid everywhere will be slow; even countries that managed to contain it have taken a hit, from Vietnam to New Zealand. But when the immediate threat is over, the world will face other major challenges that in a normal year would have dominated the headlines. Perhaps most urgent – though not always seen as such by politicians – is the climate crisis. Wildfires and extreme weather have focused attention on the costs of a warming world, and the narrowing window to cut emissions and prevent catastrophic global heating. In November, world leaders are due to meet in Glasgow for a key summit. As it was delayed for a year because of the pandemic, there is mounting pressure for them to agree significant new steps. Greener growth is a priority for new US president Joe Biden, once he has met his first campaign promise to defeat Covid. His ability to influence this and other issues will be determined in no small part by  special elections  for Georgia’s two Senate seats on 5 January. Control of the Senate hinges on the results. Biden must also consider how to rebuild his country’s reputation abroad, after Donald Trump’s aggressive “America First” project saw him retreat from international obligations and attack multilateral institutions such as Nato. Ties with Beijing, which have deteriorated rapidly under Trump, are also likely to be a particular focus. After moving quickly to contain coronavirus,  China  has returned to growth already, and a trade deal with the EU in late December is a reminder of how attractive its economy remains to global investors. But there is still resentment in many countries over China’s handling of the earliest days of the pandemic and an apparent reluctance to allow an independent international investigation into the origins of Covid-19. The country’s communist leadership has also come under increased scrutiny over human rights abuses, from a sweeping security law used to  crush Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement , to internment camps for Muslim minorities in far western Xinjiang province. By the end of his term Trump had upended decades of policy, taking a hard line against Beijing on trade and diplomatic issues, including bolstering military and political support for Taiwan. Biden is expected to seek a less confrontational approach. With Trump gone, 2021 will also see tests for other populist strongmen. Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu will face his fourth general election in two years while corruption cases continue. Brazil’s Jair Bolsonaro heads into the third of a four-year term, but as pandemic payouts come to an end, his popularity could take a nosedive. Below, our correspondents around the world take a look in more detail at what 2021 may hold.  Emma Graham-Harrison Joe Biden faces the most daunting, overflowing inbox of any new US president since the second world war when he takes office on 20 January. The coronavirus pandemic has killed more than 346,000 Americans. The economy is struggling with unemployment at 6.7% and thousands queueing at food banks. Demands for racial equity and justice are more urgent. Russia is suspected of the  biggest ever cyber-attack on the US government . America is divided, its fragile democracy in need of repair. And the climate crisis cries out for leadership. Biden, at 78 the oldest US president ever elected, has made it clear that taming Covid-19 is the No 1 priority. America, reeling from a historic failure of leadership by Donald Trump, has 4% of the world’s population but 19% of the world’s deaths and more than 100,000 people in hospital. Biden recently warned that the “darkest days” in the battle against the pandemic “are ahead of us, not behind us”. The former vice-president has promised to sign an executive order on the day he is sworn in to require people to wear masks on buses and trains crossing state lines and in federal government buildings. He also aims to reopen most schools in his first 100 days. And he has set a target of 100 million vaccinations over the same period. But among Biden’s challenges is to win over those fearful that the vaccine is unsafe, as well as conspiracy theorists determined to sow distrust in it. Indeed, America’s disinformation pandemic may prove even more contagious and stubborn than the coronavirus if a certain former president continues to tweet from the sidelines, and if rightwing media outlets continue to amplify him. In this scenario, what began as “alternative facts” at the start of the Trump administration could develop into “alternative realities” under Biden, fuelling hyperpartisanship in Washington and rendering the country almost ungovernable. David Smith With Brexit done and dusted largely to the EU’s satisfaction, Covid vaccination under way and a more amicable – and predictable – US president in the White House, 2021 should by rights be an easier year for  Europe . But its own internal difficulties, along with the continuation of global geopolitical developments that long predate the crises of 2020, seem likely to make this year, too, a tricky one for the bloc to negotiate. The divide between many western member states and the governments of Poland and Hungary continues to widen, with 2020’s row over  Brussels’s attempts to tie the EU budget to respect for the rule of law  laying bare deep-seated cultural differences on core European issues such as immigration and liberal values. Meanwhile, Germany, along with France the EU’s economic and political powerhouse, risks being preoccupied for much of the coming year by the  departure of Angela Merkel  and the choice of her successor as chancellor, with elections due in September and possibly months of coalition talks thereafter. The Netherlands, an increasingly influential EU player particularly following the UK’s departure, also has parliamentary elections in 2021. In both countries, the Eurosceptic far right – effectively sidelined by the coronavirus pandemic for much of 2020 – could play a significant role as economic crisis replaces health crisis. Neither Germany’s AfD or Geert Wilders’s Party for Freedom look likely to end up in government – but they could well sway the policies of more mainstream rivals seeking to capture far-right votes, potentially influencing future dynamics in Brussels. Looking abroad, relations with two increasingly prickly near-neighbours,  Russia  and Turkey, do not look set to get any easier either, with neither Vladimir Putin nor Recep Tayyip Erdoğan looking to soften their anti-EU stance. And with a more integrated European foreign policy – despite much talk of “strategic European autonomy” – still some way off, the geopolitical rivalry between the US and China will force Europe to tread a delicate path between principle and self-interest. Add to that the need – in the aftermath of a pandemic – to take unpopular steps to tackle the climate crisis; a disputed drive for a common European defence and security policy; and growing transatlantic tensions over the EU’s plans to curb the excesses of the US tech giants, and 2021 looks, for Europe, not much easier than 2020.  Jon Henley From the very first weeks, 2021 in Africa is going to be a year of intense politics and noisy protests as new voices of the young and dissatisfied across the continent fight to be heard, new leaders seek to assert themselves and older ones try to hang on to power. There are huge problems – the devastating impact of Covid on communities and economies, growing insecurity in many regions, and environmental crises – and big questions are being asked by hundreds of millions of young people about their futures. Many analysts saw 2020 as a year when democracy suffered, with incumbents in countries from  Tanzania  to Guinea using a mixture of the security services, populist sloganeering and new laws to muzzle dissent. This year the same tactics may finally fail to silence vocal opposition groups – or may usher in a new period of repression. Later this month, a presidential election in Uganda will pit a 76-year-old veteran politician against a 38-year-old former reggae singer. Most analysts expect Yoweri Museveni, who has been in power since 1986, to win against the charismatic Bobi Wine, but, with  dozens already dead after police shot opposition supporters  and any number of tricks used to give the president a crushing advantage, there will be profound questions over the legitimacy of any victory. Wine draws his support from the young and the urban – two of the fastest-growing constituencies everywhere in Africa – and represents a new generation of leaders calling for an end to endless elections won by ruling parties or leaders, corruption and patronage politics. Later in the year, Ethiopia is likely to go to the polls to elect a new parliament. Here, in the continent’s second-most populous state, there is a different dynamic. Prime minister Abiy Ahmed represents that new generation of forward-looking leaders. The 44-year-old Nobel prize winner spearheaded the push to sideline the ageing rulers who had been in charge for 30 years and forced through reforms. But in November Abiy launched a  bloody military campaign  against the hardline remainder who resisted his efforts to remake the nation. Will the postponed parliamentary elections reinforce his reforming zeal? Or reinforce what critics say are his authoritarian tendencies? The coming year will tell us.  Jason Burke China starts the year on a social and economic rebound from the virus outbreak, but with drastically poorer international relationships, and a global community that is far less reluctant to act against it. Last year began badly, with Beijing’s attempts to cover up the coronavirus outbreak causing reputational damage which wasn’t fixed by later attempts to rebuild bridges with masks, PPE, and  vaccines . The World Health Organization is preparing to send an investigative team to Wuhan early in 2021, urged by countries like Australia  to be “robust” in its inquiries . Mounting evidence suggests the government will continue with its authoritarian moves on ethnic minorities in Xinjiang and Tibet, and its expansionist activities in border areas. Huge numbers of people are  expected to leave Hong Kong  for resettlement or asylum in the UK, Europe, Australia, and nearby Taiwan, where many have already fled. A dozen who were caught attempting to flee went on trial last month. Regional neighbours will watch the continuing military buildup and  threats to disputed islands  in the South China Sea and to Taiwan. Further afield, there has been no resolution of diplomatic and trade disputes with  Australia , the UK, Canada, and the US. Biden promises to remain tough on China, albeit without the unpredictable and publicly hostile diplomacy of Trump, but there is no sense of China backing down, even in the face of  sanctions  and international opprobrium. Domestically, China has ambitious emissions goals to work on, and will set its agenda with the adoption of its 14th five-year plan in the spring. Culture-shaping cases will roll on, including a reckoning with  China’s #MeToo movement , and the  reining in of Alibaba’s Jack Ma , who dared to become powerful outside the party system.  Helen Davidson Israel is  set to hold its fourth general election  in the space of two years as a protracted political crisis barrels into 2021. Despite repeated attempts, parliamentarians have been unable to form stable governments, in large part due to the loathing, distrust, but also glorification of one man: Benjamin Netanyahu. The 71-year-old prime minister, who has dominated Israeli politics since the mid-1990s, has managed to repeatedly block rivals from taking his seat. Now, with Israel’s traditional opposition having  largely been obliterated , Netanyahu faces what could be an even more perilous threat from a group of former allies who broadly share his nationalist, rightwing ideology. Naftali Bennett , a far-right former leader in the Israeli settler movement who has worked in Netanyahu-led governments, heads the Yamina party and seeks to become the next prime minister. Meanwhile, Netanyahu’s former protege, Gideon Saar, broke ranks last month to create the New Hope party. Avigdor Lieberman, once a lieutenant of Netanyahu and infamous for  his anti-Arab views , is also seeking to dethrone the Israeli leader, known locally as “King Bibi”. What seems increasingly certain is that whoever leads Israel’s next government will continue to take a hard line on the continuing occupation. While a new US administration offers the prospect of renewed negotiations, few predict a significant change in the status quo. Polls show Netanyahu’s Likud party could still emerge as the largest faction in parliament, and with the country of 9 million speeding ahead with mass vaccinations, the prime minister hopes by the time of the election in March he will be seen as the nation’s saviour. However, his reputation could take a further dent in February, when witnesses are due to give testimony in his corruption trial. While Netanyahu denies the charges, he  faces three separate cases, which include accusations of bribery and fraud .  Oliver Holmes Latin America’s most polarising ruler, the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro, faces a crunch year in 2021 – the third of his four-year term – and will do so without the support of his most important foreign ally, Donald Trump. The far-right renegade has so far managed to dodge responsibility for  Brazil’s dire response to the Covid-19 epidemic , which has killed more than 195,000 Brazilians, while also shaking off a succession of scandals involving his family. Polls show Bolsonaro still enjoys the approval of about 37% of the electorate – widely attributed to emergency coronavirus payments to tens of millions of citizens. But those payments cease in January, with many observers convinced that severe economic, political and social turbulence lies ahead, as public anger swells. “The pandemic is genuinely coming to an end,” Bolsonaro claimed before Christmas, as the number of coronavirus infections and hospital admissions again soared. The president’s problems may only be beginning. Venezuela’s  humanitarian and economic crisis  will also enter a new chapter in 2021, as Joe Biden enters the White House and turns away from Trump’s “maximum pressure” campaign. Venezuela’s authoritarian leader, Nicolás Maduro, has resisted that two-year crusade and Biden is certain to seek new, less confrontational solutions for what advisers reportedly consider his main diplomatic challenge in the western hemisphere. Quite what those solutions might be remains unclear – although negotiating with Hugo Chávez’s successor to secure free and fair elections appears to be the plan. In the short term, the historic exodus of impoverished Venezuelan citizens – which has already robbed the South American country of more than 5 million people – will continue, as the coronavirus crisis pushes Venezuela deeper into hunger and deprivation. For now, Maduro seems firmly in control, his leadership apparently strengthened by the botched effort to unseat him. But in a country as fractured and volatile as  Venezuela , perhaps not even he would want to predict where his year might end.  Tom Phillips Indian prime minister Narendra Modi is going into 2021 without resolving what many are describing as his biggest political challenge yet: the farmers’  protests , in which thousands have spent weeks camping on roads around Delhi, demanding that new agricultural laws be repealed. Discussions between farmers and Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) are in deadlock at present, but they are nonetheless the first time that a civilian backlash has brought the government to the negotiating table. Yet even with agricultural turmoil, Modi’s popularity rating remains untouchably high, consistently staying above 70%, paving the way for his government to continue the implementation of its Hindu nationalist agenda with increasing fervour in 2021, and to begin the campaign for a 2024 election victory. Violence against Muslims, carried out by local hardline Hindu nationalist groups, continues to rise; just a few days before the new year, a mosque in the state of Madhya Pradesh was vandalised by a rightwing mob. With India’s main opposition party, Indian National Congress, perceived as weak, rudderless, and divided by infighting, there remains little to get in the way of Modi’s Hindu nationalist agenda permanently reshaping  India . The pandemic allowed Modi’s government to tighten its authoritarian grip, in particular through the arrests and harassment of government critics and activists, and this crackdown on civil society is expected to continue, if not escalate, going into 2021. Of the 154 journalists in India who were arrested, detained or interrogated in the past decade, 40% of these instances happened in 2020. Many of the hundreds of activists and journalists arrested in 2020 under the guise of draconian anti-terror laws are still languishing behind bars, denied bail. However, the greatest immediate looming disaster for India this year is likely to be an economic one. India was the Asian economy worst affected by Covid-19, pushing the country into its first recession. Almost 50% of the country reported a drop in income and it is estimated that up to 400 million people could be pushed back into poverty.  Hannah Ellis-Petersen This year will bring a standoff between Vladimir Putin and the opposition leader Alexei Navalny, as the government seeks to keep Navalny out of the country  by threatening him with years in prison  should he return. Navalny has been in Europe since August recuperating from being poisoned by Russia’s FSB security service. Putin is likely to be keen to punish Navalny for embarrassing revelations about the FSB hit squad, including a taped confirmation from one of the agents obtained by Navalny himself. In the final days of 2020, Russia’s investigative committee accused the opposition politician of fraud, effectively giving him the choice of remaining in exile or returning to a prison sentence. Online investigations have been one of the few cracks in Putin’s control over internal politics in Russia. Investigative reports from Proekt, a new online outlet, suggested that Putin had a secret child with a lover and had been secretly working from Sochi in a room built to resemble his Moscow office. Another outlet, iStories, claimed Putin’s former son-in-law had  bought shares worth $380m  for just $100 shortly after he married Putin’s daughter. Now the government is targeting those kinds of reports and the journalists behind them. In late December, the Duma quickly passed new laws that would let regulators block YouTube and other foreign social media and punish media who made “slanderous” comments, including accusations of major crimes like embezzlement. The effects of global climate change wreaked havoc on Russia’s Siberian and Arctic regions last year, as rising temperatures sparked forest fires, caused crop failures, and even played a role in the  largest diesel spill in Arctic history . Temperatures are rising more quickly in these regions than elsewhere on Earth and the potential for tragedy is clear. In June, the remote town of  Verkhoyansk  recorded temperatures of 38C, the highest ever recorded within the Arctic Circle. Sea ice failed to re-form until late in the year in the Laptev Sea, where scientists believe that frozen methane deposits are being released that could speed further warming. In the same year, shipping through Russia’s Northern Sea Route, which knocks weeks off travel from northern Europe to Asia, hit record levels because of the lack of ice. The impact of climate change on this delicate region is no longer remote: it has become an urgent problem for Moscow and millions of Russians.  Andrew Roth Australia has a split personality, selling itself as a land of beaches, coral reefs and quirky marsupials while driving its major export industries of coal, liquid natural gas and iron ore. But that cognitive dissonance is starting to show. In 2021, Australia will have China and the climate crisis on its mind. The country will have to  reassess diplomatic relations  with its biggest trading partner, Beijing, which has banned or laid tariffs on exports including coal, barley, wine, timber, beef and seafood. About 40% of Australia’s foreign trade is with China. Tensions have become ever tighter as Australia blocked several Chinese business dealings and angered Beijing with a new defence pact with Japan. PM Scott Morrison’s call for an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus, whether reasonable or not, further soured relations. But what to do about coal? Australia sold A$13.7bn (£7.7bn) of the stuff to China in 2019, but now Beijing is saying no. Global investors are also saying no to the climate-warming fossil fuel. Communities and  wildlife are still recovering  from the wildfires of late 2019 and early 2020 that roared after the country’s hottest and driest year on record. Australia will come under further pressure domestically and internationally to bring in effective climate policies, especially a mid-century net-zero emissions target which the Conservative-Liberal coalition government has so far resisted. Without clear signs of ambition, Australia risks carrying a reputation as a fossil-fuel exporter and international climate change pariah to the Glasgow climate talks. Meanwhile the effects of climate heating continue to threaten the country. Will the Great Barrier Reef escape coral bleaching? Will Australia be burning again – literally or figuratively – as its diplomats head to Glasgow? Graham Readfearn
Iran vows to retaliate against any 'enemy action', one year after Suleimani killing:	The head of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, General Hossein Salami, has vowed to respond to any “action the enemy takes” during a visit to a strategic Gulf island amid  tensions with the US . Salami was speaking on Saturday, on the eve of the first anniversary of the  US killing of top Iranian military commander Qassem Suleimani  in a Baghdad drone strike. In the Iraqi capital, a mock funeral procession was held, with mourners visiting the site of the attack. Salami inspected troops stationed on Abu Musa island, accompanied by the Revolutionary Guard Corps navy commander, Rear Admiral Alireza Tangsiri. Salami said, according to the Guards’ official website, Sepah News: “We are here today to evaluate and be assured of our powerful capabilities at sea and against enemies who sometimes boast ... and threaten.”  “We would respond with a reciprocal, decisive and strong blow to whatever action the enemy would take against us.” Abu Musa and the Greater and Lesser Tunb islands lie in the Gulf near the entrance to the strategic Strait of Hormuz, through which a fifth of the world’s oil output passes. The islands are under Iranian control but are also claimed by the United Arab Emirates. Tensions have been building  in the run-up to the anniversary of Suleimani’s killing, with two US B-52 bombers recently flying over the region. On Thursday, Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, accused outgoing US president Donald Trump of aiming to fabricate a “pretext for war” after Trump blamed Tehran for a rocket strike on the US embassy in Baghdad on 20 December. On Saturday, Zarif claimed that in Iraq “Israeli agent-provocateurs are plotting attacks against Americans [to put] Trump in a bind with a fake  casus belli .” “Be careful of a trap,” Zarif tweeted at Trump, saying that “any fireworks will backfire badly, particularly against your same BFFs.” In Baghdad on Saturday, a mock funeral procession marked the anniversary of Suleimani’s death. Thousands of mourners marched along the highway leading to the airport where he and Iraqi militia leader Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis were killed. Posters of the dead men adorned both sides of the road, which was lined with tents that served food and drinks for those who walked the highway. The scene of the bombing was turned into a shrine-like area sealed off by red ropes, with a photo of Suleimani and al-Muhandis in the middle, as mourners lit candles. The aircraft carrier USS Nimitz has been patrolling Gulf waters since late November, but US media reported this week that acting US defence secretary Christopher C Miller had ordered the vessel to return home. The New York Times, quoting US officials, said the move was a “de-escalatory” signal to Tehran to avoid conflict in Trump’s last days in office. Trump oversaw a sharp toughening of US policy, abandoning a  landmark nuclear deal between Iran and world powers  in 2018 and reimposing crippling unilateral sanctions. The two countries have twice come to the brink of war since June 2019. Days after Suleimani’s assassination,  Iran  launched a volley of missiles at Iraqi bases housing US and allied troops, with Trump refraining from any further military response. On 25 December, the Guards naval chief visited the other two islands also claimed by the UAE and emphasised the importance of their garrisons’ “combat-readiness and awareness”, Iran’s ISNA news agency reported.
Iran seizes South Korean tanker as tensions with US mount:	Iran’s Revolutionary Guards have seized a South Korean vessel “for polluting the Persian Gulf with chemicals” amid rising tensions between  Iran  and the US during the final days of Donald Trump’s presidency. Iranian news agencies published photos showing Revolutionary Guards speedboats escorting the tanker MT Hankuk Chemi and said the vessel’s crewmembers, including nationals of South Korea, Indonesia, Vietnam and Myanmar, had been detained. The tanker is being held at Iran’s Bandar Abbas port city. South Korea’s foreign ministry demanded the vessel’s immediate release and said South Korean forces stationed in the strait of Hormuz had been dispatched to the area. The incident came before an expected visit to Tehran by South Korea’s deputy foreign minister, and against the backdrop of  rising tensions between Iran and the Trump administration . On Monday  Iran resumed enriching uranium to up to 20% purity , a significant breach of the 2015 nuclear accord, reducing the time it would take to reach weapons-grade level. The move, which Iran notified the UN nuclear watchdog about last week, was one of many mentioned in a law passed by Iran’s parliament last month in response to the  killing of the country’s top nuclear scientist , which  Tehran has blamed on Israel . Iran started violating the accord in 2019 in retaliation for  Washington’s withdrawal from the agreement  and the reimposition of US sanctions against Tehran. The enrichment is taking place at the Fordow site, which was built inside a mountain, apparently to protect it from aerial bombardment. The 2015 deal does not allow enrichment there. “Iran enriching uranium to 20% at Fordow is a clear attempt to increase its campaign of nuclear extortion, an attempt that will continue to fail. The United States and the international community will continue to look to IAEA inspectors to report the facts on the ground,” a US state department spokesperson said. “We have confidence that the IAEA will monitor and report on any new Iranian nuclear activities.” The state department also called for the release of the South Korean tanker. “The regime continues to threaten navigational rights and freedoms in the Persian Gulf, as part of a clear attempt to extort the international community into relieving the pressure of sanctions,” a spokesperson said. Iran, which has a history of seizing ships if the national flag carrier has a related dispute with Tehran, is furious that South Korea has for months refused to release billions of dollars of Iranian oil-export revenue that it says it needs to purchase anti-coronavirus medicines, including possible vaccines. In June Iran’s central bank said banks in South Korea were preventing Iran from using the money to buy foods and medicines – trade that is exempt from US sanctions. Iran announced in June that it had received medicines valued at $500,000 from South Korea after two years of negotiations. At the time, Iran’s foreign ministry said the deal was approved by Washington. It also said South Korea was about $7bn in arrears for oil exported before the  Trump administration  last year reimposed penalties on Iran’s crude sales. South Korea has always insisted it was working within the sanctions regime imposed by the US, and was working to secure exemptions for humanitarian supplies. Analysts questioned whether the ship’s seizure was part of an internal Iranian power struggle. Esfandyar Batmanghelidj from Bourse & Bazaar said there had been recent diplomatic progress on the repatriation of the Iranian money from South Korea with the South Korean foreign minister, Kang Kyung-wha, due in Tehran shortly to discuss possible humanitarian payments. It may be that the Iranian hardliners saw the ship’s seizure as a way of disrupting the fledgling diplomacy with the intention they could claim credit and say it was their tougher approach that led to a breakthrough.  South Korea said no chemicals had been spilled by the ship or any rules breached, adding that the ship had been approached by Iranian navy speedboats in international waters.  Sunday marked the first anniversary of a US drone strike that killed the top general  Qassem Suleimani , and Washington has apparently been bracing for possible retaliation. Both sides are watching the other warily in the final days of the Trump administration.  After the US stepped up military deployments and threatening language, Iran’s foreign minister, Javad Zarif, accused it on New Year’s Eve of trying to set up a “pretext for war”. On Sunday the US reversed a decision to bring an aircraft carrier home from the Persian Gulf, with the Pentagon saying that owing to “recent threats” by  Iran , the  USS Nimitz would stay in position . The original plan to leave the region was intended to be a de-escalatory signal to Iran. The US has already sent extra B-52 bombers across the area. The European Union had warned that 20% enrichment would mark “a serious deviation” from the commitments made by Iran in the nuclear deal signed in 2015. There will also be fears in Europe that Iran’s brinkmanship could provoke Israel into a military strike. The Iran nuclear deal’s main aim was to extend the time needed to produce enough fissile material for a nuclear bomb, if it chose to, to at least a year from approximately two to three months. It also lifted international sanctions against Tehran. The decision to increase the level of enriched uranium is probably directed more at strengthening Tehran’s negotiating hand with the incoming Biden administration. Reuters contributed to this report.
'We stayed to help others': a Syrian doctor on losing her husband to Covid:	Dr Raba al-Sayed looked across the Euphrates river towards her family home in the east  Syrian  town of Al-Bukamal in Deir ez-Zor and was gripped by trepidation. It was November 2017. With her husband, Adnan al-Jassim, and their four children, the family had finally managed to escape  Islamic State , the Syrian government and Russian bombing, and were preparing to make the next stage of the dangerous journey to Al-Bab in the Turkish-controlled north of the country. Jassim, also a doctor, had made a return visit to pick up medical equipment from the local makeshift hospital that could be useful when they arrived in the north. Then the airstrikes started. “When I saw the plane pounding the place where we were living, my heart broke,” said Sayed. “[Jassim] was badly injured and needed parts of his feet amputated after we got to Al-Bab, but within six months he was walking and treating patients again. “We chose to stay in Syria to help others … We thought we would be safer in Al-Bab. I could not imagine losing him to  coronavirus .” After fighting for months to keep coronavirus patients alive and trying to stop the virus spreading through the vulnerable community, Jassim was the first healthcare worker in areas of  Syria  outside Bashar al-Assad’s control to die of Covid-19 in September. When the virus began to spread outside China last year, an outbreak in north-west Syria, where 1.1 million people live in tents and makeshift accommodation, was feared. The region’s healthcare system, decimated by a decade of war, was already struggling to deal with malnutrition and other diseases. The pandemic did not properly take hold in rebel-held parts of Syria until the onset of cold weather at the end of the year. A total of 19,447 cases have now been reported, although the true figure is likely to be much higher because of inadequate testing, and coronavirus-associated deaths tripled between November and December, according to Ocha, the UN humanitarian agency. Fears are high that another bitter winter will exacerbate the number of cases in displacement camps, while much of the rest of the world prepares for the arrival of coronavirus vaccines . “It was already difficult to work as a doctor in Syria. The war has made it unsafe to be in your own hospital sometimes and we don’t have enough resources. And then coronavirus came,” said Dr Mustafa Mahmud, a fellow anaesthetist and intensive care doctor who worked alongside Jassim in three hospitals. “Dr Adnan was a true leader. He organised groups of doctors to help us fight the pandemic, and he tried to raise awareness among the population about handwashing, social-distancing, masks… “Losing him was very painful. And we also lose all the people he could have saved if he was still here. We are a bit better prepared now, with more beds and facilities, but it is still going to be a hard winter,” he said. Sayed agrees that rebel-held Syria faces a worsening health crisis. She is still recovering from a severe case of Covid-19, but says that continuing caring for others is the best way to honour her husband’s memory. “Adnan was my whole life … he was a light for me, my children and his patients. That suddenly went out,” she said. “He loved to help others. We must carry on with the work.”
South Korean forces arrive in waters near strait of Hormuz amid Iran tensions:	South Korean forces have arrived in waters near the strait of Hormuz as pressure builds on Iran to free a South Korean tanker it  seized  along with its crew on Monday. Iran’s Revolutionary Guards said they had taken control of the South Korean vessel, the Hankuk Chemi, and its 20 crew because it was “polluting the Persian Gulf with chemicals”. The tanker is being held at Iran’s Bandar Abbas port city. The Choi Young, a destroyer carrying members of the Cheonghae anti-piracy unit, arrived in the strategically important area on Tuesday, as officials in Seoul sought a diplomatic solution to the standoff. Officials stressed there were no plans to conduct a military operation to free the crew of five South Koreans, 11 Myanmarese, two Indonesians and two Vietnamese, according to the Yonhap news agency. “[The destroyer] is carrying out missions to ensure the safety of our nationals,” foreign ministry spokesperson Boo Seung-chan said on Tuesday. An unnamed official told Yonhap: “The issue should be resolved through diplomacy. The unit is focused on the safety of our people who use the waterway after the seizure.” The Hankuk Chemi’s owner said on Tuesday that Revolutionary Guard troops had stormed the vessel and forced it to change course and travel to  Iran . That account contradicts Iranian claims that the ship had been stopped for polluting the waters of the Persian Gulf and the strait of Hormuz. The South Korean foreign minister, Kang Kyung-wha, did not comment directly on speculation that Tehran had seized the vessel to pressure Seoul into releasing billions of dollars of Iranian assets frozen in  South Korea  as part of US sanctions against the regime. Kang said her priority was to “verify the facts and ensure the safety of the crew members”. She added: “We have been trying to figure out what happened through the Iranian embassy in South Korea and the South Korean embassy in Iran and are continuing to make efforts to address the situation.” There was confusion over plans to send a senior South Korean official to Iran this weekend to negotiate the vessel’s release. Iranian state TV cited a Tehran government official as saying that the vice foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, had been due to discuss Iran’s demand that $7bn in frozen funds be released. However, a foreign ministry official in Seoul told Reuters that Choi’s visit was “unclear as of now”. Last Sunday, the Tehran Times newspaper reported Iran was hoping to negotiate an agreement to use the frozen funds to “barter” for coronavirus vaccine doses and other commodities. The Revolutionary Guards said on Monday the Hankuk Chemi, which was carrying 7,200 tonnes of ethanol, “was seized by our force’s [navy] this morning”. They added: “This tanker was headed from Saudi Arabia’s Al Jubail port and was seized due to the repeated infringement of maritime environmental laws.”
Spider-Man-style medical gun spins out 'skin substitute' for burns:	Doctors in  Europe  and Israel have begun using a medical gun that spins out a protective web to cover burns and wounds, hoping the breathable “skin substitute” will help patients recover without the need for painful bandage changes. Nanomedic, the Israeli company that designed  the Spincare system , claims its device gives patients increased mobility – often essential for burn rehabilitation – and the ability to shower, a process that can be difficult with traditional bandages. The translucent layer it produces allows medics to examine the wound without touching it, the firm says. Rob Lyon, the managing director of the UK-based distributor for Spincare, said burns could be extremely difficult to dress, making the application of bandages agonising. “Spincare is a contactless device,” said Lyon, whose company, Regen Medical, specialises in burns and wound healing products. The protective mesh, Lyon said, “mimics the skin”, which allows patients to move around more easily. Electrospinning, the technique the device employs, involves using electricity to create nano-fibres from a solution, and has been in use for years, including in the medical field. Nanomedic says its device, however, is much smaller than the large electrospinning machines previously available, meaning it can be carried to a patient’s bedside. Gary J Sagiv, the company’s vice-president for marketing and sales, said hospitals in Germany and Switzerland had used the product for facial wounds, where large bandages could be burdensome. Others, he said, had applied it to wounds on people with diabetes,  who can develop chronic foot sores that can lead to amputation . Unwilling to provide a price, which he said differed depending on which country it was sold in, Sagiv claimed Spincare was cost-effective for hospitals compared with other advanced wound care bandages. Baljit Dheansa, a doctor in the UK who specialises in burns and scarring, said he had used Spincare on five patients at Queen Victoria hospital in Sussex, with positive results on superficial burns. “You have this fine whitish thing on that’s fairly robust and seems to cope with most things,” he said. With deep burns, it was less effective, he said, but clarified that Nanomedic had not claimed Spincare would be useful for deep burns. Dheansa said the product arrived at a time of debate within the medical community on whether the traditional approach of regularly changing bandages to assess wounds was counterproductive. Several  specialist bandages  already being used by doctors do not need to be changed often. “Spincare is the same sort of concept – the idea of protecting a wound and letting nature do what it will do,” he said. “Although it’s not absolutely novel in the sense that it’s a stick-on dressing that stays stuck, it’s novel way of applying it. And in some respects, it’s probably a little bit easier.” “You get your laser-guided weapon system … you just spin,” he joked, referring to the laser pointer on the tip of the medical gun to help the user aim. Queen Victoria hospital has agreed to buy more single-use capsules for the product, according to Dheansa, and he hopes to produce research on its effectiveness. “What we try as much as we can is to take a fairly independent view of these things. Although a company will say it does this and does this and does this, we’ve come in fairly innocently and independently and said, you say this but let’s actually see what it does.” So far, Dheansa said, Spincare “does what it says on the tin”. “With this kind of dressing, in the right circumstance, it just means the patient doesn’t have to learn about how to do dressings, and they are bit more flexible and don’t have to worry so much. And sort of relax a bit more.”
Qatar and Saudi Arabia breakthrough is more exhaustion than compromise:	The  meeting on Tuesday  between Saudi Arabia’s de facto ruler, crown prince  Mohammed bin Salman  and his Qatari counterpart Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani was hailed as a breakthrough that brought together two feuding parties who were finally willing to resolve their differences. But as the two leaders gathered at a Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) summit in the north-western Saudi region of Al-Ula there was no mention of concessions, or further ultimatums, such as those that had led to the rift. The detente seemed borne more of exhaustion than compromise; the talk more of brotherly unity than lessons learned, and the end to it all more about the incoming US president than regional realpolitik. Wins from the three year dispute, which saw Saudi Arabia and two other GCC members – Bahrain and the  United Arab Emirates  – as well as Egypt boycott Qatar amid a list of seemingly unmet demands, are hard to define. Not so the cost, both economically and politically. Qatar bore the burden of the former, while Saudi Arabia shouldered much of the latter, but the final toll has fallen on the very issue that the Saudi-led sanctions aimed to safeguard – Gulf solidarity. When the ambitious heir to the Saudi throne, together with the UAE ruler, Mohammed bin Zayed, moved against  Qatar  in late 2017, the charge sheet against the tiny Gulf state was long. They, and the three other countries, accused their neighbour of backing Iran’s ambitions, and supporting Islamist groups, including the Muslim Brotherhood – a preoccupation of the UAE leadership. A growing alliance with Turkey was also seen as a threat, and the removal of a Turkish garrison from Qatar listed as another demand. By Riyadh’s reckoning, its recalcitrant neighbour could be brought to heel, and the region would know that  Saudi Arabia  was under new management and not afraid to assert itself so visibly. Except, it didn’t work out that way. Qatar, the smallest – and richest per capita – of the Gulf states had long tried to position itself as a go between on regional issues, a country that could serve all parties, without being beholden to any. It contested that its relations with Iran and support for Islamist groups should be viewed through that prism, and dug in as the accusations flew from Riyadh and Abu Dhabi. It had the reserves to sweat out blockades and a friend in Ankara, which it could – and increasingly did – turn to. Qatar and the Islamist leaning government of Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan became closer than ever over the last three years. Together with the remnants of Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood, in exile in Turkey, they became the linchpin of an axis, up against Prince Mohammed in Riyadh, Mohammed bin Zayed in Abu Dhabi and Egyptian leader,  Abdel Fatah al-Sisi  – who see their regimes as more aligned with Arab nationalism, and view the rival alliance as a strategic threat. In Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Doha, state media helped deepen the faultlines and enmity replaced any chance of reconciliation – particularly as Turkey and Saudi Arabia faced off in the aftermath of the murder of Jamal Khashoggi, carried out in Istanbul by Saudi royal court aides. Over the past year, Riyadh had led attempts to break the ice, receiving the Qatari foreign minister and hosting the national football side. However, it took events further away to force a breakthrough – the ousting of  Donald Trump  – a staunch Saudi ally – from the White House, and the imminent arrival of Joe Biden, whom GCC leaders fear will take a softer line on an even bigger foe, Iran. After Biden’s election win last November, resolving the Gulf dispute became a lead priority. It could be cast as a trust building measure to the incoming president; something to take to the table when talk turns to Iran, with whom the Trump regime had avowedly tussled. Qatar, preparing to hold the 2022 football World Cup could do without further headaches, and also benefit from a diplomatic reset. Its precondition for a rapprochement was that it not be seen to be cowed into concessions. And, as talk in Al-Ula turned to fraternal bonds and common foes, there was no attempt to grandstand by either side. State media in Qatar had dutifully changed its tune, with Al Jazeera Arabic airing a breathless tribute to the Saudi capital Riyadh, and its Saudi counterpart touting unity. A cooperation agreement was signed in private – unlike the public shaming of 2017. Wounds however, remain raw. And it remains to be seen whether rallying against a common foe – Iran will be enough to overcome a spat that is seen in some regional and global circles as pointless and damaging. A fear remains that the detente may only tape over a faultline that has deepened over three unnecessary years. •  This article was corrected on 6 January 2021. Qatar was not ousted from the Gulf Cooperation Council but boycotted by three of its member states.
Calls for Saudi Dakar Rally boycott while women’s right to drive activist in prison:	Supporters of women’s rights activist Loujain al-Hathloul, who campaigned for women’s right to drive in  Saudi Arabia , have called for a boycott of the Dakar Rally for “sportswashing” the reputation of the conservative kingdom while Hathloul remains in prison. Racers in the off-road competition – including 12 women – are this week due to pass within a few hundred metres of Riyadh’s Al-Ha’ir prison, where Hathloul is being held. “Women’s rights activists have endured years in prison, psychological and physical torture, and sexual abuse for campaigning for the right to drive. Many remain in prison to this day,” said Lucy Rae, spokeswoman for Grant Liberty, a human rights advocacy body which campaigns on behalf of Saudi prisoners of conscience. “It is utterly grotesque that at the same time Saudi authorities will host a motor sport event – including women drivers – while the heroes that won their right to drive languish in jail.” Amaury Sport Organisation, which runs the rally, did not immediately respond to emailed requests for comment. Hathloul, one of Saudi Arabia’s  most prominent activists,  was kidnapped and detained in 2018. She was  jailed last month for five years and eight months  in prison after being found guilty of spying and conspiring against the kingdom. Two years and 10 months of the sentence were suspended by the court and the start of the jail term was backdated, meaning the 31-year-old has only two months left to serve, a move decision makers in Riyadh hope will defuse a potentially damaging early confrontation with the Biden administration. Campaigners nonetheless described the sentencing as “shameful”, pointing out that Hathloul was held for almost three years without charge. The activist’s parents, who are her legal team, claim their daughter has been subjected to torture and sexual assault during incarceration and held incommunicado for long periods of time. Saudi authorities have repeatedly denied the allegations of ill-treatment. The Paris-Dakar Rally moved to South America in 2008 after terrorism threats in west Africa.  Saudi Arabia  became the host last year as part of the kingdom’s multi-pronged strategy to open up to the world and wean itself off dependence on oil revenues by 2030. Riyadh has also embarked on a series of wide-reaching social reforms since  Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman  was appointed heir to the throne four years ago. Women gained the right to drive in 2018, a few months after Hathloul was detained, a decision interpreted as a message that change in the kingdom can only come from the top down. The kingdom has repeatedly denied that Hathloul was arrested for campaigning for women to be allowed to drive, but instead for attempting to undermine the royal family. The case underlines how little political dissent is allowed within the country. “No-one should be fooled by the Saudi regime’s attempts at sportswashing ... Racers might not know it, but their participation there is to hide and whitewash the host’s crimes,” said Lina al-Hathloul, Loujain’s sister. “The PR machine claims that hosting global sporting events is a sign the country is opening up, but the reality is that just a few hundred metres from the course my sister languishes in prison because she campaigned for women’s right to drive. Saudi Arabia needs real reform, real human rights, not this charade.” As well as Hathloul, three other activists who focused on Saudi women’s right to drive – Mayaa al-Zahrani, Nouf Abdulaziz al-Jeraiwi and Samar Badawi – remain in prison. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. The original incorrectly said the rally would pass by Riyadh’s Al-Ha’ir prison on Tuesday. This has been corrected.
I didn't want to be a 'Lebo' growing up in Australia, but I came to love who I am:	I am not actually Lebanese. Sure, my parents are Lebanese, my Arabic is Lebanese-tinted and I can be extremely critical of my local Lebanese joint, but the reality is I am not actually from  Lebanon . No, I am a “Lebo”, a special blend of Lebanese and Australian, rooted in western Sydney and thoroughly unique. Born of the kids of migrants, being Lebo comes with its own fashion sense, steeped in sports brands, its own complex palette, politics and rough boundaries, over time developing into its own sense of self. It’s hard to put into words what, specifically, it means to be Lebo. To me, it is defined by a particular crude honesty and brashness, a dismissal of any kind of limitation, and an unapologetic embrace of the local. I’ve seen it easily attract condescension, with its overt authenticity and the way it stakes a claim to being Australian in its own way. But, having grown out of minority communities, it’s also characterised by paranoia and insecurity, born in feeling unwelcome in your own country. Being called a Lebo was once an insult, that our backgrounds were never worth pronouncing. It was what Alan Jones called us in the lead-up to the Cronulla riots –  famously reading out a listener text  inviting “every Aussie” to “Leb and wog bashing day”. It was what we’d hear spat out by racists, disgusted by our existence. But I’ve watched my community come into its own, and it’s high time we reclaim the name and identity, which I think is actually very distinct from being Lebanese. I was born in Australia, and have lived my whole life among my community in western Sydney, its own little world. As a kid I had never actually visited Lebanon, only regaled with rose-tinted tales from my parents. I stood out like a sore thumb in a place I’d hoped to just melt away in But once I had the money and the capacity, I went five times in three years. I was obsessed, I had to know how Lebanese I was, I had to shed years of minority angst and finally claim my identity. But, of course, that’s not how identity works. What I found in Lebanon was worlds away from the Lebanese I had come to understand in Australia. I knew it would happen but I couldn’t help but hope I’d find some peace there. Instead, I found an incredible, complex country, weighed down by its history and politics, bouncing with energy and creativity. Somehow, bursting with hope and utterly hopeless at the same time. But certainly not “my” country. I couldn’t imagine their experiences, couldn’t connect with what it meant to be Lebanese, not by fault but by design. Simply put, I’d never lived there. The realisation came in waves. I stood out like a sore thumb in a place I’d hoped to just melt away in. Sometimes it came when I realised how different Australian Lebanese food is to food in Lebanon. It was in being picked out as a foreigner at every shop, regardless of what I did to hide that fact. It was the details in the language you miss when it isn’t your first language. But it was most evident in my interactions with my cousins. Those around my age looked and acted nothing like the Lebos I knew in Sydney. They could’ve come from another universe at that point. It’s a strange pain to deny who you are, a suffocation you only realise when it is released It wasn’t until I relented and abandoned my expectations that I better connected with them, until I accepted my understanding of Lebanese identity wasn’t universal, but particular to western Sydney. But this isn’t a lamentation. It was that experience that led me to the radical realisation that I didn’t need to seek to know my identity, I already knew it! I just had to accept it. It took a while. I have a fractured relationship with being Lebo, I tried many times to escape it. From growing my hair out in the hopes I’d look like Lleyton Hewitt circa 2004, to no longer wearing sports brands. I even began adjusting how I speak, so nobody could guess my background. I desperately didn’t want to be Lebo. Eventually I just physically escaped, moving overseas where nobody would associate me with being Lebo. Where I could just reimagine myself over and over and pick new identities. Of course it didn’t work, the constant running and delusions eventually collapsing onto themselves, leaving me with nothing but my identity in the rubble. I could only stare at it wistfully, hoping it’ll evaporate into thin air if I tried hard enough. Most importantly, I just found myself constantly unhappy. It’s a strange pain to deny who you are, a suffocation you only realise when it is released. To some degree, my angst was a product of Australia itself. I did not see myself or my identity in the TV shows I watched, only in the news. Inherently, I hated being Lebo because of the reputation it carried. But it wasn’t until I realised that I missed the particular kind of charcoal chicken you can only get in Granville that I came to understand I was denying who I was. I was searching for something I already had. A sense of self, a sense of belonging and understanding. I love my community, warts and all. I love western Sydney, its unique blend of crazy and delicious. I love wearing all my sports brands, love my sneaker collection and I love my accent. It has taken me years to say that, but I could not be more grateful to be here. And now I will celebrate with some chicken, toum (garlic dip) and chips, content in who I am.
My life is on hold, frozen at the moment my son died in the Beirut blast:	Five months ago, my son died. As I write these words and read them over and over again, they are so incomprehensible that they might as well be in a foreign language. Again and again I read them, unable to grasp that they relate to me, that they form part of my story. These words belong in a novel, or a sad news story about some poor family that I will never meet, but will take a moment to feel sorry for before going back to my life.  They cannot be my life . I cannot be the one that people look at and silently thank God that my life is not their own. Needless to say, I am nowhere near the acceptance stage of grief. I continue to regularly flit in and out of the land of denial. Part of the challenge is the shocking way that my son Isaac died – in the  Beirut blast , one of the biggest non-nuclear explosions in history. It all happened so quickly. One minute I was sitting with Isaac having dinner and singing nursery rhymes, the next I found myself sitting at my in-laws’ house in suburban Perth – about as far removed from Beirut as you can get – without him. I know there was a whole lot of stuff in between – the explosion, the hospital, the challenge to get flights out of the country. But it is all a blur. Within seconds, our whole life came tumbling down around us like a house of cards. What happened was so huge and so beyond the realm of imagination that my mind cannot compute that I lived through it. When I think of that day, and the immediate days that followed, I feel like I am watching myself in a movie, rather than remembering actual events. The inability to wrap my head around the explosion and the way Isaac died, aged two years and three months, means I also can’t wrap my head around this new reality. I feel like an interloper in this world, an observer but not a participant. This life in suburban Perth seems surreal and unnatural. It is like I have slipped into a parallel universe and I am just waiting to slip back to the “real” one, the one where Isaac exists and our family is whole. On the occasions when it does hit me that yes, I am actually here in the suburbs of Perth and this part is real, it makes me wonder if my former life – and Isaac – were all just my imagination. Was life with Isaac simply a beautiful dream? Or am I currently in a never-ending nightmare that I can’t wake up from? The contrast between my two existences is so stark, the events that led me to where I am today so surreal, the blow so cruel, that I simply cannot reconcile this new reality with my old one, so in my mind only one must be true. The only thing connecting the two realities is the flashbacks I get while going about my day. A loud sound makes me want to duck for cover, the squeals of children playing conjures up the screams that filled the hospital corridors, and a quiet moment brings to mind my last image of Isaac’s face, scared and confused. People around me go to work, attend parties and spend time with their children. They laugh, they cry and they worry about their own problems. Their lives continue as “normal”, unaware of the small things that immediately transport me back to that horrific night in Beirut. They live their lives, while I remain frozen. Time doesn’t interact with grief the way we expect it to. Somehow the sun still rises every day. Somehow it still sets. But life as I know it stopped at 6.08pm on 4 August 2020, and that is where part of me remains. The idea that five whole months have passed is as incomprehensible to me as the explosion itself. How have I survived five months without my little boy? Before his death, I spent a total of three nights away from Isaac. The first night, when he was eight months old, I was hospitalised with a bad stomach virus. I remember sitting up in that hospital bed at NYU, breast pump attached because I was still breastfeeding, and crying my eyes out. Isaac was no more than a kilometre away, safe at home with his dad, and yet it felt like he was a million miles away. The second time was when he was 18 months old, and I travelled to Kuwait for two nights for work. I cried all the way to the airport and vowed then and there – before I had even left the country – that I would not travel for work again unless I could take Isaac with me. Each of those three nights away from Isaac felt like torture, and yet I have now spent 156 nights without him and I have a lifetime to go. How have I gone 156 nights without reading Isaac his bedtime story? 156 nights without having him give me a big bear hug and saying “Bonne nuit, Mama”? – 156 nights without sneaking into his room late at night just to double check he is OK? How have I survived 156 nights? I don’t want to move forward – each step forward in time is a step away from Isaac and our life with him – but going backwards is impossible. And so I am stuck. Life moves on around me, but I am stuck at 6.08pm. The horror of what happened to Isaac, the grief that I feel, permeates every aspect of my being. It is all-encompassing, suffocating even. I live in a permanent state of cognitive dissonance: on the one hand fully aware of what happened, on the other unable to believe or accept it. Time and space do not mean the same thing any more. Grief is not only dealing with the loss of my son, but coming to grips with the fact that our lives have fundamentally changed, and try as we might, time marches on whether we like it or not. Sarah Copland is a United Nations officer working on women’s rights and gender equality
Iraqi court issues arrest warrant for Trump over killing of paramilitary chief:	A Baghdad court has issued a warrant for the arrest of the US president,  Donald Trump , as part of its investigation into the killing of a top Iraqi paramilitary commander. Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis , the deputy head of Iraq’s largely pro-Iran Hashed al-Shaabi paramilitary network, died in the same US drone strike that killed the storied Iranian general Qassem Suleimani at Baghdad airport on 3 January last year. The strike on their motorcade was ordered by Trump, who later said it had taken out “two [men] for the price of one”. The UN special rapporteur for extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Agnès Callamard, has described the twin killings as “arbitrary” and “illegal”. Iran already  issued a warrant for Trump’s arrest  in June, and  asked Interpol to relay it as a “red notice ” to other police forces around the world, a request that has so far gone unmet. The court for east Baghdad issued the warrant for Trump’s arrest under article 406 of the penal code, which provides for the death penalty in all cases of premeditated murder, the judiciary said. The court said the preliminary inquiry had been completed but “investigations are continuing in order to unmask the other culprits in this crime, be they Iraqis or foreigners”. In the run-up to Sunday’s anniversary of the twin killings, pro-Iran factions stepped up their rhetoric against Washington and Iraqi officials deemed to have colluded with it.
Saudi Arabia set to end three-year feud by reopening borders with Qatar:	Saudi Arabia will reopen its land and sea borders with Qatar, in the first steps toward  ending a diplomatic crisis  that has deeply divided regional US allies since 2017. Kuwait’s foreign ministry announced the move on Monday, as part of a deal towards resolving a  political dispute  that led Riyadh and its allies to impose a boycott on Qatar. The state-run Kuwait news agency reported the announcement, saying  Saudi Arabia  would open its borders with Qatar from Monday evening. According to several reports, Qatar will, in return, drop its lawsuits against Riyadh and its allies, as part of a broader agreement to defuse tensions, due to be signed on Tuesday. Qatar’s only land border has been  mostly closed since mid-2017 , when Saudi Arabia, Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain launched a blockade against the tiny Gulf state, accusing it of supporting Islamist groups in the region and of having warm ties with Iran. Kuwait has been mediating between Qatar and the four Arab states. The lifting of the embargo by Saudi Arabia paves the way for Qatar’s ruler to attend a summit of Gulf leaders on Tuesday that will be held in the kingdom’s desert city of Al-Ula and chaired by the Saudi monarch, King Salman. The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) summit will be “inclusive”, leading the states towards “reunification and solidarity in facing the challenges of our region”, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman was quoted as saying in remarks carried by the Saudi state-run news agency. The foreign minister for the  United Arab Emirates , Anwar Gargash, said he welcomed “a return to GCC unity at tomorrow’s summit”. The decision by the close US allies comes in the final days of the Trump administration’s time in office, and just ahead of president-elect Joe Biden’s swearing-in. Bader al-Saif, assistant history professor at  Kuwait  University, suggested that the Trump team was claiming disproportionate credit for ending the standoff. “Quite astounding how the current US admin is trying to milk “achievements” out of the region before it departs, whether in its push for normalization agreements or now claiming the current breakthrough,” Saif  said on Twitter , adding that, though the Trump administration “played a role alongside Kuwait”, it had also been “part of the problem”. Many Gulf experts have argued that Donald Trump and his son-in-law Jared Kushner’s personal support for the Saudi crown prince emboldened Riyadh to attempt its stranglehold on Qatar four years ago. Karen Young, resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and a scholar on the political economy of the Gulf,  argued that  “the breakthrough likely has more to do with a changed reality in Washington and Saudi need for recalibration; as well as changed fiscal reality of GCC states.” Young said that  Qatar  was needed in the GCC “tent” but pointed out that the Gulf rivals’ broader visions for the region were still at odds.
Beirut's wounds on show in display of art damaged by port blast:	Through the entrance is a version of Guido Reni’s 17th-century portrait of St John the Baptist, blown to shreds. Nearby, a chandelier lies splattered on the ground where it fell. Mirrors are cracked, paintings ruptured, and roofs in some rooms half-caved in. Beirut is slowly rebuilding from the explosion on 4 August that destroyed much of its eastern seafront neighbourhoods and tore through galleries and hotel lobbies where some of Lebanon’s most renowned art was on display. A new exhibition in the city seeks not to put artworks together again but to remake them, despite the gashes in canvasses and grazes in sculptured stone. Wounded  Art , a collection of works damaged and destroyed by the blast, opened this month in the city’s Villa Audi, a mosaic museum that was itself badly hit. In small rooms with curated music and passages from Lebanese writing and verse, lights mounted behind the canvases call attention to damage done to each work. “The idea was to build the piece of art again without touching it,” says the curator, Jean-Louis Mainguy. “To build it again with music, with Lebanese poetry and literature, and of course the light.” Nayla Romanos Iliya’s sculpture Entangled Love had been in the lobby of Beirut’s five-star Le Gray hotel a few hundred metres from the port. The explosion gutted the building, badly damaged the piece and sent Iliya into “a coma-like state”, she said. “I was not able to function, I was not interested to work, unable to create anything, unable to think, it was too much to cope with,” she said. “The fact of proposing to show art that probably endured the same thing I did was the magic formula for me. I felt like blood was running again in my veins.” She chose to include Entangled Love along with another of her damaged sculptures, Salaam, which had also been in the lobby of the hotel, located in the city centre which was a focus of Lebanon’s protest movement in 2019. “To me the sculptures were witnessing everything that had been happening in Beirut and the coup de gras was this explosion, and they ended up falling and being damaged.” The exhibit also includes artwork created since the blast, and some subjected to “enhanced relief”, including a piece by the British painter Tom Young, who roughly stitched together the torn canvas of one of his works. The blasted centre of Reni’s St John is covered by projections of other historical depictions of the baptist, until the light suddenly dies, leaving a brown canvas surrounded by strips of colour and a lone recognisable foot. “The primary idea is: why do we have to restore?” said Mainguy. “Why can’t we just live with the wound? Why do we have to forget it? And how far do we have to go to live with this wound in our everyday lives?” In a city facing concurrent economic and health crises alongside the ongoing impacts of the blast, these were more than aesthetic matters, he said. “These are the questions we’re asking, and all the pieces in this installation are in fact answers.” The exhibition, sponsored by Banque Bemo and the Audi Foundation, is on display until 16 January.
Arab states agree to end three-year boycott of Qatar:	A three-year boycott of  Qatar  by four other Middle Eastern countries that disfigured Gulf cooperation and raised concerns in the west about a strengthened regional role for Iran and Turkey has come to a stuttering close. “The kingdom is happy to welcome you,” Saudi Arabia’s crown prince Mohammed bin Salman said as he greeted Qatar’s emir, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, on the tarmac of the airport in Al-Ula, north of Medina, on Tuesday. With varying degrees of enthusiasm, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and the  United Arab Emirates  announced they were ending their air, land and sea boycott of the tiny, gas-rich state of Qatar. The boycott had begun in June 2017, when the four countries accused Qatar of supporting Islamist groups in the region and of having warm ties with Iran. The summit agreed a solidarity statement in which all sides agreed to respect the principle of non interference in one another’s affairs whilst retaining the freedom to conduct their own foreign policy. In his remarks to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) summit on Tuesday, Prince Mohammed, Saudi Arabia’s de facto leader, stressed the need for Arab unity to confront  Iran . “We are today in need of such unity to counter the threats against our region represented in the Iranian regime’s nuclear programme, its ballistic missiles and agenda of sabotage adopted by its sectarian proxies,” he said. “This demands that the international community work seriously to stand against these harmful practices that threaten the peace of the region and world.” As part of the deal Qatar has agreed to freeze a number of its high-profile legal claims, such as at the World Trade Organization and to sign up to a non-aggression pact with the boycotting states aimed at tempering a media war waged by local websites.  But most of the boycotting states’ 13 political demands, such as ending support for the Muslim Brotherhood and closing a range of media operations including Al Jazeera, have been quietly dropped. Qatar has said all along during negotiations mediated by Kuwait that submitting to the demands would have meant effectively losing sovereignty over its foreign policy and becoming a cipher for  Saudi Arabia . The summit is widely seen as an attempt by Riyadh to clear the ground for a better relationship with the incoming Biden administration in the US, even though the actual reconciliation was brokered by Kuwait and Jared Kushner, the son in law of outgoing US president Donald Trump. Kushner flew to the summit to celebrate the end of the rift. One source knowledgeable of the deal said “The impression was Saudi wanted to move because of Biden’s election, but it took Kushner to bring along other states like the UAE that were more reluctant.” Riyadh also feared that if the boycott persisted Turkey and Iran might benefit by giving them an opportunity to draw Qatar closer into their orbit. The dispute has nevertheless left scars on the region, and some analysts say fundamental ideological differences have been left unresolved, including Qatar’s belief in its role as a mediator in disputes across Africa and the Middle East. Qatar has long argued that trying to suppress legitimate grievances with a security-led response fuels terrorism.  On Twitter, Qatar’s former prime minister Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim al-Thani wrote: “While I certainly welcome the end of the crisis from the bottom of my heart, I appeal and invite everyone to take lessons to avoid the outbreak of such crises in the future. In order to ensure this, there must be a deep and frank study of the causes of this crisis, and the psychological wounds it left behind, which afflicted the entire Gulf community and shaken confidence in the future.” The reconciliation, in doubt right up to the last few days, means that subject to Covid-19 disruption Qatar will be able to host the World Cup in 2022 without the distraction of a neighbourhood dispute. There are also hopes that fractured personal relations between families hailing from different parts of the Gulf will be healed. In practical terms the reconciliation means Qatar will no longer need to pay Iran to fly over its airspace, which was costing Qatar millions of dollars in fees.. Despite Prince Mohammed’s focus on confronting the threat posed by Tehran, Qatar is unlikely to sever its links with Iran, since the two countries share a giant gas field and Qatar does not believe the nuclear deal signed in 2015 should be ended. Reflecting his country’s ambivalence about the end of the boycott, Dr Anwar Gargash, the UAE’s foreign minster, tweeted that although “a bright new chapter had opened” there was more work to be done. 
The Observer view on the Brexit trade deal:	Any deal is better than no deal. But the agreement that Boris Johnson struck with the European Union on Christmas Eve is no political triumph, no diplomatic feat. It will one day surely be regarded as one of the greatest-ever deceits inflicted on the British electorate. We were told that a free trade agreement with the EU would be “ one of the easiest  in human history” to get, that we were “ going to get a great deal ”. We were told that a free trade agreement would give us “the exact  same benefits ” of EU membership without any of the obligations or financial costs. Yet the deal Johnson has reached will inflict all the costs he denied it ever would. It will take some weeks to fully digest the many pages of legal text. But it is already clear that this deal will have enduring consequences for Britain in the coming decades: for the wellbeing and resilience of communities across a highly unequal nation; for the potential for the UK to be an influence for good in an increasingly unstable world; and perhaps even for the very integrity of our nation. Johnson’s act of national harm could not come at a worse time. It will set in train significant economic damage during a global pandemic that has left the NHS and economy reeling. That we have ended up here is no great surprise. It was always in the interests of both sides to reach a deal before this week’s hard deadline. But no number of bombastic speeches from Johnson can disguise that the realpolitik of negotiation finally forced him to grapple with Brexit’s fundamental tradeoffs. The man who has spent years telling voters Britain can gorge itself on cake now and forever has agreed to pay a serious price. First there are the costs that will be measured in pounds and pence. This trade deal is unique in erecting rather than eliminating barriers to trade. Goods will be subject to costly new customs and regulatory checks. Services – which make up 80% of the British economy – do not even get a look in. The  economic consequences  will be profound: the Office for Budget Responsibility has forecast that in the long term, this kind of deal will reduce Britain’s long-run GDP by 4%, dwarfing the long-run  costs of the pandemic . But, as  we wrote  in 2016, the EU was always much more than an economic project. It was an idealistic undertaking to prevent the continent ever again being racked by war. Decades later, we live in a world marked by new types of instability. The biggest global challenges we face – the climate crisis, global pandemics, international tax avoidance on an eyewatering scale – can be tackled only through nation states acting in concert, rather than alone. This, together with the fact that we live in a globalised world where the most successful countries choose regulatory alignment in order to facilitate trade, puts paid to the isolationist and old-fashioned notions of national sovereignty trumpeted by the small-minded politics of the Leave campaign. The EU is not flawless – no union of 28 nations could be anything but imperfect – and it faces existential challenges of its own. But the world is a better place for it, and it is a cause for great sadness that the UK is turning its back on what it represents. Britain has not been dragged along as a reluctant passenger: from Margaret Thatcher to Tony Blair, generation after generation of politicians have shaped the EU from the inside. This deal will diminish the UK’s global influence not just from the perspective of our national interest but in terms of our wider international responsibilities as one of the world’s richest liberal democracies. It is the internal politics of the Conservative party that made this type of hard Brexit inevitable. The vote to leave the EU could have paved the way for a softer Brexit that kept the UK in the single market and customs union. The British public is far more pragmatic than the right of the Conservative party: a  citizens’ assembly  in 2017 suggested that people were prepared to accept free movement of people in order to minimise the economic costs of Brexit. A responsible prime minister would have sought to unify the country by pursuing the least divisive form of Brexit. Instead, the country has been governed by a party captured by an unholy alliance of populists and hard-right ideologues. The Vote Leave campaign  misled the public  by spreading racist dogwhistles about immigration and by misusing official statistics to promise that Brexit would deliver  a huge boost  to the NHS. These lies were endorsed by politicians like Boris Johnson and Michael Gove who both surely knew that an honest case for Brexit was not strong enough to win a popular vote. The lesson of populism through the ages is that pretending there are easy solutions to voters’ discontents, and identifying, then marginalising scapegoats for our problems, makes winning easier – if more dishonourable. Rather than confront the public with the truth that some of the sharpest geographical inequalities in Europe, and the lack of jobs and opportunity in parts of the country, would require real and sustained investment to address, Tory Leavers made out that Brexit was the answer, while at the same time supporting drastic cuts in government support to those very areas. In the past five years, crass sloganeering has substituted for responsible government. A unifying, soft Brexit was never on offer: May’s withdrawal agreement could never bind a successor in charge of a final deal. As it turns out, Johnson, the actual successor, has proved willing to break international law, let alone agreements with opposition MPs. If a more effective leader than Jeremy Corbyn had been at the helm of the Labour party, perhaps things could have been different. But a politically dominant Conservative party led by prime ministers in hock to the European Research Group has led us inexorably towards this hard  Brexit . We will live with the consequences for decades. The economic cost is not some theoretical number: it will translate into greater hardship and fewer opportunities in areas that can least afford to bear it. It will make the urgent task of reducing the UK’s stark regional inequalities much harder. Forgive our scepticism that a Conservative government that has slashed support for low-paid parents by thousands of pounds a year, and has forced the least affluent areas to cope with the biggest cuts to public services, will do what is needed. Any gains to a dated notion of sovereignty will come at great cost to people’s personal freedoms: to make a life, to study, to start a business or to fall in love in another country. It is a myth that these freedoms were only ever exercised by a privileged group of voters. The irony is that some of the wealthiest  backers of Brexit  have found ways of hanging on to them even as they expect the rest of us to give them up. This hard Brexit will also deepen rifts within the union. Most immediately, it will give succour to the cause of Scottish independence. The Scots did not vote for Brexit and do not want it. Johnson is unpopular in Scotland, and support for independence is growing. And it is far from certain what the long-term consequences of this deal will be for Northern Ireland. The deal at least removes the need for a border in Ireland, but at the cost of a border in the Irish Sea. It disturbs the fragile political balance that the Good Friday agreement achieved and creates an uncertain future for the power-sharing arrangements that were critical to ending a bloody, decades-long conflict. The hope will be that this deal might at least herald the beginning of a more responsible politics in the UK; that it might form the basis for a return to government in the national interest, and the repair of relationships that have been damaged by the petty, childish diplomacy of the past few years. But the reality is that we are in for at least a few more years where internal Conservative party battles continue to dominate. Despite his majority, Johnson is a weak leader lacking in principles and vision. There is now likely to be an almighty struggle between those on the right of his party who always saw Brexit as the route to slashing taxes, regulatory standards and consumer protections, and those who recognise the human costs this would involve. This deal will at least one day form the basis for a more visionary prime minister to rebuild what Johnson has forced the UK to voluntarily surrender. One day, our children and grandchildren will look back in astonishment that Britain’s governing class managed to fail the country so comprehensively. One day, politicians will feel embarrassed to admit their association with the tawdry politics of Brexit. For now, we are consigned to government by an incompetent and unscrupulous gaggle of politicians. They will continue to wreak damage our country can ill afford. But in the wake of their eventual defeat there surely lies a better, brighter future for Britain that will one day come to pass.
Covid-19 has shown us that good health is not just down to biology:	I f you wanted to run an experiment on Earth to understand human behaviour, the pandemic would be the perfect opportunity. In some people, the virus that causes Covid-19 has no symptoms. In others it leads to deadly disease. The virus pits the healthy against those with underlying health issues, and the young against the old. Infectious diseases  can bind us together  or drive us apart. Low-income countries know this too well; many face multiple outbreaks of infectious diseases each year. But richer countries such as Britain are still painfully learning that a virus doesn’t just attack the human body: it holds up a mirror to national weaknesses and runs havoc across society and the economy. Across the world, the pandemic has resulted in a perverse “Hunger Games”, where countries have competed in mortality rate league tables while also trying to save their economies and cope with successive waves of this disease. In February and March, European governments chased down limited PPE stocks, ventilators, oxygen, out-of-stock reagents for their labs, and experimental steroids and drugs. The US was accused of  stealing ventilators  from Barbados, PPE from Germany and it bought up the rights to remdesivir, limiting the supply available to other countries. At the  World Health Assembly  in May, governments committed to sharing research products and working collectively to address Covid-19. But when governments were faced with tough decisions about how to share resources, their promises of cooperation broke down. The pandemic has been a test of our self-interest, both as individuals and as nations. One of the key questions has been what responsibility richer countries owe towards poorer nations, particularly when it comes to ensuring the equitable distribution of a vaccine. Earlier this year, 171 countries pledged to take part  in the Covax initiative , which aims to support the development and equitable distribution of 2bn vaccine doses before the end of 2021. But when the first vaccine proved successful, manufactured by Pfizer and BioNTech, richer countries  bought up 80% of its doses . In fact,  one analysis by Oxfam  found that even if all five of the most advanced vaccine candidates succeed, there would not be enough vaccine for most of the world’s people until 2022. This has always been the case in global health: whoever pays the highest price acquires the research products. The World Health Organization has actively  tried to warn  against this nationalistic approach, but in the end, words and pledges don’t amount to anything unless they are followed by action. It’s money and power that counts. The same questions about selfishness can be asked of our commitment to each other at home. What responsibility does each of us have towards our communities? The pandemic has divided families, friends and neighbours over whether they’re willing to bend the rules to accommodate individual wishes, or make sacrifices with others in mind. The mixed reaction to summer holidays reflected this, as some people decided to travel to other countries, with the risk of transporting the virus with them, while others stayed put. In some schools, entire bubbles of children were sent home to isolate because one student in the bubble had been on holiday abroad and their parents had decided not to follow the 14-day quarantine rule. Families have been split over the question of  Christmas celebrations ; whether it’s sensible to host multiple families at one gathering, or wait to delay festivities until the spring or summer when a mass vaccination programme is in motion. On many occasions, the virus has forced us to decide how comfortable we each are with particular risks, and to reevaluate others according to their own risk threshold. We may have become closer to some families who share our thinking, and distanced ourselves from others who have different approaches to the pandemic. In comparing our pre- and post-Covid selves, we’re perhaps at risk of overstating how much the pandemic has changed us: instead, it has simply shown each of us who we really are. There were many bright moments of selflessness in 2020. Many people made huge personal sacrifices – none more so than the health workers who put their own lives at risk to treat patients needing care. Because of their occupation, healthcare workers are  seven times more likely  to get severe Covid-19 than other workers, and many turned up to work on wards in March and April without adequate PPE, ready to accept whatever came their way. Elsewhere, bus drivers, security guards, social care workers, cleaners, grocery store workers, mutual aid groups, and teachers all put the needs of running society above their own health and welfare. If anything this pandemic should give us cause to reflect who adds value to society and whether we are compensating these roles appropriately. On the other hand, time and time again in Britain, we’ve seen that it is one rule for some people (the wealthy and powerful) and another rule for others (the rest of us). The government created a loophole in quarantine restrictions that allowed “high value” business travellers to skip the mandatory 14-day isolation period when arriving into the country. Celebrities have hosted private parties while the rest of us have avoided social gatherings and seeing our family and friends. Most memorable of all, the prime minister’s then  chief adviser, Dominic Cummings , breached Covid rules but remained in his post. Of all the lessons we’ve learned from this pandemic, the most significant is how unequal its effects have been. Wealth, it turns out, is the best shielding strategy from Covid-19. As poorer people crowded together in cramped housing, the rich escaped to their country retreats. Two of the largest risk factors for dying from Covid-19 are being from a deprived background and being from a minority-ethnic background, pointing to the underlying role of  social inequalities , housing conditions and occupation. Our society’s recovery from this disease should be centred on building more equal, resilient societies, where people in all parts of the world have access to both protection from the disease and access to research developments. It all starts with government. At the end of a gruelling 11 months, I’m left with Abraham Lincoln’s words in my mind: the pandemic has shown that we need “government of the people, by the people, for the people” – not just government for the wealthy elite. Perhaps that’s the strongest legacy of Covid-19. •  Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh
The Guardian view on Britain out of the EU: a treasure island for rentiers:	W hen the UK entered the coronavirus age in March,  state resources and collective commitment  were mobilised on a scale not seen since the second world war. Decades ago, Britain had revealed itself, thanks in part to being able to marshal the industrial might of the empire, to be a formidable world power. Its economy was energised with breakthroughs in  radar, atomic power and medicine . Although the story of the pandemic has not yet ended, there appears to be no such transformation in sight under Boris Johnson. Rather depressingly, familiar trends of greed, incompetence and cronyism are reasserting themselves. This is bad news for an economy where there has been a collapse of socially useful innovation. Britain’s lack of hi-tech manufacturing capabilities,  notably in medical diagnostic testing , was cruelly exposed by the pandemic. This country has become more of a procurer than a producer of technology. But it is a remarkably inefficient one – despite an extraordinarily high percentage of  lawyers  and  accountants  in the working population.  Connections  seem to matter more than inventions. How else to explain why, in the desperate scramble to procure personal protective equipment, ventilators and coronavirus tests, billions of pounds of contracts have gone to companies either run by friends or supporters – even  neighbours  – of Conservative politicians, or with no prior expertise. History is not short of  examples  where political  insiders  were successful in extracting virtually all the surplus that the economy created. Such  influential interests  moulded politics to enlarge their share of the pie. Greed was limited only by the need to let the producers survive. The shock of  war, revolution, famine or plague  provides an opportunity to fix a broken society. But if, post-pandemic, UK politicians care less about reform than the retention of power, they will fail to restrain the grasping enrichment that undermines democracy itself. Perhaps the most penetrating X-ray of this phenomenon today is by Brett Christophers in his book  Rentier Capitalism . The academic makes the case that Britain has become a treasure island for those seeking excess profits from state-sanctioned control of natural resources, property, financial assets and intellectual property. Rent, paid by renters to rentiers, is tied to the ownership or control of such assets, made scarce under conditions of limited or no competition. Mr Christophers says that the first sign of this new order was when Britain struck black gold in the North Sea. He writes that MPs on the public accounts committee noted with  incredulity  in 1972 that “the first huge areas of the sea were leased to the companies as generously as though Britain were a gullible Sheikhdom”. After that, public assets were sold off cheaply. The private sector ended up controlling  lightly regulated  monopolies in gas, water and electric supply, and public transport and telecoms. Customers lost out, overpaying for poor service. In a rentier’s paradise, windfall profits abound. Brazenly occupying the lowest moral ground was essential, as the housebuilder Persimmon proved by earning supersized state-backed help-to-buy profits long enough to hand out a £75m bonus to its boss. The banks, which took this country to the brink of collapse a decade ago, are at the heart of a rentier state. France, Germany, Japan, the US all have banking sectors smaller than the UK. While banks earning rents have flourished, the households paying them – either directly as financial  consumers , or indirectly as taxpayers of a debtor state or  customers of debtor firms  – have floundered. The anger that such spivvery engenders is diffused politically by making voters complicit in the theft. The sell-off of council homes, says Mr Christophers, was a privatisation that gave many of those perhaps most inclined to kick against Thatcherism a personal stake in the project. Culturally, Brexit plays the same sort of role as the  right to buy , insulating poorer leave voters from the idea that they will suffer from the resulting policies. The prime minister understands that  Covid can change Britain , but lacks modernising policies. He extols the  virtues  of free competition – both for itself and because such freedom, he reasons, will somehow liberate the spirit fluttering within a pre-Brexit Britain caged by coronavirus. He is no doubt betting that the disruption of leaving the EU will be lost in the roar of an economy taking off as an inoculated population returns to offices and shops. The gap between rich and poor in the UK is at least as high today,  academics calculate , as it was just before the start of the second world war. This is largely because the British state that once mediated the struggle between labour and capital has been taken over by  rentiers . Weakening regulations, reducing the importance of fiscal policy and shredding social protections has corroded liberal democracy in which an increasingly influential wealthy few have been enjoying a free run. Ultimately, rentiers want to increase what the economist Michał Kalecki called the “ degree of monopoly ” in an economy. This allows them to limit the ability of workers, consumers and regulators to influence the markup of selling prices over costs and to defend the share of wages in output. The EU says its labour, environment and customer protections are a floor, not a ceiling, and that they can’t be traded away for frictionless market access. If we had stayed in the club, our ability to concentrate profits for monopolists would have been stymied in future trade deals negotiated by Brussels and open to MEPs’ scrutiny. Outside the EU, Mr Johnson can barter away such regulations –  without parliamentary oversight  – and  scrap   safeguards  in new technology for higher monopoly profits. Karl Marx  wrote  in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte in 1852 that “the Tories in England long fancied that they were in raptures about royalty, the church and the beauties of the ancient constitution, until a time of trial tore from them the confession that they were only in raptures about rent”. His assessment of early 19th-century Tories applies with unerring accuracy to today’s Conservatives. Mr Christophers’ insight is that the Tories under Mr Johnson are a party of – and for – rentiers, much more than the interests of  productive capital . This explains why, after 2016, the Tory party embraced Brexit and shrugged off productive capital’s concerns about leaving the EU. It will be to the great detriment of this country if the pandemic permitted Mr Johnson to combine present-day fears with a yearning for hopeful change to persuade the average person to vote against their interests in the future. But history often repeats itself first as tragedy, then as farce.
Demand for action on racial harassment in social housing:	Campaigners are calling for social housing providers to put lives above profits following an  Observer  report  on a black tenant who was left homeless after a racist campaign by neighbours. Former social housing chiefs, Lord Victor Adebowale, Aman Dalvi, Lord Geoffrey Filkin and Barry Simons have signed an open letter to the National  Housing  Federation highlighting wider failings to protect victims of racial harassment. The letter demands an urgent review of social housing policy to ensure that perpetrators of racial harassment are evicted, or their victims rehoused as a priority. The group acted after reading of the plight of Laura Tate (not her real name) who has been homeless for five years after fleeing her flat following death threats. Her housing provider, London and Quadrant (L&Q), refused to evict her abusers, despite their convictions for racially aggravated harassment and public order offences, and it failed to rehouse Tate. Last week a judge awarded her £31,000 in compensation after she sued L&Q for negligence. The  Observer  had also reported the case of another black tenant who has spent two years in a women’s refuge after fleeing an abusive ex-partner. L&Q failed to rehouse her without concrete evidence that she was endangered. “These are not isolated cases,” said the Labour peer Lord Filkin. “Board members and managers have a fundamental duty to ensure that tenants can live peacefully in their homes; there is more they need to do to ensure this duty is fulfilled.” L&Q, which houses 250,000 people in more than 105,000 homes across the south-east, has promised an independent review on how it handles abuse cases following the  Observer  investigation. In a  statement on its website  it admitted that there were lessons to be learned and said that it has a zero-tolerance policy on discrimination of any kind. The National Housing Federation, which represents housing associations, said that it would be glad to meet the letter’s signatories to discuss reforms. “We know that as a sector we can and must do better,” said chief executive Kate Henderson. “Last month we launched our Equality, Diversity and Inclusion Insight report, which provided evidence of the change we need to deliver. “This, and our new code of governance, emphasise the importance of housing association boards and staff reflecting the diversity of the communities they serve and ensuring the sector is always working to strengthen relationships with residents.”
Cutting foreign aid will put girls at risk:	“T he great strategic prize of the 21st century is the full economic, political and social empowerment of women,” said William Hague, when he was foreign secretary. “There are still large parts of the world who are undervaluing, under-utilising, under-developing half their population.” That was five years ago, and there is still a long way to go. I am speaking out now, because we are about to go into reverse. Parliament’s women and equalities committee, which I chair, isn’t afraid to take the prime minister to task when his policies fall short in providing for the marginalised and under-represented. We’ve held the government’s feet to the fire on the  domestic abuse bill , the role of women in the response to Covid-19 and  the disproportionate impact  of the pandemic on BAME communities. But the need to level up society doesn’t stop at our borders, and many of the world’s poorest countries are also the most unequal. The plan to abandon our Conservative manifesto commitment to  maintain aid spending at 0.7% of gross national income  is a massive blow to the impact the UK government can make for those dealt the worst hands in life. With news of a  new variant of Covid-19 sweeping through South Africa , this looks increasingly like the wrong policy at the worst possible time. We can’t beat Covid anywhere unless we beat it everywhere. Elsewhere in  Africa , there is serious concern about disruption caused by the pandemic to regular healthcare, especially in the battle against malaria. World Health Organization experts suggest that as many as 100,000 extra deaths from malaria are expected this year, bringing the global death toll from malaria to over half a million. While Covid is predominantly killing older people, malaria continues to be a killer of children. But malaria is entirely preventable, and the UK has led the world in preventing it. Our manifesto at last year’s election promised to help provide 12 years of quality education for every girl. This was a great ambition Women  and girls have rightly been a priority for the international development programmes of successive Conservative administrations, and they have had some real champions in ministers such as Baroness Sugg, Penny Mordaunt, Harriet Baldwin and Justine Greening. Among other things, UK aid helps almost 23 million women a year to access modern methods of family planning – a phenomenal feat that means countless women’s prospects are not ruled by their bodies. But at a time when fragile health systems are struggling to cope, and research suggests that the pandemic has caused adolescent pregnancies to rise, the UK proposes a retreat from its support in this arena. There is never a good time to step back from this empowering, lifesaving work for some of the most vulnerable women on the planet, but right now is perhaps the worst. We have a good track record on girls’ education too. The prime minister has been a fantastic advocate, calling it “the Swiss army knife that solves a multitude of the world’s problems”. Our manifesto at last year’s election promised to help provide 12 years of quality education for every girl. This was a great ambition, to extend equality of opportunity as far as we can, and to provide a generation of women with the skills they need to build and lead strong, equal societies. Reducing our aid budget by a third will mean supporting about half a million fewer girls through education a year. It will blunt the Swiss army knife. Coming a year after the budget has already significantly shrunk due to the impact of the pandemic on our economy, this means that the UK can no longer put its money where its mouth is in ensuring that girls get the same opportunities as boys, and it’s fair to assume that the manifesto promise on girls’ education will go the same way as the one on 0.7%. One of the things that sets the UK’s international development role apart from the investments made in developing countries by China and Russia is that our aid is rooted in our values. We offer support not based on self-interested motives but on a determination to promote equality, human rights and rule of law. So my concern is that this cut is not just about the programmes that won’t be funded but about the vacuums they will create. Where the UK withdraws, we risk seeing the influence of less scrupulous partners spread, and progress slow towards a world where your gender, ethnicity, faith or disability don’t determine your lot in life. Caroline Nokes MP is chair of the House of Commons women and equalities select committee.
Throughout history Britain’s ruling class has created crisis after crisis – just like now:	W hen the novelist  John le Carré died  earlier this month, among the passages quoted by journalists was a short excerpt from  The Secret Pilgrim , published in 1990. In the book, the words are spoken by Le Carré’s fondly loved character George Smiley. “﻿The privately educated Englishman – and Englishwoman, if you will allow me – is the greatest dissembler on Earth,” he says. “Was, is now and ever shall be for as long as our disgraceful school system remains intact. Nobody will charm you so glibly, disguise his feelings from you better, cover his tracks more skilfully or find it harder to confess to you that he’s been a damned fool.” The words are a cutting summary of the far-off era of upper class treachery and cold war subterfuge, but also fit the less romantic time of Brexit, the pandemic and a Conservative party whose leadership by two public schoolboys has so pushed us into disaster. Therein lies a huge part of the national tragedy that, amid  stranded lorries , a shamefully high death toll and some of the greatest peacetime blunders this country has ever made, has recently seemed to be reaching some kind of awful climax. Of late, some of the best writing about the mess we are in has focused on Boris Johnson’s character flaws, which are undoubtedly a big part of the tale. But what has been rather less examined is the fact that his shortcomings blur into a much longer story about our longstanding ruling class, and its habit of creating crisis after crisis. The year 2021 will mark the 80th anniversary of George Orwell’s inspirational essay,  The Lion and the Unicorn , his warmly patriotic text about the English national character, and his belief that this country’s efforts in the early stages of the second world war were being compromised by the fact that he was still resident in “the most class-ridden country under the sun”. Here, too, there are plenty of characterisations of the English elite that seem as pertinent now as they were then. “Probably the battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton, but the opening battles of all subsequent wars have been lost there,” wrote Orwell, and as an Etonian himself he surely knew what he was talking about. Of the ruling-class politicians who had overseen Britain’s domestic travails during the 1920s and 30s while pursuing the disastrous foreign policies that culminated in appeasement, he said this: “What is to be expected of them is not treachery, or physical cowardice, but stupidity, unconscious sabotage, an infallible instinct for doing the wrong thing. They are not wicked, or not altogether wicked; they are merely unteachable.” Back when Conservatives at least partly understood such criticism and successively embraced first postwar consensus politics, then the populist meritocracy most spectacularly embodied by Margaret Thatcher, they were harder to malign as chancers and stuffed shirts. But in the buildup to Christmas, as I watched Johnson deny the nightmare of a no-deal Brexit,  row back on his stupid promise  of a normal Christmas and then yet again offer the prospect of a return to normality (this time, he seemed to suggest,  by Easter ), Orwell’s words once again made perfect sense. Since the election as party leader of David Cameron back in 2005, even if the Conservatives have  stuck with a post-Thatcher view  of the world, many of the inner circles of Tory politics have reverted to a way of doing things more rooted on the grouse moors of old than in the modern world. Johnson’s arrival at the top revived a familiar mixture of entitlement, superficiality and lives that most people would think impossibly opulent. We all know what those things have led to – a seemingly endless run of terrible decisions, from the calling of the 2016 referendum to the chain of stupidities that has defined Britain’s experience of Covid-19. Just to be clear: the downsides of a certain kind of privileged leadership have flared up on all sides of politics, from the messianic arrogance that led Tony Blair into the Iraq disaster, to Nick Clegg’s virtual destruction of the Liberal Democrats. But in the main, this is a Tory story. If your Christmas presents included the horrifically readable memoir, Diary of an MP’s Wife by Sasha Swire (whose husband, Hugo, was a minister under Cameron and part of his social circle), you will have a sense of what all this looks like up close. Johnson’s biographer, Sonia Purnell,  described Swire’s book  as a portrait of people who are “unserious, entitled, snobbish, incestuous and curiously childish” – obsessed with the subtle distinctions of taste and status that separate the middle from the upper class, and drawn to politics and power not out of any sense of mission or duty, but a dull belief that such things are what people like them do. Under Johnson, the same culture of entitlement and mutual back-scratching has hardened into the so-called “ chumocracy ”. Oligarchy is rarely an efficient or sensible way to govern, but that doesn’t seem to have got in the way. Just before Christmas, dismay about the Johnson government and its apparent distance from reality seemed to be reaching a peak. But then came the Brexit trade deal, and a familiar idea returned – not least in the rightwing press – that under the shambling exterior, the prime minister is some kind of swashbuckling genius. This is an archetype that depends on the glib charm cited by Le Carré, and draws on a deep well of deference. The reality is surely that a reckless project driven by the alumni of private schools (Johnson, Dominic Cummings, Nigel Farage, Jacob Rees-Mogg et al) has resulted in probably the only trade deal in history that  puts up barriers  to commerce rather than removing them, and will be rushed through parliament with a sickening disdain for any scrutiny. Combined with the economic effects of the pandemic, the result will be damage and uncertainty that is only just starting: all the talk about Brexit now being finished is further proof of the ditch we have been led into. The disasters, then, will continue to mount up, but will they result in any change? If history teaches us anything, it is that this country’s mixture of cap-doffing and unassailable privilege tends to keep even the most rotten hierarchies in place, and the saga grinds on. This is the essence of the very British mess that we seem unable to escape. •  John Harris is a Guardian columnist
Covid has moved us to understand the need for more 'we' and less 'I':	A fter years of cuts to overseas aid, the federal government recently added $1.1bn in new money for our neighbours in need of help. This was in response to the  “End Covid For All”  campaign that I have been a part of which essentially declared that our borders may be shut but our hearts are not. Federal ministers whom I visited in Canberra expressed their surprise that they got almost no pushback from the move. I suggested it might be because Australians are feeling gratitude knowing when it comes to the virus we largely dodged a bullet compared to other countries. They do not begrudge helping our south-east Asian and Pacific neighbours with fragile health systems. After all it does not end for any of us until it ends for all of us. As we pull the shutters down on what has been a fairly horrendous 2020 we are left to ask, has this year taught us anything that would mark a permanent change? There are lots of answers that are hopeful. We speak of new respect for essential workers and commit to never again taking them for granted. We now apparently trust medical scientists. Prior to 2020 who even knew we had chief medical officers, let alone their names? We marvel at the level of trust enjoyed by our political leaders. Not many of us would have predicted that in February after the bushfires. But I believe something even bigger may have changed – a deepening of our ethics. I think Covid-19 has moved us to understand the need for more “we” and less “I”. Ethics is essentially about the duties we owe to others. What is the common good and public benefit? To live an ethical life I must ask what am I contributing? We discovered through Covid-19 that it is interdependence that really matters. All of us are biologically connected by an invisible virus and all of us are vulnerable if we do not act together. I think this is a lesson that may change us. Over the last 200 years we in the west have eaten the fruit of a liberalism that grounds sovereignty in the individual, not the group – whether church, tribe or nation. Much has been gained in liberating individuals from creeds and taboos that defined them. But is has also lessened the sense of community and exalted the individual. Election pitches typically cater to the self-interest of the individual, not the common good. Think climate change and our entwined common threat. I have welcomed the ethical solidarity this pandemic has brought us As politics and markets have prioritised the individual, it is the third foundation for a good society beyond the state and the market that has been floundering. We call this the community sector where we form families, join communities, support charities and pursue recreational interests. This is the common good glue where we voluntarily give and serve. We often bond around communal activities such as sport, arts or religion. Humans need a sense of tribe with its obligations and duties towards others that cannot be satisfied by only individual autonomy or freedom. We long for the “we” not just an “I”. As Mother Theresa put it, “The most terrible poverty is loneliness.”  Covid 19 has reminded us that we have duties to care for our neighbours. In lockdown we rediscovered those neighbours. This has been called the kindness pandemic as we tried to express locally that we are all in this together. And because our homeless people are biologically connected to us we discovered that they could be housed in hotels. Overnight a insoluble social problem had an interim solution. In Victoria premier  Daniel Andrews announced a $5.3bn package  for social housing. In a state where social housing is less than 5% of all housing stock (that is why we have so many homeless) we found, thanks to Covid-19, a permanent solution. At the federal level the cruel Newstart rate of $40 a day was increased with jobseeker. Somehow that was politically impossible before the advent of the virus. As a 65-year-old I feel incredibly grateful to young Australians for being so compliant and considerate. They had the most to lose from lockdown given their demographic was the least at risk from health complications and their job security was the worst. I and my generation owe them for their sacrifice. Yes, there were a few maskless libertarians marching, flouting the rules and crying “my freedom” and “my independence”, but the shared sacrifice and courtesy for the elderly was an ethical triumph. This  Christmas  I ponder the all-powerful invulnerable divinity becoming a helpless vulnerable baby. This act of solidarity sustains and promotes the notion of our spiritual interdependence. I have welcomed the ethical solidarity this pandemic has brought us. I hope and pray it is a lasting perspective in how we live together. •  Tim Costello is a senior fellow at the Centre for Public Christianity
Cramped housing has helped fuel spread of Covid in England – study:	Overcrowded housing has helped to spread Covid-19 in England and may have increased the number of deaths, according to  research by the Health Foundation . People living in cramped conditions have been more exposed to the coronavirus and were less able to reduce their risk of infection because their homes were so small, the thinktank found. Overcrowding was a key reason why poorer people and those from ethnic minority backgrounds in particular had been disproportionately affected by the pandemic, it said. Health Foundation  researchers also concluded that overcrowding, together with other housing problems such as damp and insecure tenancies, had led to a rise in physical and mental health ailments. “Since March many of us have spent a lot more time at home. For many, the quality of their home has made their experience of the pandemic even worse than it needed to be,” said Adam Tinson, a co-author of the analysis and a senior analyst at the thinktank. “While some have weathered lockdown in large homes with gardens and plenty of living space, others have struggled in overcrowded and unsafe conditions. Overcrowding is associated with the spread of Covid-19, making self-isolation more difficult and allowing the virus to spread through more people if one becomes infected.” Data for 2019-20 released earlier this month showed that just before the pandemic hit in March, 830,000 households in  England  were overcrowded, especially rented properties. That was 200,000 more than the number in that situation a decade earlier. “People’s housing environments have affected their ability to shield themselves and others from Covid-19. People have been encouraged to stay in their homes as much as possible, but within-household transmission has played a serious role in the spread of the virus,” the analysis says. “Overcrowding, which has been increasing in the years prior to the pandemic, makes it harder to self-isolate and shield, and may have contributed to higher death rates in poorer areas.” He added that 8% of households with the lowest income lived in overcrowded homes, compared with fewer than 1% of those with the highest earnings. Similarly, “Ethnic minority households are five times more likely to be overcrowded than white households, illustrating just one of the ways in which existing housing disparities are combining with the pandemic to further widen inequalities in health.” People being forced to spend more time in overcrowded homes during this year’s various lockdowns has also caused or worsened mental health problems, especially those suffering distress. “Distress is generally higher for overcrowded households, and data from the pandemic period seem to show this intensifying during the more severe lockdown in April 2020, when 39% of people in overcrowded households were indicating psychological distress”, compared with 29% of those whose homes were not overcrowded, the analysis concludes. “This analysis shows that mental ill-health has been a particular issue for those in overcrowded households during the pandemic, especially in the first lockdown. The chronic lack of affordable housing options, combined with years of reductions in support for housing costs, have led us to this point,” said Tinson. The restrictions on movement and social mixing had also deepened loneliness among those living alone, the report said. Major changes to housing policy, such as more secure private tenancies, reversing cuts to housing benefit and building more social housing, are needed to reduce the impact of poor-quality homes on people’s health, the  Health  Foundation recommends.
Gaps in remote learning need to be closed urgently:	It has become increasingly clear to me, as a parent of an 11-year-old and a 16-year-old in state school education in London, that some schools are probably going to close for the whole of January and possibly up until February half-term. The fact that the government has been neither discussing or admitting this as a strong possibility is a further display of weak leadership that shies away from grasping the Covid nettle. However, there is an urgent need for proper remote, teacher-led online learning to be put in place. The fact that the government left state school parents to home school was a national disgrace. As was the fact that it was never fully challenged by the mainstream media. We accepted parent-led home schooling like a nation of lemmings. We cannot return to that. Teachers should lead teaching, not parents. Availability of, and access to, technology is held up as a legitimate excuse. It is not. Different year groups can be taught at different times to allow for multi-year-group households. Tech can – and has – been supplied to children who need it, and in extreme cases children without access to online learning should be treated the same as those with specific educational needs or key worker parents and be taught in school. This is a huge priority and needs to be tackled urgently for the sake of the economy and school-aged children in the UK. Yet the government has been silent. Teachers also need to be given the same priority for vaccination as frontline health workers. If teachers are exposed to Covid they have to isolate, which has a significant impact on the ability of schools to remain open, and people should not be put at significant daily and increased risk for doing their job. Hayley Brocklehurst London •  Your article ( What do we know about the two new Covid-19 variants in the UK ?, 23 December) says that the UK variant was discovered during an investigation into why Covid cases continued to rise in Kent during the November lockdown. It follows that not even immediately extending tier 4 to the whole country would halt the rise in cases, unless we change our behaviour. Knowing about the new variant, perhaps we will be more frightened and prudent now than the people of Kent in November. One key preventive measure seems obvious: schools and universities must remain closed in January, as in the first lockdown. While schools and universities remain open, many people must be asking themselves: if young people can mix, is the virus really so dangerous? Closing schools would not only reduce school infections but could persuade us to be more prudent. I expect Boris Johnson, as ever reactive rather than proactive, to announce this the day before the new term starts. Joseph Palley Richmond, London •  Should not every student who is old enough to be given work from their school to do online during lockdown have a laptop? Why has the government not provided them for every child whose parents cannot afford it? Failing that, why is there not a charity to organise this? It would not be that expensive and the beneficial return would be enormous. Not only would it give a sense of solidarity that every British student has a chance to maximise their education and are at an important level equal, but also it will prevent destructive behaviour down the line from an underclass of people who have missed out during the Covid pandemic from being able to maintain their education. Is this not urgent and completely doable? Frances Kelly London
‘It has hit my dignity’: women fight for equal treatment from Indian army:	N idhi Rao* has 13 years’ experience serving in the communications wing of the Indian army. Now she is looking for work online and doesn’t know where to start. “I am jobless in the middle of a pandemic, with no financial security.” When Rao joined the army, female officers were contracted for five years, after which time they might get an extension of five more years. Unlike men, they were not offered a permanent job. Later, the initial commission period was changed to 10 years, which could be extended a further four years. While men retired with pensions and other benefits, women could never reach the pensionable service length of 20 years, and remained out of the senior ranks. In 2010, after a  group of female officers took their case to court , a ruling was made to put women on a par with men, but the Indian government challenged the order and refused to implement it. After a decade-long legal battle, in February last year India’s supreme court  ruled the situation discriminatory  and granted the women permanent status and entitlement to army pensions. The authorities set up a board, dividing women into categories. Those with 14 or more years’ service were given either a permanent commission (PC) or the option to retire with a pension. Those with 10-14 years’ service were selected for a permanent position or released from the army without a pension. In November, the army declared that  422 women out of 615  had been picked for permanent jobs. Rao was not among them. She says there were 68 such women from her service bracket who would be leaving without a pension. “Most of us are past our mid-30s and are married and have children. Some are expecting a baby; some could not plan it due to the job uncertainty,” she says. “After serving the institution for more than a decade, they are asking us to go and restart our careers, at this age, in the Covid-hit market. Who will hire us? Where do we go?” Anjali Sinha*, another affected soldier, says: “When I was pregnant, they asked me to run 5km and I did. When I gave birth, I rejoined within a week for fear of being relegated. I have worked in some of the most difficult terrains of the country, all while dealing with an unsupportive husband and family. And all this for what?” Sinha is in the 11th year of her service. She says: “I was deemed fit till a few months ago. But now when I am demanding PC, I have been declared unfit. More than anything, it has hit my dignity. I am questioning my worth every single day.” The female officers claim  a lack of transparency  in the selection process and say the true number granted PC may be lower than the army claims. What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth? Prakash Patil, an army veteran, says women undergo the same military training as men but while most of the male officers are absorbed into permanent roles and offered career progression opportunities, most of the women have to drop out. “When women were first inducted into the army in 1992, they were eulogised,” he says. “Newspapers published their interviews and compared them to female warriors of the past. But this antagonised many within the army, who simply could not bear the arrival of women. Hence, at every stage, women were made to prove themselves.” Rao says that once she lived with her baby in a tent in the desert, and on another occasion faced extreme pressure from her seniors to move to another location even though she was in the later stages of a high-riskpregnancy. Sinha says: “Men taunt us over maternity leave all the time. And, ironically, the same men then go on to take two-year-long breaks for specialised courses.” When male officers opt for permanent roles they can choose to study advanced technical courses, Patil says. But women miss out on the opportunity to take such degrees, reducing their chances of getting back into the job market. In September, Patil wrote to India’s president, Ram Nath Kovind, asking that the authorities grant permanency or pension to the 68 women, or help them get an advanced degree. He hasn’t received a reply. “What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth?” he says. “You cannot just leave out the women in their twilight years.” Lawyer Rakesh Kumar represents some of the 68 affected. “These women have been subjected to the policy’s gender bias. Further, there is no reasonable basis to distinguish them from those who have completed 14 years,” she says. “They should be at least allowed to serve 20 years.” Rao and Sinha believe it is a deliberate ploy to keep women out of uniform. There are about 1,500 women in the Indian army, less than 4% of the total strength. They are still  banned from combat roles . “Most of the meritorious women in our batch have been chucked out,” Sinha says. “Most are absolutely fit and have no disciplinary cases against us. We have international shooters, bikers, and mountaineers who have represented  India  abroad and won medals for their work. Were they so afraid of us eating up command posts in future?” *Names  have been changed . Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Richest 1% have almost a quarter of UK wealth, study claims:	Almost a quarter of all household wealth in the UK is held by the richest 1% of the population, according to alarming new research that reveals a historic underestimation of inequality in the country. The study found that the top 1% had almost £800bn more wealth than suggested by official statistics, meaning that inequality has been far higher than previously thought. Researchers said the extra billions was a conservative estimate and could well be more. The revelation comes amid calls for ministers to consider a new wealth tax or substantial reforms to existing levies on the rich, so that they play a bigger role in helping the country deal with the Covid fallout and the costs of an ageing population. Demands for a  mansion tax  are also being revived. Around 5% of the total wealth held by the very richest households has been missed by official measures, researchers at the Resolution Foundation thinktank found. It discovered the missing wealth by comparing official statistics compiled by the Office for National Statistics with data from the  Sunday Times Rich List. It discovered that the official data struggled to capture the assets of very wealthy households. Taking the newly discovered billions into account has a significant impact on the share of total UK wealth held by the top 1%, increasing it by more than a quarter – from 18% to 23%. Wealth  inequality  fell throughout much of the 20th century, with the proportion of wealth held by the richest 10% falling from more than 90% to around 50% by the 1980s. However, the Resolution Foundation said it had been flat or increased slightly in recent decades. Wealth has been fuelled by rising asset prices since the  financial crisis , such as soaring housing values, land or stocks – rather than through active saving. Between 76% and 93% of financial wealth gains since the crisis have come through the rising value of assets such as housing. Rishi Sunak , the chancellor, has faced recent calls to sanction a one-off wealth tax on some households in a move that could raise up to £260bn for the post-Covid recovery. The call came from the  Wealth Tax Commission , made up of leading tax experts and economists convened by the London School of Economics and Warwick University. The group said that targeting such a windfall tax at the richest households would be the fairest and most efficient way to raise taxes in response to the pandemic. In November, a study commissioned by the chancellor also recommended reforming capital gains tax by slashing the annual allowance. The move, backed by the independent Office of  Tax  Simplification, would hit wealthy individuals with assets such as second homes. Even before Covid, the Treasury faced large spending demands in areas such as social care. Health and welfare spending is set to rise by £38bn a year by 2030. The Resolution Foundation said wealth taxation “will need to play a bigger role in the economy over the course of the 2020s”. “The foundation is calling on the chancellor to embark on the biggest reforms to wealth taxation in a generation – including via the restriction of capital gains and inheritance tax reliefs (together raising several billion), and adding a council tax supplement of 1% on properties worth over £2m (raising over £1bn).” Jack Leslie, an economist at the foundation, said: “The UK has undergone a wealth boom in recent decades, which has continued even while earnings and incomes have stagnated. But official data has struggled to capture these gains, and misses £800bn of assets held by the very wealthiest households in Britain.”
Vera Carstairs obituary:	My mother, Vera Carstairs, who has died aged 95, was a research social scientist in the civil service. She devoted her studies to illuminating links between social and economic deprivation and poor health. As a civil servant, Vera was employed as a social researcher and statistician, first as principal research officer for the Scottish Home and Health Department (1966-75), then as assistant director in the Scottish Health Department Information Services Division. In addition she taught in the University of Edinburgh Medical School, later serving as Scottish  Health  Services Research Network Coordinator. She served as chair of the Society for Social Medicine (1982-83), remaining an honorary member thereafter, and then, from 1991, was an honorary member of the Faculty of Public Health. She was also a member of the Social Research Association and attended meetings of the British Sociological Association Medical Sociology Group. Although not a medical graduate, she was nonetheless awarded an honorary doctorate by the Faculty of Medicine in 1995. Her professional legacy is the  Carstairs Index of Deprivation , which supports the analysis of the relationship between health and socio-economic circumstances and has informed the development of the  Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation . Born in Cheltenham to Dorris (nee Hirst) and Daniel Hunt, who both worked as shopworkers and in catering, Vera grew up in London and Nottingham. Leaving Manning school for girls in Nottingham in 1941, she worked at the Meteorological Office. After the war she benefited from a special entrance exam for service personnel, and studied economics, sociology and statistics at University College London and the LSE, graduating in 1949. A year later, she married  Morris Carstairs , a doctor, in Cambridge, where he was studying anthropology. The couple moved to Udaipur, India, in 1951, where she assisted him in his field research, which contributed to his book  The Twice-Born: A Study of a Community of High-Caste Hindus  (1958). They returned to London in 1952 following the birth of their first child, going on to have two more. On Morris’s appointment as professor of psychiatry at the University of Edinburgh in 1961, the family moved to  Scotland . My parents divorced in the 1970s, whereafter Vera had a long partnership, until his death in 2015, with Graham Scott, a senior Scottish civil servant in the health department. Vera lived and worked with intelligence, enthusiasm and honesty. She was a cook, a sailor, a gardener, an opera lover, a traveller, a seamstress, a photographer and, briefly, a fly fisher. Above all, she was an independent spirit, brave and fearless. She is survived by her children, Mungo, Jamie and me, and three grandsons.
Australia's billionaires became 50% richer during pandemic:	The combined wealth of Australian billionaires has risen by more than 50% over the past year, new figures show, prompting concerns that the pandemic-triggered recession has “turbocharged” the gap between rich and poor. The combined net worth of Australia’s billionaires dropped in March – when Covid-19 restrictions ramped up – before rebounding strongly and increasing throughout the course of the year, according to the  Bloomberg Billionaires Index . The combined worth of Australian billionaires was assessed to be 52.4% higher this week than at the same time last December. By comparison, billionaires in the US and UK recorded an increase of about 25% over the same period, the Bloomberg index shows. The Labor frontbencher Andrew Leigh said the figures “remind us of the importance of tackling inequality, which is significantly higher in Australia than it was a generation ago”. “Those increases are remarkable,” the shadow assistant minister for Treasury and charities told Guardian Australia. “Any of your readers would be punching the air if they had enjoyed a 20% increase in their wealth, and they would be double fist-pumping the air if they had a 50% increase, and yet that’s the story for the typical Australian billionaire.” By contrast, Leigh said, regular families were already doing it tough before Covid hit. He cited “anaemic” wage growth, home ownership being at its lowest level in six decades and household debt skyrocketing. “The fact is for those who are struggling this has been a terrible year and 2021 will be a rough year indeed,” he said. “Recessions often worsen inequality but this one seems to have turbocharged the gap. High-paid workers can more easily work from home than low-paid workers. “While affluent Australians can ride the sharemarket rollercoaster, more than 1 million people with insufficient assets have pulled money out of superannuation.” Bloomberg News says it tracks billionaires’ personal wealth based on market and economic movements and its own reporting. The index uses valuations that are converted to US dollars. Leigh said while the jobkeeper wage subsidy probably had only a minor impact on the Bloomberg figures, he  reaffirmed his concerns  that the scheme intended to help battlers had “ended up lining the pockets of billionaires”. He said several Australian billionaires, including Solomon Lew, owned firms that had paid out significant dividends after receiving jobkeeper support from taxpayers. Critics have dubbed the design issue as “ dividendkeeper ”. It has  previously been reported  that Lew would pocket $24.25m in dividends after his retail empire, Premier Investments, received almost $70m in wage subsidies during the coronavirus crisis. But Lew said in September that Premier’s dividend payment did not have anything to do with jobkeeper subsidies and was based “purely on trading”. Meanwhile, people receiving unemployment benefits are due to experience a cut to their income from 1 January, when the government proceeds with a reduction to the coronavirus supplement that was introduced to top up the jobseeker payment. The fortnightly coronavirus supplement will be reduced from its current rate of $250 to $150 for the next three months. The government argues that the elevated support was always intended to be temporary. The treasurer,  Josh Frydenberg , said the Coalition had passed major pieces of legislation over the past year “to cushion the blow of the Covid-19 pandemic, keeping Australians in jobs, businesses in business and sparking a faster-than-anticipated economic recovery”. In a statement issued on Monday, Frydenberg said jobkeeper had been “an economic lifeline to millions of Australians”. He cited  Reserve Bank analysis released in November  indicating that it had saved at least 700,000 jobs.
As the US descends into chaos, what better time for Britain to go the same way?:	J udging by his preposterous  video  calling for healing on Thursday night, Donald Trump is tipping both the scales and the effort marks at “late-era Brando”. Apparently reading off cue cards held up by one of the last bunker-buddies yet to resign, the president somehow contrived to make his lines sound both quarter-arsedly phoned-in and bowel-voidingly terrified. No one should trust a single word he says, naturally, but there was a distinct ring of truth in the quote of one current presidential adviser, who told a New York magazine reporter that Trump was irritated by the scenes at the Capitol simply because they looked “ low-class ”. As the adviser explained: “He doesn’t like low-class things.” Well, quite. All populists loathe their people, and Trump’s lifetime distaste for exactly those who voted for him and supported him to this most bitter of ends – if it even is the end – is one of his era’s most sledgehammer ironies. And so it was that the most diehard members of his base were waking up to discover that, for Trump, it was just a one-coup stand. On Wednesday night he told them he loved them; by Thursday he was promising to jail them – probably using the draconian monument executive order he’d brought in to delight them during the Black Lives Matter statue topplings. Life comes at you fast, I’m told.  Quite how well they’ll take the betrayal is as yet unclear. We’re already talking about people whose idea of freedom is so warped that they seem genuinely affronted by the idea they aren’t actually free to stage a coup in a democracy. One guy on Wednesday  posted  a picture of his son standing inside the Capitol on a statue plinth with the words: “That’s my son!” By Thursday, he was inquiring: “Why are the FBI contacting me?” I was mesmerised by  one clip  of a Maga insurrectionist who explained, “This is a revolution!” but was positively outraged and appalled that she had been teargassed. America’s service culture runs deep. And so to the founding fathers of this level of mass delusion. It was nice to hear from Mark Zuckerberg, who grandly announced he’d blocked Trump’s Facebook and Instagram accounts. This is not so much a case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted as doping the horse, whipping it into a frenzy, encouraging it to bolt, fostering a world in which humans are subjugated by horses, monetising every snort and whinny, allowing the very existence of “humans” and “horses” to become just one of a bunch of competing opinions, and then – only when that one particular horse has outlived its usefulness and seems destined for the glue factory – gently closing the stable door with a self-satisfied little “click”. That said, I very much enjoyed the photos of Zuckerberg’s wife enjoying a carefree surf in Hawaii, presumably taken as a man claiming to be  prepared for a violent death  was surfing on Nancy Pelosi’s desk. Yet to break his silence is Rupert Murdoch, holed up in Oxfordshire and already safely vaccinated, even as his highest-profile Fox news anchor, Tucker Carlson, pushes anti-vax propaganda. But there would never have been a Trump presidency without Fox News, with the channel spending years before his election pushing his birtherism, boomer-bait and belief that the news is really just another TV show whose ratings were his primary obsession. Doubling down on all its worst instincts from the moment Barack Obama was elected,  Fox News  terrified and radicalised with wild disinformation, creating a post-fact black hole so powerful that even previously mild-mannered rivals got sucked into it. And here we are. The import of events in Washington this week is many things, but one of those is a cautionary tale about what happens when “news” is entirely unmoored from facts. Hopping between the channels as the drama unfolded, I was struck by how much there is still to treasure in UK  TV news . Robert Moore’s truly masterful reporting for ITV from right inside the Capitol was miles better than anything I saw on the US channels, where even CNN seemed locked into the punditry format at the height of the action. And yet … imagine being the country that is RIGHT NOW deciding to get in on the bonkers newsotainment game. Imagine being the country that has watched the last four years unfold in the US, with its bloodlines so easily traceable to the Fox sensibility, and is nonetheless thinking: let’s have a bit of that. Because that’s us, of course. In the coming months, not one but two anti-impartiality news channels will launch in the UK – GB News, backed by Discovery, and News UK, courtesy of that aforementioned adornment to international life, Rupert Murdoch. You couldn’t move for commentators explaining after the phone-hacking scandal that Murdoch’s spell was broken. In fact, as numerous events have since proved, Rupert Murdoch’s spell is not remotely broken. He is spello intacto. Shortly after Trump was elected, Murdoch protege Michael Gove was flown to New York to perform an adoring colonoscopy on him – “interview”, as he had it. Gove seemingly described every detail of his visit to Trump’s office, right down to who rode in the lift with him – but never thought to mention that  Murdoch sat in on the whole thing   according to the Financial Times.   The public doesn’t like to see how the trick is done, perhaps. The Trump presidency was arguably the logical result of the type of hyper-partisan disinformation first fostered by Fox News, and the grotesque events of Wednesday were the logical result of a Trump presidency. I wouldn’t be so wishful as to call it the logical end, given that strong rumours persist of a Tucker Carlson presidential run sooner or later. There is always another chapter. As for our next chapter, there will be those wondering after the era-defining events in Washington this week if this is quite the moment for the UK to start chasing this particular Fox. Then again, what’s the worst that could happen? Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist
Top UK bosses are paid 115 times more than average worker, analysis finds:	Bosses of top British companies will have made more money by teatime on Wednesday than the average UK worker will earn in the entire year, according to an independent analysis of the vast gap in pay between chief executives and everyone else. The chief executives of FTSE 100 companies are paid a median average of £3.6m a year, which works out at 115 times the £31,461 collected by full-time UK workers on average, according to research by the High  Pay  Centre thinktank. On an hourly basis the bosses will have earned more by 5.30pm on Wednesday 6 January than the average worker will pick up across the whole of 2021. Warren Kenny, acting general secretary of the GMB union which represents more than 600,000 workers, said: “These repugnant figures expose the sheer scale of inequality and exploitation in the workplace. “The workers who have made heroic sacrifices to keep society together during the [coronavirus] outbreak deserve better – it is time for corporate leaders, shareholders and politicians to wake up and take action.” Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said the fact that bosses had earned so much money already “tells you everything you need to know about how unfair our economy is”. “Our army of minimum wage workers – carers, shop assistants and delivery drivers – have kept the country going through the pandemic. Not these CEO’s at the top raking in far more than their share,” she said. “ If the government is serious about levelling up Britain, it needs to start by levelling up pay and conditions for those we most rely on, and stop the threat to freeze key workers’ pay.” Luke Hildyard, the director of the High Pay Centre, which campaigns for executive pay restraint, said: “Pay for top CEOs today is about 120 times that of the typical UK worker. Estimates suggest it was around 50 times at the turn of the millennium or 20 times in the early 1980s.” The online supermarket  Ocado has been singled out  as having the biggest pay gap between those at the top and those on the shop floor. Its chief executive,  Tim Steiner, was paid £58.7m in 2019  , which works out at 2,605 times the £22,500 paid to the online grocery delivery company’s staff on average. It means Steiner was paid about 10 times as much as the average Ocado worker’s annual salary for just one day’s work. The High Pay Centre estimates that chief executive pay levels remained essentially flat in their analysis over the past year, while pay for UK workers had increased slightly. It means that CEOs have to work 34 hours of the year to surpass median earnings, rather than just 33 hours in 2020. The thinktank’s calculations assume “a highly demanding workload” for CEOs of 320 12-hour days of work a year. This equates to hourly pay of £941 an hour. It would take a worker on the full minimum wage rate of £8.72 an hour 212 years to earn the same as the average CEO earns in a year.
'David was terrified': the inside story of how Bowie met John Lennon:	David Bowie  and  John Lennon  first met in scenes more reminiscent of an awkward children’s playdate than a summit of two of rock’s greatest ever stars, according to a new interview with music producer  Tony Visconti . Speaking on the programme Bowie: Dancing Out in Space, airing on BBC  Radio 4  and 6Music on 10 January to mark five years since Bowie’s death, Visconti, who produced 11 of Bowie’s studio albums, tells the story of how the pair met in a New York hotel room, ahead of their collaborations on Bowie’s 1975 song Fame and his cover of the Lennon-penned Beatles song Across the Universe. “He was terrified of meeting  John Lennon ,” says Visconti, who was asked by Bowie to accompany him and “buffer the situation”. He added: About one in the morning I knocked on the door and for about the next two hours, John Lennon and David weren’t speaking to each other. Instead, David was sitting on the floor with an art pad and a charcoal and he was sketching things and he was completely ignoring Lennon. So, after about two hours of that, he [John] finally said to David, ‘Rip that pad in half and give me a few sheets. I want to draw you.’ So David said, ‘Oh, that’s a good idea’, and he finally opened up. So John started making caricatures of David, and David started doing the same of John and they kept swapping them and then they started laughing and that broke the ice. Visconti says the pair’s “great friendship” was settled from then on. A week later, Bowie called Lennon to invite him to play on the Across the Universe cover; following the recording, a jam they worked up together became Fame, co-written with guitarist Carlos Alomar. Both songs ended up on 1975 album Young Americans, whose title track features another Beatles reference, the line, “I heard the news today, oh boy.” Fame, on which Lennon also sang falsetto backing vocals, reached No 1 to become Bowie’s first US hit. Visconti, 76, also refers to the encounter in his 2007 autobiography Bowie, Bolan and the Brooklyn Boy. He met his future wife May Pang – who was dating Lennon while he was estranged from Yoko Ono – for the first time that evening, and he offended her with an ill-advised comment about kung fu. “Eventually everyone in the room finally got into a dismally dark conversation about, ‘What does it all mean’, ‘it’ being life, which left us all staring dejectedly at the floor; we were not helped by the dwindling effects of the cognac and coke,” he wrote. He added that he left around 10am that morning, returning at 4pm to find Bowie awake in exactly the same spot he had left him, and announcing he was finally going to bed. A previously unreleased Bowie cover of Lennon’s song Mother – which addressed his absent parents – was released on 8 January to mark what would have been Bowie’s 74th birthday. Visconti says in the  BBC  interview that Bowie’s mother Margaret “was a very withdrawn, very sad person. Probably suffered from chronic depression … She was in poor health and even though they didn’t get on really well, he went back to London to see her. So, he loved her nonetheless … [the cover of] Mother was probably a reaction to that, maybe a way of expressing that.” Visconti, whose career with Bowie stretches back to Bowie’s self-titled second album in 1969, also discussed his final album Blackstar, released in 2016 on his 69th birthday two days before he died of liver cancer at home in New York. Informed by jazz, electronica and Kendrick Lamar, it is now regarded as one of Bowie’s finest releases. “His keenness was incredible,” Visconti says. “It was important for him. He knew what his health issues were. It was important for him to get this album done. But we never spoke about it, apart from one private conversation I had with him prior to the album, his health was never brought up. He didn’t even honestly look unhealthy or act unhealthy, he was in great shape. You could hear from that singing that his voice was probably the strongest ever in his life.” Visconti also said Bowie will be “remembered like Beethoven … in a hundred years’ time … He’s more than an Elvis, because Elvis never wrote a single song in his life. “If he created a formula, he certainly wouldn’t use it a second time. Bowie was not only a songwriter, he was an innovator on every level. He was a great dancer, he was an actor. More than just a rock star.” •  Bowie: Dancing Out in Space is on BBC Radio 4 and 6Music, Sunday 10 January, 8pm
Christianity's long history in fighting for social justice:	While the great religious traditions do not support any single political dogma, throughout history they have been at the forefront of the some of the great struggles for liberty ( The Guardian view on liberal Christians: is this their moment? , 1 January). The campaign to abolish the slave trade featured a number of Christians, and was led by William Wilberforce. He proposed anti-slavery motions in parliament for 18 years, culminating in the 1807 act to abolish the trade. Furthermore, some of the welfare reforms in early 20th-century Britain were inspired by Christians, such as Canon Samuel Barnett and his wife, Henrietta. In the US, the civil rights movement was led by a Baptist minister,  Martin Luther King , while Archbishop Romero was a totemic figure in campaigning against breaches of human rights in the civil war in El Salvador. The church also played a prominent role in opposing apartheid in South Africa. On the international stage, churches and Jewish groups were the main supporters of the campaign to institute the 1948 genocide convention. These examples show that religious groups have a strong record of supporting campaigns for justice and freedom, and defending those facing persecution.  Zaki Cooper  Trustee, Council of Christians and Jews •  Founded by Manchester Unitarians in the early 19th century, the creation of the Guardian newspaper was partly the product of liberal Christian conscience. Your otherwise excellent editorial on the opportunities for progressive  Christianity  focused rather heavily on the Roman Catholic and Orthodox churches. Across the denominational spectrum, liberal and radical Christians are keen to nurture a narrative and practice of fraternity to challenge the brutal individualism that has torn the fabric of society since the beginning of the 1980s. It is seen in practical support for food banks; the way churches make their premises available for social support groups; and the unseen work done by clergy and people of faith to support the mental health of countless people in our communities. When so many political promises of individual prosperity are increasingly exposed as cakeism and illusion, we should not be surprised if people return to deeper patterns of meaning and solidarity.  Rev Matthew Smith  Minister, Framlingham and Bury St Edmunds Unitarians
There's no blaming studio interference for the disappointment that was Wonder Woman 1984:	F or a studio that prides itself on letting directors get on with the job, Warner Bros sure is prone to the odd jot of heavy executive interference. Or so it might initially appear from recent comments made by Wonder Woman 1984’s Patty Jenkins  on Marc Maron’s WTF podcast , which have subsequently been picked up by media outlets across the globe. Discussing Gal Gadot’s first turn as the Amazonian superhero in 2017’s widely-acclaimed  Wonder Woman , Jenkins revealed she initially battled the studio to get her vision of a warm-hearted, loving Diana of Themyscira across, ultimately winning out over an approach that would have seen the character engaging in extreme ultraviolence. “I felt like they wanted to hire me like a beard; they wanted me to walk around on set being a female director – but it was their story and their vision,” said Jenkins of her first experiences with the studio. “Even when I first joined Wonder Woman it was like, ‘Uhh, yeah, OK, but let’s do it this other way.’ But I was like, ‘Women don’t want to see that. Her being harsh and tough and cutting people’s heads off … I’m a Wonder Woman fan, that’s not what we’re looking for.’ Still, I could feel that shaky nervousness of my point of view.” I felt extremely supported in my vision on both films by  @wbpictures ,  @ZackSnyder  all the producers and everyone on board our eventual team. Just was a long road to get to make it. Let's chill the dramatic headlines like "war".  https://t.co/V7Tj1rOTBS Jenkins has since taken to Twitter to point out that she was rarely “at war” with Warner Bros and was discussing conversations that took place over a decade ago, (presumably) with very different executives to those who eventually greenlit Wonder Woman. The Monster film-maker first began talks on taking on a Wonder Woman moviein 2007, but it wasn’t until the best part of a decade later that she was invited to finally make the film with full creative freedom. That makes sense when you watch the 2017 movie, which feels like an entirely different beast to other episodes in the early DC “extended universe” such as the dark and knuckle-headed Batman vs Superman: Dawn of Justice. Even the later Justice League, a lighter-toned affair clearly influenced by the success of Wonder Woman, didn’t depict Gadot’s battling Amazon the way Jenkins would have.  The film-maker told Yahoo recently  that she was “uncomfortable with who she was and how she was seen”, after director Joss Whedon oversaw scenes in which the superhero is over-sexualised compared with her appearances in other movies. All of which brings us to Wonder Woman 1984, a so-so affair that, while entertaining enough for hardcore fans, seems to have fallen into the typical superhero sequel trap that previously affected Marvel’s Iron Man 2 and Thor: The Dark World. Here is a movie where Jenkins clearly had full creative control following its predecessor’s impressive box office take and almost universal critical acclaim. So why has it left such a sense of “meh?” The set-piece sequences are spectacular – in particular, Jenkins’ bravura opening vision of a cross-Themyscira athletics marathon that makes the modern Olympics look like a toddler’s egg and spoon race. The Mandalorian’s Pedro Pascal brings an unusual blend of humanity and furniture-chewing bad guy brio to the role of villain Maxwell Lord, Gadot is as splendidly statuesque as ever in the lead role, and her fish-out-of-water badinage with Chris Pine’s miraculously revived Steve Trevor is a thing of joy. The sequel also cleaves closely to Wonder Woman’s essential mantras, her powerful, independent femininity, kindness and grace. It does not pull its punches when depicting masculinity at its most toxic, yet utterly avoids any descent into myopic misandry. These are nuances to treasure. So what’s not to like? Perhaps the only criticism that can be levelled at Jenkins is that there is little new other than the 80s-setting  and a freaky new MacGuffin  to the essential makeup of Wonder Woman 1984. One can’t help feeling that if this had been a Marvel movie, there would have been scope to introduce other superheroes to lighten the load on the other princess Diana. And yet Jenkins has always preferred the standalone approach . Ultimately the film-maker got to make the Wonder Woman movie she wanted to make, without any studio interference – again, a rare achievement in Hollywood. It’s just a pity she didn’t – quite – manage to pull off the same trick twice.
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
How Promising Young Woman shows the limits of #MeToo revenge:	Promising Young Woman , writer/director  Emerald Fennell’s  acidic dark comedy which coats an incendiary rape revenge plot with a pastel sheen, runs an alluring, looping trap: Cassie, a singularly obsessed character played with singularly impressive depth by Carey Mulligan, pretends to be near-passed-out drunk at a bar, plays along to a skeevy man’s predatory machinations, then flips the switch when he begins to sexually assault a woman he believes is too drunk to notice or care. “What are you  doing ?” she asks, suddenly stone-cold sober. The first time Cassie pulls the trap, in the film’s first sequence, it’s not quite shocking – if you’ve seen the trailer, you know her revenge scheme – but given that it’s The OC heartthrob Adam Brody as the aw-shucks predator, Mulligan’s archly calibrated facade drop is an enticing and unnerving jolt. I wanted to root for this trap – the film wants you to cheer for this hook – but by the second ruse, as Cassie shocks and condemns another louche loser (this time played by Superbad’s Christopher Mintz-Plasse), the thrill of exposure wanes. By midway, when Cassie, on a one-last-revenge grief bender for her unseen best friend (I won’t spoil the very bad thing that underpins her rage, but it’s not hard to guess from the film’s beginning), targets her past medical school dean (Connie Britton) who turned a blind eye to devastating behavior, I had to hit the pause button. The film has been billed as a thrilling revision of the tired rape revenge drama, a #MeToo romp that relishes comeuppance for self-justifying bad men. But Cassie’s annihilating obsession – the reduction of her character to the long shadow of the worst thing that’s ever happened to her – felt not giddy or revelatory but frustratingly dead-ending. The film didn’t feel edgy or provocative so much as, in its singular focus on vigilante justice, a very recent relic of the early, heady days of public #MeToo rage. Promising Young Woman, with its tart bite and dark fatalism, is deliberately disquieting, but watching it in late 2020 felt unsettling, like a song just out of tune. Its molten core threw me back to late 2017, when the early #MeToo movement flooded with white-hot rage – a constellation of private pains suddenly given vague, if still revelatory, shape in the public forum. There were many deep-rooted hooks to hang outrage on to: the Harvey Weinsteins, which ignited lingering outrage over the  Brock Turner case , which was itself reminiscent of the  2012 Steubenville high school gang rape  recorded on cellphone footage (a crime and trauma similar to the unseen tragedy at the heart of Promising Young Woman), which landed in a much different media landscape, along with the story of  Daisy Coleman , than the one we occupy now. But three-plus years removed from the fuse of the  #MeToo movement , a decade-plus into the internet’s loose flotsam of story after story of horrific, excused, mundane, infuriating cases of sexual assault and our culture’s ill-preparedness to discuss it with any psychological nuance, we know there are bad men, bad excuses, bad records. Unmasking is a limited thrill. Promising Young Woman boils an archetypical assault story into its starkest shades – vigilante and bad, unchanged people, a woman whose trauma subsumes her personhood. Where is the insight in that exposure? What’s left when the rage boils off? Part of Promising Young Woman’s nano-specific anachronism owes to the long pipeline of film development further stretched by the pandemic (after a hyped debut at Sundance, Focus Features pushed its wide release date from April to Christmas Day), and the hyper-velocity of late 2010s internet in which cultural conversations balloon and burst by the day and week. The film has its strengths – Mulligan’s performance, how it weaponizes the benefit of the doubt afforded to Cassie’s blonde, white femininity, with her feathery bangs, rainbow manicure and bubblegum pink wardrobe. (The fact that the film’s commercial premise – a revenge fantasy in which a woman systematically targets nice-seeming men – largely hinges on Cassie’s blonde, white femininity goes unmentioned, an undeniable limitation.) But its problems – setting up easy punches against thinly drawn characters who say and do all the wrong things – glare when compared with other contemporaneous works tackling the shape-shifting ghouls of trauma, the slipperiness of complicity, and the insidiousness of prioritizing power over clarity, such as HBO’s The Tale, which explores time and trauma’s fracturing of self-narratives, and one woman’s capacity to change her understanding of what happened to her. Or the finale of HBO’s I May Destroy You, which uses rape fantasy as a mechanism for healing without trauma becoming obliterative, Cassie-style dark matter. Last year’s The Assistant eschews the bad men-focus of Promising Young Woman for a gripping (if tonally opposite) portrait of systemic rot and toxic adjacency at a Weinstein-esque production company. In other words, all pieces which transmute the same soup of horror into jagged, irreducible edges, that burrow out of rather than into the bifurcation of good and bad people. Promising Young Woman’s macabre, candied denouement certainly shocks, but at the cost of surprise; there’s little room to run when both Cassie and the film assumes everyone’s worst potential. That bleakness holds to the early days of #MeToo, when exposure was revelation, when recognition of the scope of toxicity was the story. I’d like to understand the next chapter, to believe in healing, or change, or potential, or complication, or moving forward, which could also be the sweetest revenge. Promising Young Woman is out in US cinemas and will be released digitally in January with a UK release on 12 February
'Maybe death isn't the end': can a TV series prove the existence of an afterlife?:	T he  Netflix  docuseries Surviving Death has no shortage of paranormal activity. Mediums call on the dead. Seances try to manifest them. People claim to be reincarnated actors, pilots or murder victims while others describe feeling a heavenly embrace during near-death experiences. Over six hour-long episodes, the series pores over signs and evidence that there is something to experience beyond our last breath. Surviving Death’s director, Ricki Stern, is ready for your skepticism. Her show practically invites it. “I would call myself a sort of non-believer, but someone who was open to it,” Stern told the Guardian from her New York City apartment. Stern, whose recent docuseries work includes Reversing Roe and Surviving Jeffrey Epstein, doesn’t shy away from cross-examining the mediums and witnesses who appear on-camera saying they speak to or have seen apparitions. The show never dismisses the possibility that a seance can use lighting tricks to conjure a ghost or a medium can dig up information on Facebook and pass it off as info from the great beyond. But Stern’s series also builds a convincing and provocative case that our consciousness can and does continue beyond life as we know it. The director explained that she wanted to explore the possibilities of a great beyond through legitimate analysis. To do that Stern followed the lead from journalist Leslie Kean’s book, Surviving Death, which the series is based on. Kean, who also appears in the series, brought a research-heavy scientific approach to discussing an afterlife, which can be a bit like using a stethoscope on a ghost. When the scientific world loves physical evidence, how do you build a persuasive argument for the metaphysical? Kean told the Guardian she enjoyed the inherent challenges of bringing investigative practices to find “truths that you can probably never get to”. She also pointed out that she is simply following a distinguished lineage of people who have gone down this path for hundreds of years before her. Philosopher and psychologist William James, Sherlock Holmes author Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Dr Ian Stevenson, who founded the division of perceptual studies at the University of Virginia in 1967, are some of the people who produced papers and manuscripts on paranormal investigations. “They’re not necessarily believers,” Kean said. “But they’re people that take it seriously enough to want to study it.” Doyle’s popular Victorian-era creation, Sherlock Holmes, was a skeptical, scientific mind. In novels like The Hound of the Baskervilles, Holmes would pull back the curtain and disprove theories involving the supernatural and paranormal. But Doyle was surprisingly more open to the possibility that there are people who could communicate with the dead, and even manifest them. Surviving Death tries to find the tricky balance between that Sherlock skepticism and Doyle’s openness to spiritualism. The series also addresses how finding evidence of an afterlife almost always requires an open mind. You have to be willing to accept that a visit from a persistent cardinal or flickering lights can be signs from the dead. But Stern admitted that such openness is also grounds for dismissal: “You could just say, people are who are looking for signs will see signs.” “Everybody has to decide for themselves whether something has that meaning for them or not,” Kean added. “With signs, it’s not really objective.” When investigating life after death, objectivity isn’t really in the cards. With this particular subject, absolutely everyone is personally invested. Journalists and academics, like Kean and Conan Doyle, who explored the subject scientifically can’t help but be affected. Conan Doyle was nudged towards spiritualism following his son’s death. While researching for her book, a close friend to Kean died, bringing her work closer to home. “If you have these profound experiences in the process of [investigating], then you’re sort of joining your journalism with your personal experience,” Kean said. “But that’s really the only way to study it at the same time. It’s hard sometimes to separate the two.” Stern’s series departs from Kean’s book by focusing on personal stories about encountering the afterlife. More often than not, the subjects in the series are motivated by a personal loss to find signs of an afterlife. Mike Anthony is a particularly fascinating character in Surviving Death. After losing his father some years ago, he became a hobbyist of sorts, visiting different mediums who claim to be communicating with his father. These visits have two purposes. Anthony is continuing a relationship with his father. But he’s also vetting and rating these mediums on their abilities, with a willingness to admit that some are probably hustling and taking advantage of his trust. He puts himself through a heavy rinse-and-repeat cycle of emotions between skeptic and believer and back. “It is a bit of an emotional rollercoaster for him,” said Stern, who described Anthony as an audience surrogate. To discover the truth, he repeatedly made himself vulnerable to believing and often met with disappointment as a result. Stern agreed that such emotional vulnerability is exactly what we “protect ourselves” from when we stay skeptical. Some of us are cynical about the possibility of an afterlife because we don’t want to set ourselves up for the most crushing disappointment. The other side of that equation is hope. “I just hope the series is going to help people open up their minds and question the nature of consciousness,” said Kean. Her book is the perfect litmus test for the response that can be expected for the series, which, given its universal subject matter, has undeniable appeal for a wide audience. Readers reached out to Kean to express how they or someone they know found solace in the book while dealing with grief. Others reached out to talk about how they too experienced possible signs that they were never able to speak openly about before, because there’s a stigma around rational minds believing in an afterlife. “I think the book opens a door for people to feel more comfortable talking about all this,” Kean explained. “I’m framing it in a way that’s extremely credible and research oriented.” “We can’t answer the questions,” Kean added. “We don’t try to do that in the series. But it’s about [the possibility that] there is something that happens after we die. Maybe death isn’t the end.” Surviving Death is now available on Netflix
Pomp and romps: how Bridgerton became the most talked about show on TV:	Lanre Bakare Christmas 1995 was one to forget. I was ill and mostly confined to the sofa, trying to keep down mince pies as my big sister made her way through the VHS release of  Andrew Davies’ Pride and Prejudice . A few years earlier, I had been subjected to the Julian Amyes version of Jane Eyre starring Timothy Dalton, but at least that was weirdly gothic and unintentionally hilarious; this was another level. Pemberley, Mr Bingley, Jennifer Ehle with her bonnet, Colin Firth in a pond. For an 11-year-old who liked WWF and Rage Against the Machine, it was like water torture. The experience put me off costume dramas and Austen for years. Any sign of buttoned-down, stiff-upper-lip, no-sex-we’re-British Regency nonsense was anathema to me. Then, 25 years later,  Bridgerton turned up on Christmas Day . Unapologetically daft, it luxuriates in playing with the form and conventions of costume dramas, instilling them with modern storytelling chops and the sort of overblown production I last saw in  Sofia Coppola’s Marie Antoinette . It sees the Regency period through American eyes, highlighting the things that people like most about British aristocratic tropes: the grandeur, the pomp and the gilded cages. The repressed sexuality is still on show, but it is countered by unapologetically rampant bonking and homoerotic boxing. But the show is about far more than sex and siring heirs. Bridgerton even managed to make me interested in the logistical problems of 19th-century aristocrats. How do you cope when you have wasted your daughters’ dowry on ill-advised wagers? Why do the townsfolk recoil in horror when m’lady refuses to choose a pig for the slaughter? What about hiding the tell-tale bump of a forthcoming illegitimate child when you have a ball to attend? One of the best scenes is when Daphne confronts her mother after she doesn’t tell her about the intricacies of the birds and the bees. Yes, that sounds utterly ridiculous when written down, but  the Shondaland framing  manages to make it compelling. I don’t think I will be reaching for the Pride and Prejudice VHS any time soon, but  Bridgerton  has made me – and probably thousands of others – reconsider what a costume drama can be. Jenny Stevens Bridgerton is a romp – in all senses of the word. Take the very first scene, where the debutante Daphne waits to be escorted to London by her brother, while we see him pants-at-knees humping an opera singer against a tree. It is an impressive amount of bottom in the first three minutes – you didn’t get this in  Cranford , but then nor did you get an orchestral reimagining of Ariana Grande as a soundtrack. And so begins this very modern period drama; a romantic rollick set in 1813 London that feels eerily prescient to contemporary pandemic Britain. It is courting season on Grosvenor Square, where “titled, chaste and innocent” girls flounce into the capital to find – or be thrust upon, or laden down with – a respectable male suitor. Potential matches meet with chaperones, often in public spaces, and touching is strictly forbidden. It is not exactly the same as illicitly meeting up with a Hinge or Tinder match and pretending to do “exercise” around the local park, but nor does it feel so very far removed. It made me wonder whether, in 2227, viewers will watch London’s singletons, in knockoff Moncler duvet coats with woolly hats and Thermoses, endure socially distanced park-bench dates while hoping for a sneaky touch on the arm, in a period drama about the great pandemic courting season of 2020/21. Shonda Rhimes, the Bridgerton producer, has quenched a thirst in bleak times, not just for a bit of fluff, pomp and drama to soothe tired new year minds, but for the recognition that chastity is very hard, strict social rules make people miserable and that some people will inevitably break them – especially the moneyed and powerful. She has also managed to balance the audience’s gaze on the male and female body equally. It is rare to find on-screen depictions of sex where the men are as unclothed as the women. Here, there are more male tops off than the 1994 Take That European tour; it takes a bit of time to adjust to seeing the Viscount Bridgerton fully dressed. And so as lockdown continues and the absence of touch is felt even more cruelly, Bridgerton – with its circus of secret trysts, gossip and drama – is a perfect balm for those at home, alone, with a long winter ahead. Poppy Noor I have a rule about TV. If there are no people of colour in a show, I try not to watch. However, this rule, despite its many benefits – I watch less TV than I otherwise would and have an excuse for refusing to watch many of Judd Apatow’s films – has confused me into thinking I didn’t like period dramas. I now realise this is untrue. Bridgerton has taught me that I do like period dramas – I was just put off by the near-total whiteness. Period dramas are supposed to speak to all women – thanks to the supposedly universal themes of women being treated like a doormats. But as the Guardian TV critic Ellen E Jones wrote,  while talking about Fleabag : “Art that’s most often ascribed this kind of universality actually comes from the specific perspective of the dominant class. ‘Posh girls’, for short.” To this I would add only that this almost always means “posh white girls”, so you’ll understand why I didn’t vibe with period dramas before now. But who can resist the themes of scandal, betrayal and stupid men? In Bridgerton, these three things are cleverly combined with an element of mystery: a gossip columnist called Lady Whistledown informs high-society London (AKA “the ton”) of all three, by mail every week – and of course everyone, the viewers included, want to know who she is. Brown people have been around in England for a while ( Cheddar man, anyone? ). Yet TV and film have long been happy to whitewash not just history, but also fiction – see the endless debates about whether fictional characters can be played by a person of colour ( eg James Bond ) and the lack of shame around casting white actors as brown people (see Ridley Scott’s  Exodus: Gods and Kings ). To say Bridgerton is the height of representation would be silly – the characters of colour are not treated well and have little agency. The Duke of Hastings is tricked by his wife, first into marrying her, then into having unprotected sex with her – which  some critics have called sexual assault  (a more clearcut theme in the book than the TV version). He does not want children (telling her, before they are married, that he “cannot” have them), but she then wields the power of the dictionary to fight this, insisting she had misconstrued his words and thought he was impotent. “Cannot is different to will not!” she proclaims. Marina Thompson, meanwhile, the beautiful black woman sent to live with the unremarkable Featheringtons, is subject to scorn, jealousy and ultimately revenge for being desirable. Queen Charlotte, played by an actor of colour in a nod to the conjecture that she may have been mixed race, pines for her mentally ill husband. (Others have pointed out that all the characters of colour who are love interests are light-skinned.) The only black character you don’t feel pity for is Lady Danbury, who, quite simply, is the role model you wish you had. The show suggests that the king marrying a black woman removed racial inequalities in the 19th-century – which, well, you only have to look at what happened to Meghan and Harry in the 21st century to know that utopia hasn’t arrived.  Race  is rarely mentioned. Then again, justifying brown characters in a show by adding a bit about “people-of-colour issues” is not exactly revolutionary. Bridgerton is watchable if ultimately predictable. If it were another show, I wouldn’t write about it. But to see people like me allowed to star in a genre that is usually cordoned off tricked me into exploring a world I never get to see on screen. I am not landed gentry or nobility, but I am a person of colour, and I have never, until this year, seen myself in a period drama ( hats off to The Great, also ). Perhaps the novelty will wear off, but to find novelty on TV in your 30s is an unadulterated joy. Hannah J Davies I loved Bridgerton. I loved all of its mindless Regency spectacle. At a time when politicians are arguing  whether The Crown should come with a warning that it is not unfailingly factually accurate , Bridgerton unbridled itself from history – and made that debate seem stuffy and pointless. It took the Downton approach a step further, revelling in its anachronistic Ariana Grande and Taylor Swift string covers, Julie Andrews’ tattle-talking narrator and its diverse cast. Like Gossip Girl – a 00s series  getting the remake treatment  – it is the kind of show you can consume while doing 100 other things or invest in fully to the detriment of your dinner (who cares about burnt fish fingers when you are pondering huge questions such as: “But  will  they? Or will  they ? And is  she  pregnant?!”). Executive produced by Shonda “Scandal” Rhimes, the puffy-sleeved hit has received the same criticism as some of her previous series,  specifically that its “colour-blind” casting doesn’t hit the mark on race . In truth, it doesn’t – but neither does most TV in 2020. That said, Bridgerton does feel two-dimensional when it comes to race, more concerned with visibility than reality. Indeed, the whole period drama industrial complex has much to do when it comes to moving white narratives from the spotlight; it is unfair to level all the criticism at one production and one creative of colour. Similarly, its portrayal of sex is rather “yikes” in places, but isn’t that more of a flaw of hundreds – or thousands – of years of patriarchal nonsense? Period dramas are very much not my thing. I enjoyed the memes of Saoirse Ronan shouting “I can’t!” more than I enjoyed  Greta Gerwig’s long-winded adaptation of Little Women . I have read one Jane Austen novel (and I can’t even remember which one). Even the words “Downton Abbey” are enough to elicit a cold sweat – and that is before considering how preposterous Julian Fellowes’ writing is. Maybe it is the lack of iPhones, maybe it is the fact that the word “corset” makes my chest hurt, but something about them makes me nauseous. All that said, Bridgerton is an undoubted success. It has heart. It has goodies and baddies getting their dues. It has  Nicola Coughlan from Derry Girls . And, for once, it has made me excited to watch a show set before 2000, which really is a revision of history.
'If the aliens lay eggs, how does that affect architecture?': sci-fi writers on how they build their worlds:	Revelation Space Universe (2000-2018); Poseidon’s Children Universe (2012-2015) My approach to world-building is a bit smoke and mirrors – there’s only as much as you need to carry the story. I think of it as one of those sets they used to have for cowboy films: the facades look good, but if you walk around the back, it’s all props and plywood. I don’t want to sound lazy, but I want to do as little as possible. I don’t need to know how the sewage system works to tell a story about someone on another planet. I like the idea that you write in such a way that the reader thinks they’ve been given a bit of world-building, but they haven’t – they’ve made it up in their own head, or joined up the dots. That’s the way to do it with maximum economy. Clearly this is something that frustrates a lot of readers, but I like leaving stuff out. Let the reader fill in those missing chapters. I’d far rather go and create other stuff to drive them mad. As a consumer of science fiction, I love those moments when a character will make some offhand reference and nothing more will be said of it. As in  The Talons of Weng-Chiang , when the Doctor refers to the battle of Reykjavík in the 51st century. The idea that he knows this nugget of future history stimulates my imagination far more than if I’d been shown what it was. World-building wasn’t even on my radar when I started writing science fiction in the 1980s. It’s miraculous to me that the stories I wrote 20 years ago still get people thinking, that they go off and do fan art about spaceships or the characters. I love it, but I’m also very wary of the perfectly natural fan thing of wanting to know more. Trust me on this – the less I give you, the more you’re going to enjoy it. Binti (2015), Akata Witch (2011), Who Fears Death (2010) My stories tend to start with the characters. Then I look through their eyes (or however they “see”), minds, perspectives to observe the world. Typically this happens the moment the character exists. So I know the world not long after I know the characters. I walk through it, I smell the air, listen to the gossip, observe its insect world, hear its history through various perspectives, and so on … I experience it. I don’t make notes initially or while writing – I find that distracting. And while writing, I can hold the world pretty fully in my mind … I tend to write first drafts swiftly and nonstop, putting it aside to cool only when it’s complete (which means it carries everything in it; it’s out of my head and on the page). I might draw maps, charts or diagrams while editing. My editing phase is much longer than the writing phase. My worlds are African worlds. I’d love to take credit for the culture that is in my worlds’ DNA, but I can’t. Those cultures existed long before me; I didn’t have to imagine them. And my stories certainly don’t exist because white male (or female … let’s not forget that white female perspectives also dominate female perspectives in science fiction and fantasy) perspectives refused to imagine them first. My stories aren’t a “response” to whiteness. They exist wholly outside of white-male-anything. These stories that come from my own culture, experiences, from within me, from reflections of specific African cultures. By existing, I’d hope they help bring cultural, ethnic and gender balance to science fiction and fantasy, but that is not my work’s reason to exist. The Imperial Radch trilogy: Ancillary Justice (2013), Ancillary Sword (2014), Ancillary Mercy (2015) I try to choose details that are real – the whole of human history and culture is fantastically varied – and that seem to fit together. In real life, cultures and histories are full of things that contradict each other. There will be one common narrative of how things happen, how people live and eat and so on, but people won’t actually always do things that way. I try to include such moments, because it makes my world more three-dimensional. I also leave some things unexplained or just referred to, as though the world is much bigger than just this one story and won’t all fit in the pages. There’s a particular style of world-building that’s all about filling in all the details, making sure everything fits logically. In real life, people are chaotic and self-contradictory. While I do believe that, in theory, everything is ultimately susceptible to logic, human cultures and activities are far less simple and obvious than some people seem to assume. When someone thinks they entirely understand the logic of human behaviour, the world-building is very flat, and the shadows that might have given it depth are filled in with the very schematic, simplistic assumptions the world builder assumes are universal truths. It’s difficult, when you really enjoy a work, not to engage fully with a science-fictional world and wonder about those details, and try to build them out yourself. I can see why readers ask the questions they do about the worlds they read, and I can see why some writers would respond by trying to answer all those questions in advance. Wayfarers series: The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet (2015), A Closed and Common Orbit (2016), Record of a Spaceborn Few (2018), The Galaxy, and the Ground Within (2021) World-building is both the foundation of your fictional universe and the decorations on the walls. It’s a rulebook and a travel brochure all in one. The only rule in world-building is consistency. Beyond that, it’s your party. I do a big chunk of world-building at the start, which is crucial for me because I don’t outline my books. I write by the seat of my pants, so I need to know the rules of the sandbox I’m playing in. I don’t draw maps, but I live and breathe by my notes. I always buy a new notebook at the beginning of a project (sometimes two), and I have a private Wiki on my hard drive where I keep all the Wayfarers lore. The Wayfarers books are intimate, low-key stories by design, so I keep the focus on everyday details. I’ve worked out tons of particulars regarding wars and politics and evolutionary histories and so on, but in the books, I only dive into those as much as would make sense in a normal conversation between average folks. I’m not going to talk to you much about trade disputes or border conflicts beyond a brief bit of exposition. What I will tell you about is what people eat, and what homes look like, and how annoying the paperwork is when you travel. With alien species, I start with biology. If a species lays eggs, how does that affect architecture, parenthood, family? With alien species, I start with biology. The Aandrisks, for example, are a reptile-like, ectothermic species who lay eggs. So how does that affect your architecture, or your concept of parenthood, or family, or the typical composition of a household? From there, I ask questions about how these things affect art and culture and government and philosophy and so on. This is my favourite part of the creative process, aside from being done. There is always the danger of turning your story into an encyclopedia article instead of a living, breathing ecosystem. It’s easy to get lost in the weeds of world-building, and finding the balance between too much and too little is a never-ending puzzle. There are plenty of blanks I’m content letting the reader fill on their own, either because I don’t know the answer or don’t want them to have it. But what that balance looks like depends on the preferences of both writer and reader. Mars trilogy: Red Mars (1992), Green Mars (1993), and Blue Mars (1996); 2312 (2012); The Ministry for the Future (2020) I don’t like the term world-building. I’d say there’s no such thing – it’s a term out of a vocabulary that grew in writing workshops to help writers talk about the craft of fiction. But the writer should remember that these diagnostic terms are not what the reader feels while reading: the reader reads in a kind of dreamlike state in which the events of a story really happen. So the writer should focus on somehow forwarding the story. That’s the only imperative: make that “willing suspension of disbelief” go into action, and take the reader away.  I try to show the future situation from the viewpoints of a number of different characters, who have different takes on the situation, and thus perhaps give it more depth. I also usually stick to the laws of physics as understood now, which will tend to make the things I make up more convincing. And I’ve often written long novels, which gives me more room to establish a sense of realism in what I’m describing. Lastly, there’s a technique Roland Barthes called “the effect of the real”, which is the inclusion of some small striking detail that doesn’t add to plot, character, theme, setting, or anything else - it’s only there “because that’s the way it really happened and so it has to be noted as such”. A little of that will go a long way, but it can be helpful. Viriconium series (1971-1984); Kefahuchi Tract trilogy: Light (2002), Nova Swing (2006) and Empty Space (2012); The Sunken Land Begins to Rise Again (2020) Realists authenticate their work by placing it in an imitation of the world, while fantasists have to build a false world before “fauxthentication” can take place. We all have to do something to give the reader and characters a sense of place. But minimalism – a line of dialogue overheard here, a couple of wry observations about the shape of a house there – often works better in realist writing: why not see if it would work in the false realism of fantasy as well? The writer has to have a rough idea where everything is – indeed, where “where” is. But I like to know as little as possible, whether I’m writing or reading. Too much knowledge gets in the way of my imagination. I don’t want The Day of the Triffids to be a pseudo-accurate horticultural guide to walking vegetables, I want it to be a novel about middle-class people pulling themselves together in the aftermath of the second world war – sorry, “the disaster”. I don’t want to read the operating instructions for the Starship Enterprise; it isn’t a vacuum cleaner. I don’t want to read the operating instructions for the Starship Enterprise; it isn’t a vacuum cleaner I never planned for anyone to get comfortable or have an exciting adventure in Viriconium. I believed back then that if you spent your time dreaming of (or in) a more exciting and fulfilling world than this one, you would never do anything to change the real world – the one you had so needed the escape from in the first place. I felt that you had caught yourself in a loop there, and given in to the honey-trap laid by the real-world political and economic circumstances that were making your life less fun than a hobbit’s. (Indeed, making it so awful that the life of a hobbit seemed fun.) I don’t think the processes of authentication/fauxthentication are much different for the Yorkshire Moors and the Misty Mountains of Distant Gondor. Most of my mise en scène starts out real. I rarely need an overview of the economic/industrial base of the fantasy land, because my worlds are usually a direct parody of ours. After that, I think you can increase the illusion of depth by leaving plenty of space for the accidental as you write. And not just in world-building. But it’s important to go back afterwards and wave your magic fauxthenticity wand over the scene of the accident.
Helen Keller: why is a TikTok conspiracy theory undermining her story?:	W hen the internet is riddled with conspiracy theories, it can be difficult to decide which to worry about. While QAnon and Pizzagate are proving themselves to have radicalising potential with real-world repercussions, others are flourishing beneath the radar, or certainly going unnoticed by anyone over the age of 25. What I mean to say is: teenagers on  TikTok  doubt the existence of Helen Keller. I know – I had to read that sentence a few times, too. How could Keller’s existence be up for debate? There is extant film footage of the author, activist and disability rights advocate, who became deafblind after a childhood illness, learned to communicate using hand gestures and to understand others through the Tadoma method, and learned how to speak. She attended Harvard, wrote 12 books and many more essays and lectures. Her autobiography was adapted for film and stage. She travelled the world, campaigning on civil rights, labour rights and women’s suffrage. Her book on socialism was burned by the Nazis. She died in 1968. Her birthplace is now a museum. None of this seems to matter. Screenwriter Daniel Kunka, who came across the conspiracy theory  when speaking to his teenage nephews and nieces , said they and other proponents don’t doubt the existence of Helen Keller the woman, but the fact that she was both deaf and blind, yet still able to write books. Setting aside the offensiveness of this assumption for a moment, the conspiracy seems to have started as a joke. Anyone who has met a member of Gen Z knows that they are creatures of the internet, and as such have an almost awe-inspiring grasp of irony. They are walking examples of what has come to be called “context collapse”. And yet it does seem that some teenagers do doubt Keller’s achievements, or, in some cases, that she was disabled at all. Some of the videos have been removed, with TikTok telling Newsweek that any post that “dehumanises others on the basis of a disability is a violation of our community guidelines”. But  others remain up . “Does it stem from our own insecurities – could it be that a blind, deaf woman with more success in life than all of us is too much to grasp? Possibly,”  writes one young woman on Medium , with such extraordinary solipsism that this correspondent had to take a moment. Obviously, the entire theory is shockingly ableist, and serves as an example of the sort of prejudices that disabled people face every day – particularly those with invisible disabilities, who can find themselves set upon by members of the public for using parking spaces or disabled toilets when they “don’t look disabled”. Anyone with a shred of sense knows that human beings are able to achieve extraordinary things, whatever the hurdles they may face. After a stroke left him with locked-in syndrome,  Jean-Dominique Bauby wrote The Diving Bell and the Butterfly  by blinking his left eyelid. Naoki Higashida, who is severely autistic and has limited verbal communication skills,  wrote The Reason I Jump using an alphabet grid . Donna Williams overcame shocking abuse and prejudice to produce her 1992 memoir Nobody Nowhere. These are just a few examples of an entire body of literature produced by disabled authors over the years. It would be easy to be all “teenagers today!” about the Helen Keller theory. Perhaps, on some level, that is what Gen Z wants. (I am still half-inclined to think that this is all a gigantic wind-up, it is that stupid.) And yet, to blame this entirely on a generation ignores the fact that these views do not occur in a vacuum. Who taught them this attitude to disability, after all? Isn’t it men of a certain age who are the keenest proponents of, for example, the abelist, sexist and highly patronising notion that Gen Z activist Greta Thunberg has been coached? Until society as a whole takes a more nuanced attitude to disability, prejudices such as these will continue to exist. All we can do now is have a conversation with the teenagers in our lives about Keller and ableism – and how social media spreads disinformation to the point where anyone can claim someone is not real.
A midsummer night's sax comedy: the return of the lost Shakespeare jazz musical:	W hen Swingin’ the Dream opened on  Broadway  on 29 November 1939, the creators of this jazz version of A Midsummer Night’s Dream had every expectation of a smash hit. The music alone seemed worth the price of admission. Among the hits were Ain’t Misbehavin’, I Can’t Give You Anything But Love, Jeepers Creepers, and Darn That Dream. All this was intermingled with swing renditions of Mendelssohn’s Wedding March, from his 1842 Midsummer Night’s Dream. The music was performed by some of the biggest names around: Bud Freeman’s band played on one side of the stage, Benny Goodman’s inter-racial group on the other, and in the centre Donald Voorhees conducted an orchestra of 50. The Shakespeare musical had a 150-strong cast, featuring many of America’s most popular black artists, including Maxine Sullivan as Titania, Juano Hernandez as Oberon and none other than Louis Armstrong as Bottom. The trumpeter reportedly turned down a part in another Broadway-bound jazz show, Young Man With a Horn, to star in it. Butterfly McQueen (AKA Prissy in Gone With the Wind) played Puck. Agnes de Mille, who a year later would break new ground in her Black Ritual for the newly formed Negro Unit of Ballet  Theatre , oversaw the choreography. The dancers included the great tap star Bill Bailey, the three Dandridge sisters (who played Titania’s pixie attendants), as well as 13 tireless jitterbugging couples. With set designs based on Walt Disney cartoons, it looked great, too. Sullivan’s Titania entered enthroned in a “World of Tomorrow” electric wheelchair, microphones appeared in the shape of snakes and caterpillars, while a pull-down bed hung from a tree. It seemed destined to a be a hit, and a startlingly original one. But   Swingin’ the Dream closed after only 13 performances – and lost its investors a staggering $100,000, the equivalent to about $2m today. Critics continue to debate what went wrong, hampered by the fact that no script for the show, other than a few pages from the Pyramus and Thisbe scene, has ever been found, despite extensive searches. Towards the end of the brief run, CBS radio aired Sullivan and Armstrong performing some songs and scenes, but that recording is lost as well. Now, eight decades on, the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Young Vic and New York’s Theatre for a New Audience are joining forces to livestream a concert of a “work in progress” based on the show’s surviving music, presented   by  Kwame Kwei-Armah . For the Young Vic’s artistic director, the “desire to fuse two great art forms, jazz and verse – and in doing so make a statement about the state of the American nation at the time – feels ripe for exploring now”. The show’s creators,Erik Charell and Gilbert Seldes,set their musical in 1890s New Orleans. The programme reminded playgoers that the “Athens of the Southland” was the birthplace of swing. A helpful summary of the adaptation was provided by Philip Carter in his review for the Amsterdam News, New York’s leading black newspaper. The gist is that the story revolves around the wedding of a Louisiana governor. The two men who work for him as secretaries are in love with his cousin’s daughter. This leaves another southern belle – who loves one of the lads – out in the cold. The “plantation hands”, Carter wrote, “decide to perform A Midsummer Night’s Dream as the wedding entertainment, and the four lovers wander into the magic woods where their love affairs are first entangled and then straightened out by the magic of Oberon, King of the Pixies. All of this forms a background for Jackie Mabley and her company of actors to stumble through the lines of a mock rehearsal of their play.” White actors were cast as the governor and his circle, black performers played the “rude mechanicals” and the many spirits that inhabit the woods. While casting reinforced class and racial boundaries, it nevertheless broke gendered ones. Quince, played by the gifted standup comic “Moms” Mabley, was a midwife, and Alberta Perkins played Peaceful Pearl, a cook. Snug is a cleaner, Snout a steeplejack, Flute an iceman, and Louis Armstrong’s Bottom a fireman. Seldes and Charell had hoped to capitalise on the success the previous year of The Boys from Syracuse, the first major Shakespeare musical, based on The Comedy of Errors. Its all-white cast made effective use of swing and the show ran for 235 performances. The defining feature of the emerging Shakespeare musical was hybridity: mixing musical styles, mixing Shakespeare’s language with contemporary American idiom, mixing highbrow and lowbrow – and, in Swingin’ the Dream mixing races, establishing a precedent for Kiss Me, Kate and West Side Story. But getting the mix right wasn’t easy. Contemporaries offered various explanations for why the show failed. Some blamed the venue, the cavernous Center Theatre, which seated 3,700. As a postmortem in   Theatre Arts Monthly put it: “A dreadful distance separated the audience from dancers and music alike. Even the Pied Piper of Manhattan, Benny Goodman himself, could not draw his followers from the misty wastes of that huge and too elegant auditorium.” While praising the production’s “sheer mass and charge”, the review concluded that the “showmanship was not there, nor any ingenuity in direction or planning which would have made of a collection of brilliant ideas a functioning whole”. John Mason Brown wrote in the New York Post that the show was at its best when it “pushed Shakespeare offstage” and stuck to the dancing and music, adding that by clinging so closely to the original, the show’s creators “may please the school marms, but they silence Mr Goodman and Mr Armstrong for too long a while”. Brooks Atkinson went even further in his  New York  Times   review ,  wondering whether the show would have done better “by forgetting Shakespeare altogether”. While the show never had an out-of-town run to iron out its problems, the Pittsburgh Courier reported that, after opening night, it “was greatly improved with hasty revisions”. Had the run extended, it would likely have become sharper. But salaries for its many performers ran to more than $6,000 a week, and that didn’t include Benny Goodman’s band. Faced with so many empty seats in the huge theatre, the producers resorted to giving away tickets. The Thursday before it closed, reported the New York Times, the place was packed, but the gate that night was only $596. While the cost of a seat – the most expensive went for $2.20 – was kept deliberately low, the show failed to attract white audiences and didn’t seem to make much of an effort to cultivate black theatergoers either. Did Swingin’ the Dream arrive on Broadway ahead of its moment? White audiences certainly didn’t seem ready to pay to see black performers do Shakespeare. You catch a glimpse of this attitude in the dismissive review in Time ,  which declared that “no self-respecting Bard-hunter would stalk such mongrel prey”, while the Boston Globe notified its readers that “the cast will be Negro”. Yet the musical was also very much of its time, and not only in its embrace of swing. However progressive its creators imagined their show to be, they were reluctant to give their black stars the improvisational freedom that was at the heart of swing, and relegated them to what verged on demeaning minstrelsy roles. Black critics were especially sensitive to this. William G Nunn, writing in the Pittsburgh Courier, faulted Charell for failing to “allow his super cast of stars to be themselves”. Bud Freeman, one of the few white artists in the production, later wrote in his autobiography that “if Charell had known the greatness of the black people, he could have had a revue that would still be running”. It didn’t help that the show’s creative control mirrored the world of the play, in which white actors were cast as those in charge, while black actors played the “plantation hands”. If anyone in the cast chafed at this, none said so on the record. In 1939, black performers faced hard choices as the Great Depression extended into its 10th year. In the theatre world at least, things had improved since the government’s creation, in 1936, of the Federal Negro Theatre, part of the New Deal’s Federal Theatre Project, which saved the careers of many unemployed actors. While finding work in difficult times was a good thing, was accepting stereotypic roles too high a price to pay? Philip Carter asked as much in the Amsterdam News: “There are those who may feel that the ‘Dream’ deserves the same sort of support of any other enterprise when there are 150 Negroes drawing salaries. But the same high ideals will cause still others to feel that such support only shoves farther into the distant future the day when Negro actors and Negro art will be recognised without lampooning and burlesque.” As the Pittsburgh Courier reported, the abrupt closure of Swingin’ the Dream put “more than 200 performers again on the job wanted list, most of them colored”. And six months later, opportunities for black actors across America would be sharply curtailed, as the House Un-American Activities Committee shut down the entire Federal Theatre Project, deeming it subversive, and declaring that its pursuit of “racial equality forms a vital part of the Communistic teaching and practices”. The live-streamed concert may well be a harbinger of Shakespeare in a post-pandemic world, with theatre companies looking to the past as they struggle towards a more inclusive and collaborative future. If so, the story of Swingin’ the Dream embodies both the perils and the promise of this future. In the meantime, it will be good, under lockdown, to hear some remarkable jazz and imagine the great Satchmo on his horn, breathing new life into Bottom’s “most rare” dream. •   Swinging’ the Dream will be livestreamed on 9 January . James Shapiro is professor of English at Columbia University in New York. He is the author of Shakespeare in a Divided America.
Trump will soon leave office. But the ingredients of homegrown fascism remain:	S everal months into the pandemic, a friend drove us away from the southern California coast into barren, dun-colored mountains, where roadside signs were riddled with bullet holes. We came across an abandoned service station with the windows blown out and an American flag, faded by the desert sun, painted on the front. We entered the ruins. On the back wall was a graffito:  fucked at birth. “I knew you’d like that,” my friend said as I took photos of the words that encapsulated what I’d been trying to say for the past 40 years in my work as a journalist documenting the ever-expanding class chasm in America. In the early 1980s, I believed awareness would instigate political and social change. Now, after so many articles and books, I felt that they were like some tired country ballad playing in a honky-tonk where everyone is drunk and not listening to the music. I was done with the work. So when my friend suggested the scrawl as a title for my next book, I blew her off – I was tapped out. In the coming days, however, I was haunted by the juxtaposition of the flag and the spray-painted words. It was time to change the song. I decided to drive across America and visit homeless encampments, meatpacking towns, crippled onetime industrial cities, showing people a picture of the gas station’s exterior and what was inside, and let those I encountered tell me what it meant. The responses always came fast. In Sacramento, John Kraintz, who had been homeless:  “In the Declaration of Independence, they said all men are created equal. That was the first big lie. If you’ve got money, they care about you.” In Denver, the Black Lives Matter activist Terrance Roberts:  “You ask me about being fucked at birth? I mean, I’m an African American male.” In New York City, my former student Megan Cattel:  “That’s the millennial rallying cry.” That journey convinced me of the need for the title. Sales representatives from middle America told my publisher it would be difficult to place the volume in stores; a professor friend wrote that her community college bookstore in California “warned me that they might not carry it because of the title”. The words –  fucked at birth  – are perhaps harsh. But what is far more harsh and unpleasant is the fact that they are simply reality for ever-increasing numbers of Americans. The stark title is the least part of changing the song. I also came away from my recent cross-nation reporting tour convinced that the 2020s are going to be this century’s 1930s. The stock market – fueled by low interest rates and a record three-fourths of a trillion dollars of borrowed money – is by one metric overvalued more than any time since 1929. Amid this, the Eviction Lab at Princeton University fears as many as 30 to 40 million people face being thrown out of their rental homes when the various moratoriums end, which seems destined to create an unprecedented wave of homelessness. Don’t be fooled by what’s going to happen later this year: when the vaccines are widely distributed, the top two quintiles of the American population will start spending money. A lot of it. But this won’t immediately translate into good times for the bottom three quintiles. Tens of millions of the precariat were already living in a de facto Great Depression before the pandemic, and many working-class jobs will not return in the short term – if ever. This widening disparity creates a level of rage among voters that inexplicably continues to evade Beltway journalists’ understanding. It’s not that difficult to grasp meaning. Just look to the past. I’ve long been a student of the 1930s – fascism was on the rise in the US throughout the Great Depression. It’s something that never went away; it’s part of the American DNA. Many of the 74 million who voted for Donald J Trump in 2020 would be quite happy with authoritarian leadership. They aren’t going to vanish with the inauguration of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. In early 1939, a Nazi rally at Madison Square Garden drew 20,000 people We think of social media, Fox News and the One America News Network as being drivers of QAnon or the Proud Boys, amplifying feelings and actions that heretofore would have remained in the shadows. But long before there was an internet and television, fascist ideas thoroughly infiltrated American culture. An early activist who recognized this was the Reverend LM Birkhead, a Unitarian minister. In 1935 Birkhead traveled to investigate the authoritarian governments of Italy and Germany. In 1938, he released a list of 800 “antidemocratic” organizations in the United States that were aligned with the Nazis and fascism. He believed that one out of every three Americans was being reached by fascist materials. In early 1939, a Nazi rally at Madison Square Garden drew 20,000 people. The rising authoritarian movement was the subject of a 9,000-word 1940   Harper’s magazine article, The American Fascists, by Dale Kramer. In the modern era, the Youngstown State labor studies professor John Russo recognized early that anger over the loss of good jobs was leading to a resurgence of fascism. When I interviewed him in 1995, he foresaw the emergence of a Trump-like figure. When I went through Ohio recently on my cross-country journey, John doubled down on his 1995 prediction; he feels that the threat from the far right will not abate. Trump lost “and the thing I say is, ‘So what?’ Right now we are at a tipping point in terms of what the American economy is going to look like, what the American social structures are going to look like,” Russo told me. “2024, that’s going to be the seminal election.” Russo says there will be “contested terrain”, a fight between progressives and rightwing authoritarianism between now and 2024. If a smarter, more effective Trump comes along, he or she could eclipse the threat that Trump presented to American democracy. The fascist inclinations of the 1930s were simply stalled by the New Deal and postwar economy. The final paragraph of Kramer’s 1940 Harper’s   article, though off in timing by seven or so decades, serves as a warning for 2024: “It will take time for a powerful movement to organize itself out of the confusion caused by the war. But the [technique] of prejudice politics has been so well learned that should economic insecurity continue there can be no doubt that the American people during the next decade will be forced to deal with powerful ‘hate’ movements. Great vigilance will be required to preserve our liberty without giving it up in the process.” Adapted from Fucked at Birth: Recalibrating the American Dream for the 2020s (Unnamed Press, 12 December) Dale Maharidge is a professor at Columbia University’s Graduate School of Journalism
How to find the right therapist:	M ore of us are having therapy – about 1.5 million a year in pre-pandemic Britain. Many therapists say that, since lockdown last March, they have been busier than ever, mostly seeing clients over Zoom. The stigma long associated with seeking professional help is declining. Entertainers, footballers, politicians, royals – it can seem as if everyone is doing it. And with the move online, therapists’ fees are more affordable. But there is still a hurdle: how do you find the right one for you? There are dozens, even hundreds, of different styles. Broadly speaking, some – including CBT – are more focused on relieving symptoms, while others, such as psychodynamic psychotherapy, delve into your past to help you understand yourself and move forward. Many are integrative: a mix of the two. Therapists may also have areas of specialist training, such as couples counselling, or they may treat specific issues, such as addiction, trauma or eating disorders. Research shows that key to the success of therapy is the relationship you build with your therapist, rather than their experience or therapy style. So it’s important to consider issues such as gender, age, sexuality, race and cultural background. Location used to be important, but with so many therapists now working online, you may opt for one you never meet. There can be a disinhibiting effect for clients of being at home, though some cannot feel private enough in their surroundings, or want to be physically “in the room”. Look for members of professional therapy associations such as  BACP ,  BPS  and  UKCP , which have directories. Or try  the therapist-matching platform I founded , which uses a questionnaire to match your needs with others’ areas of expertise. The cost of therapy varies a lot. Psychologists, hypnotherapists and CBT therapists tend to be dearer. Central London therapists can charge more than £100 for 50 minutes; those in less-populated areas may be as low as £30. Many therapists will see or talk to potential clients for free for an initial session, and concessions may be available. •  Louise Chunn is the CEO of  welldoing.org .
Experience: I won 1p on Deal Or No Deal:	I t was 2006, and I was out of work and broke, so I signed up to an email newsletter that listed all the programmes looking for gameshow contestants in the hope of making some cash. That’s when I saw a callout for a new programme called Deal Or No Deal, and thought I’d try my luck. It hadn’t aired, but it was a game of chance, and unlike most of the others didn’t require you to be particularly intelligent. I was on set for three weeks. It was hectic: we filmed three shows a day, from late morning to late evening. Forming friendships so quickly was incredibly intense: each day was full of highs and lows in our little bubble, an experience only the other contestants could relate to. It was draining to be constantly switched on and smiling. Most days someone walked away with life-changing sums of money, so every night people partied hard. I was exhausted by the time my game came around. When my name appeared on the screen my heart started racing – fortunately I was wearing a dress which wouldn’t show sweat patches. Everyone worried about how they’d come across when the show aired on television; there were forums where obsessive fans dissected every contestant’s approach to the game. Being perceived as greedy petrified me. It was a total game of chance: I didn’t buy all the superstitious feel-the-box’s-aura woo-woo. I opted for a method and stuck with it; that year I’d competed in an ill-fated ocean race, rowing 5,000km from the Canary Islands to the West Indies with three other women. I decided to pick the numbers in the same order the boats made it across the line. Things were going well when I started opening boxes: some big amounts went, and some small ones, too. At the end of every round I’d have a chat with the banker. At one point I was offered an impressive £18,000. I weighed it up, but had a good feeling in my gut. There were big amounts still on the board, so I rejected it. It was then that everything started to crumble; high number after high number was wiped off. At one point, we had to stop filming because I was having a hot flush from anxiety: the crew caked my face in more foundation while checking I was OK. My last high-value box was £15,000, and then I lost it. That’s when things got quite overwhelming. I’d come on the show desperate to leave with some financial security; now the most I could leave with was £500. With two boxes left (1p and 50p), I had my final call with the banker. He said he respected what I’d achieved and the challenges I’d overcome on my transatlantic expedition, and that he knew I, of all people, could take away positive things from a bad situation. I still get emotional when I think about it – that moment of humanity meant so much amid my despair. By that stage, I was desperate to take home even a single penny. I’d learned from long-distance rowing how important it is to adapt to situations. Leaving with the lowest amount was at least a story to tell. Opening my box to find 1p there came with its own sense of elation. When I got back to the dressing rooms, though, I wept like a small child. I asked  Noel Edmonds  if I could at least take home the box. I’ve kept it to this day with the cheque for my winnings; there wasn’t much point cashing it in. When my show was on TV, I was sitting in my gran’s house. I knew she would be proud of me, whatever I’d done. I started holding a cushion in front of my face, blocking my view so I wouldn’t have to see me. But my grip slowly loosened as the episode went on. To my surprise, I liked the person looking back at me, which was comforting. I was impressed by how I handled everything. You know the cliches: there’s no point crying over spilt milk; it’s not the end result but what you learn on the journey. Of course I was gutted, but it made me resilient, too. Now, I work in mental health, and have set up a charity during lockdown. I advocate for wellbeing, and help people to build resilience in the face of stress and anxiety. I’ve discovered it’s through facing adversity, not winning cash, that you grow stronger. •  As told to Michael Segalov Do you have an experience to share? Email  experience@theguardian.com
Lockdowns don't work unless workers can afford to follow restrictions:	L ockdowns only work if they reduce transmission. And transmission only reduces if those who are sick self-isolate. But what if that comes at too great a cost? The millions of people who cannot afford to self-isolate face a choice between financial devastation and compliance. By not providing proper support, the government is forcing people to decide between their families and their communities. This choice is cruel. And it is avoidable. The evidence is clear  that Covid-19 disparities are driven by differences in exposure both at home and at work. Those of lower socioeconomic status are hit hardest by both the virus and the collateral damage of restrictions. In lockdown, almost all risk is shifted on to the 10 million key workers who  cannot work from home , as well as those living in deprived areas and overcrowded houses – two groups that often overlap. Given that the new variant of Covid-19 is significantly more infectious, transmission within households and among key workers, who spend extended time in close proximity to others, will increase. As always with deprivation, one problem amplifies another – being an essential worker and living in dense housing with multiple generations is not just associated with Covid-19 risk: it is the mechanism that creates the risk. Like lockdowns, testing and tracing will only reduce transmission if infectious cases are able to isolate effectively. Yet possibly fewer than 20% of those who should  isolate do so fully . The data shows that, while most people intend to adhere to government advice, only 12% get a test, 18% isolate, and 11% of contacts isolate properly. Crucially, self-reported ability to self-isolate is three times lower in those who earn less than £20,000 per year or have less than £100 saved. An OECD review  showed that, because it permits workers to self-isolate, paid sick leave can contain and mitigate the spread of the virus. Therefore, it plays an important role in protecting workers and their communities during a pandemic. Yet the  UK has one of the lowest  proportions of income covered by statutory sick pay in Europe, and millions don’t even qualify. The government calls it a war on Covid, but they have left a key weapon at home. This failure to provide proper self-isolation support has meant that the country is split in two: those who have the means to stay at home and protect the NHS, and those who cannot, no matter how much they want to. Affluent communities with adequate housing and sick pay provisions are given socioeconomic immunity, while the burden is shifted on to the networks of the working class. It is protection for some, and pandemic for others. Nowhere has this been more obvious than in Leicester. Most of the country at least had some sort of break from Covid-19 over the summer, but Leicester has been on the highest level of restrictions  since June  due to a surge in cases in the city. Public Health England evidence showed that workers in the city’s garment factories and food-processing plants were a significant driver of transmission. Many of these workers felt they  could not stay off to self-isolate  when sick. Transmission was likely amplified further by  poor working conditions  and networks of people living in over-crowded, multi-generational housing. These outbreaks then spilled over into the community, contributing to a surge in cases and restrictions being applied. This is the untold story of the pandemic. The focus on personal compliance has taken attention away from the structural inequities that preclude compliance and drive transmission   risks in   communities. And yet, with all of this evidence, with school, university, and business closures, local economies in freefall and the NHS near breaking point, the government has still failed to implement the most basic of public health principles. By not enabling the financially vulnerable to self-isolate, we have repeatedly exacerbated social inequities   and   the disasters of the pandemic. Now we desperately need action from the government. Key workers must be guaranteed social and income protection. Additional support must be provided to ensure low-paid, non-salaried and zero-hours contract workers can afford to follow isolation rules. In addition to employment protection, Sage states that for individuals to be able to self-isolate properly,  support should include  a daily text or phone call and provision of food supplies and essential goods. Sage also stresses a need for solidarity and togetherness rather than divisive messaging. Workplaces can also be made safer by reinstating the 2-metre rule, provision of PPE and sanitiser and, importantly, ensuring ventilation wherever possible.   Like in New Zealand, South Korea and  New York , the government should use the thousands of empty hotel rooms to provide accommodation so that people, particularly those in crowded and multi-generational households, are able to self-isolate properly. By directly addressing the barriers faced by socioeconomically vulnerable populations, self-isolation support to patients and their households can also increase  test uptake and  the number of contacts given. In Liverpool, a  pilot of mass testing  was rolled out with hundreds of thousands of rapid tests and large numbers of army personnel to implement it, but the government ignored requests from local public health leaders for additional funds to support isolation. The  pilot report  concluded that the impact of mass testing was reduced due to low test uptake in deprived communities. The reason most often given? A fear of not having adequate support to self-isolate. It’s one of countless examples of the government shooting for the moon without bothering with fuel for the rockets. Isolation of infectious individuals is the single most important measure in terms of controlling transmission. If we don’t pull these basic public health brake levers to slow the spread, the virus will simply continue to transmit among key workers and their families. Therefore, the effect of lockdown will be limited. Given the emergence of the new variant, providing income protection and support for self-isolation may be the deciding factor in whether we  reduce R  below 1. The disproportionate impact of Covid-19 on households living in poverty emphasises the need to urgently update our definition of “vulnerable” populations and address these inequities. Many (rightly) take issue with the  Great Barrington declaration  and its policy of focused protection. But this current blanket lockdown approach fails to address what is really driving the pandemic, and is merely the focused protection of the middle classes. Even the strongest of wills cannot overcome hard economic realities. We need targeted and sustainable solutions, based on evidence and core public health principles. To make this lockdown a smart lockdown, the government must support key workers and self-isolation. This tale of two pandemics has gone on far too long. Alex Crozier is a Covid-19 research scientist, also involved in science communication
Tim Dowling: my wife wants to adopt a dog to live on our farm. Wait – what farm?:	I t’s hard to pinpoint the exact moment when I stopped being excited about the prospect of 2021. Up until a few weeks before Christmas, I was at least looking forward to 2020 being over, but I realised this was a bit like looking forward to flood waters finally receding: once they’re gone you’re left with a lot of ruined furniture and a foot of mud in your kitchen. The best thing you can say about 2021 so far is that the flood waters are still halfway up the bookshelves. When I open the back door to walk out to my office in the mornings, I create an ever-shrinking wildlife ripple: pigeons and magpies lift off the ground in front of me, and land behind me. Squirrels retreat a few feet, and then circle back. The parakeets, I notice, are too preoccupied with attacking the bird feeder to stop what they’re doing. Soon I will be invisible to the animal kingdom, evanescent, unable to displace enough air to stir a feather. Inside the house, my wife and I have begun to run out of things to talk about. During our unending isolation, a vital channel of communication has been severed: I can’t remember the last time we sat down to speak frankly and openly about the marital problems facing other couples we know. Without that context, we’re left clutching at straws. “I don’t understand why you won’t give  The Wire  a chance,” my wife says one day while we’re in the car. “Give what a chance?” I say. “You’d really like it,” she says. “You’re only denying yourself to be contrary.” “The Wire the TV show?” I say. “What other wire would I be talking about?” she says. “This argument is from 10 years ago,” I say. “I know you’re angry, because I watched it without you and you got too far behind,” she says. “That’s not how I remember it,” I say. “Then you made me watch The Sopranos, and I loved it,” she says. “Have we gone back in time?” I say. “What’s happening?” “We’ve seen everything else,” she says. “There’s nothing left.” “If it makes you happy, I will watch The Wire,” I say. Later that night, I find my wife at her desk, looking at what appears to be a website dedicated to the adoption of abandoned dogs from around the world. “What are you doing?” I say. “Look at Lucky!” she says. “Are you trying to adopt a dog?” I say. “To live on our farm!” she says. “But we have a dog,” I say. “Look at Kenny!” my wife says. “Look at Loretta!” “Wait, what farm?” I say. “Loretta suffers from anxiety,” she says. “If you’re looking for an anxious dog,” I say, pointing at our dog, “look no further than the sofa.” “Look at Wallace! Look at Flute!” “Go back one,” I say. She clicks on a dog that looks like an improperly dry-cleaned sheep. “Piccolo,” my wife says. “Flute’s brother.” “That dog is hilarious,” I say. “I’ll take it.” “There’s a lot of paperwork,” my wife says. “I think you have to be nominated, or something.” “Get me that hilarious dog now,” I say. “Sadly, Piccolo is reserved by another family,” she says. “I’ll fill out the application in case.” “My heart is broken,” I say. “Never mind.” I sit down next to the old dog and turn on the television. At the end of last year I was concerned that 2021 would be in large part a rerun of 2020, only with the added knowledge that I am not the sort of person who rises to the challenge in such circumstances. Now I’m suddenly worried this year will bear no resemblance to my former life. “When you say farm,” I say. “I’m just looking,” my wife says. “Do you want to see some pictures?” “Not yet, thank you,” I say. I change the channel and think: no matter where I find myself at the end of this year, and no matter what new farm animals I find at my side, one thing remains certain. I am never going to watch The Wire. 
The secret to happiness? Get better at feeling sad:	S itting in a corner sobbing may not be everyone’s idea of a great start to the year, but learning how to feel your sad emotions could be the key to a happier 2021. People who cry typically experience fewer “negative aggressive feelings”, such as rage and disgust, than people who don’t, according to  research from the University of Kassel in Germany in 2009 . Similarly, a  2010 study from Indiana University Bloomington  found that American footballers who cried reported higher levels of self-esteem, and were less concerned about peer pressure than their non-crying counterparts. “We now know that crying is something all humans are programmed to do, and that tears serve a purpose,” says Ad Vingerhoets, an academic known as the “tear professor” from Tilburg University in the Netherlands. “Cortisol levels decrease in those who cry, since expressing   sadness   soothes us.” This is because sadness has a function. In numerous studies since the 1980s,  researchers  from the University of New South Wales have found that accepting and allowing for temporary sadness helps improve attention to detail, increases perseverance, promotes generosity and makes us more grateful for what we’ve got.  Aiming to avoid sadness or suppress negative thoughts can backfire. The Harvard University social psychologist Daniel Wegner led a  thought experiment  in 1987, where subjects were told  not  to think about white bears, inspired by the Russian writer Dostoevsky, who wrote:  “ Try to pose for yourself this task: not to think of a polar bear, and you will see that the cursed thing will come to mind every minute.”   Wegner found that participants routinely thought about the thing they were attempting to avoid;  further studies  confirmed that thought suppression is futile, as well as exacerbating the very emotions we’re hoping to swerve. Having spent the past eight years  researching happiness worldwide , I began to notice that many of the people I met were so obsessed with the pursuit of happiness that they had become phobic of feeling sad. I’d speak to people who had just lost loved ones and they would ask: “How can I be happy?” I’d meet people who’d recently been made redundant, or homeless, or had a bad breakup, who’d still ask:“Why aren’t I happy?” I’d try to explain that, sometimes, we  need  to be sad. Sadness is what we’re supposed to feel after a loss, and sorrow is the sane response when sad things happen. After a year in which all of our lives have been rocked by a global pandemic, for instance, it’s OK to feel sad. But many of us have been conditioned to be so averse to “negative emotions” that we don’t recognise them, much less acknowledge them or give ourselves permission to feel and process them. This can be isolating for those experiencing sadness and baffling for those trying to help loved ones through pain.  Fortunately, there are strategies that help, such as allowing time, managing our expectations, getting some perspective and  engaging with culture  – putting down our smartphones and sitting with sadness when it comes. We shouldn’t apologise for our feelings or numb them with excesses (alcohol, drugs, shopping; whatever our crutch of choice) or deprivation (controlling food intake is a common unhealthy coping strategy in times of pain). To be sad better, we need to get active outdoors, daily – if only for a 20-minute walk.  There’s also much to learn from cultures where people are more in touch with their emotions – “good” and “bad”. In Bhutan, for example, crematoriums are located centrally, so children grow up with the idea that loss and death are inevitable. The Portuguese and Brazilians have the concept of  saudade  – meaning a melancholy for happiness that once was, or even the life we merely hoped for. The Chinese concept of  xingfu  is often translated as “happiness” in English but actually refers not to a good mood, but a good life: one that is sufficient, sustainable and has meaning. It isn’t necessarily an easy, pleasant existence (in fact, the Chinese character for  xing  represents torture). Life may be hard, but it will have meaning. And it’s this that should be the goal: a life experiencing our entire emotional spectrum. Sadness is going to happen, so we may as well know how to “do it” right. •   How To Be Sad: Everything I’ve Learned About Getting Happier, By Being Sad, Better  by Helen Russell, is available to preorder (4 th  Estate).
10 houseplants to make you happier at home:	An unkillable plant with cheery central leaves of banana yellow. This tough succulent has many stunning cultivars but this is my favourite. There are a few foliage houseplants – crotons, caladiums, and coleus, for instance – that offer a riot of colour, but the algaonemas are probably the easiest to grow, tolerating more shade. Look for the  pink-splashed ‘Ruby’  or if you prefer muted tones, the  dappled ‘Peacock’ . You cannot fail to smile at the sight of this delightfully kitsch and long-flowering plant. Either stick with the classic scarlet, or opt for one of the newer cultivars with blooms in pink, white or lime green. I find pink foliage irresistible: this one has the added bonus of producing dozens of baby plants at the end of long pink runners known as stolons. Place it in a hanging basket or on a plant stand so it can trail its brood of babies, jellyfish-style. Caudiciform plants (ones with woody, swollen bases) are all the rage, but many are expensive and hard to source. This one is widely available and can turn into a tall specimen plant that will cope with the dry air of your living room in a way most palms won’t (and despite the common name, it’s not actually a palm). This trailing succulent wins the award for the coolest looking leaves, which appear to have been cut with a pair of giant pinking shears. Once mature, it produces large white flowers, too. If you love cacti but hate the spikes, this species is for you. It produces huge white lily-like flowers that smell of washing powder but last only a day and a night. No flower suits the word “voluptuous” better than this. It’s no harder to care for than the ubiquitous moth orchid, but its meaty blooms are much more of a showstopper. If you don’t have room for a swiss cheese plant but love its elaborate leaves, this is a great substitute. If it scrambles too far, just hack it back. I do love a plant with fuzzy, tactile leaves: this succulent has silvery foliage tipped with chocolate. It’s easy to care for when placed on a sunny windowsill, ideally within stroking distance. •  Jane Perrone is crowdfunding Legends Of The Leaf, a book on houseplants. See  janeperrone.com  for details. Something happens deep inside us when we grow plants, a glow of pleasure and satisfaction as each leaf, bud and stem emerges. One of the easiest, more joyful things to grow, wherever you live, is lemongrass. Many things can be propagated in a glass of water, but the bright, citrus-floral scent of lemongrass is like a shot of sunshine. Dried leaves are merely dust in comparison. Buy a fresh stem, as green and firm as possible, with the longest best before date, and pop it in a glass with 5cm or so of water. Top it up whenever it starts to dry out and, a month or so later, roots will appear. Once these are about 2cm long, pot the plant in good, peat-free compost. Keep up this process, moving to a slightly larger pot every time white roots appear in the drainage holes, and you’ll find that you go from one stem to a multitude. Lemongrass is a tropical, perennial grass that wants high temperatures – 18-33C is ideal, never below 10C. For most of us, that means inside the house. It needs bright conditions, such as a sunny windowsill and, in summer, needs to be permanently damp, so water every day. In winter, the soil needs to stay barely damp, not bone dry, so water once or twice a month. If you start now and get good growth this summer, you should have a few fat stems by winter and many more next year. Don’t harvest until you have a substantial plant. The homegrown leaves pack as good a  flavour punch  as any supermarket stem, and you can harvest them without disturbing the growth. For something so undemanding of the grower, lemongrass is rich in rewards – and think of the air miles you’ve saved.
How to make the perfect coffee at home:	A good coffee is one of the last truly affordable luxuries. You can’t get a vastly superior wine or whisky by spending a little bit more; but with coffee, you can. The type of brewer you use – cafetière, AeroPress, percolator – is less important than using a grinder, which is the star of the show. Ground coffee goes stale quickly – after 24 hours you notice the difference – so if you can, invest in an entry-level burr grinder ( Baratza  and  Wilfa  are good brands). We have all normalised black pepper grinding at home; it’s time we did the same for coffee. Grind what you need, and it’s fine to grind several cups’ worth at once. But whether you grind your own beans, or buy ready ground, don’t store them in the fridge, just somewhere dark, dry and airtight. All brewers are capable of making a great coffee; it’s a tool, in the way a knife is when cooking a great dinner. Cafetières are simple, but don’t be in a hurry. I always weigh my coffee: 15g of ground coffee per person to 250ml of water. For light to medium roasts, use water straight from the boil; for darker roasts, let it sit off the boil for a minute or so .  Steep for four minutes, then scoop off any slurry floating on the surface. Plunge so it rests on the surface of the coffee, and leave for another five minutes, longer if you can, so the fine silt sinks to the bottom. There’s no need to plunge further; it will cause turbulence and stir up the gritty bits. Then pour. As long as the mesh filter is sitting inside the cafetière, it will stop grounds coming through.   A stove-top percolator makes a stronger coffee – halfway between an espresso and a filter – but it can have a bitter taste. The trick is to fill the bottom with just-boiled water from the kettle. As soon as it starts to gurgle, run the base under a cold tap to stop the steaming process. You might get a touch less coffee, but it will taste better. For the finishing touch, froth your own heated milk. When heating milk, don’t let it boil. The aim is to keep the milk below 70C, because that’s the temperature at which it starts to “cook”, change in flavour and get a bit eggy-smelling. It’s easy to do with a pan on the stove, or in a microwave, though it will be a bit of trial and error without a kitchen thermometer. Froth the milk in a small cafetière, plunging it up and down a few times. Finally, pour your coffee. What to drink it from? Whatever makes you happy: you can get fancy special-tasting glassware, but your favourite mug (mine is currently a  matt glazed stoneware set from Monoware ) is perfect. •  James Hoffman is a former world barista champion and the author of  The World Atlas Of Coffee . Interview by Hannah Booth
Who founded a city in memory of his horse? The Weekend quiz:	1  Who founded a city in memory of his horse? 2  What is the UK’s only aquatic songbird? 3  What word meaning haughty comes from the Latin for eyebrow? 4  Yeti Airlines is based in which country? 5  Which game show took place in a French naval defence? 6  “When the legend becomes fact, print the legend” comes from which film? 7  Where is Heather Phillipson’s sculpture THE END? 8  Shostakovich’s Tahiti Trot is an arrangement of which song? What links: 9  William Bligh; Robert Falcon Scott; Michael Foot; Tom Daley? 10  Cinderella; my son John; Jason, according to a prophecy? 11  Bridge; Free; George; Kings? 12  American saloon owner; Italian singer; Chinese princess; Japanese girl? 13  Anorak; kayak; igloo? 14  Martina Navratilova & Pam Shriver; Bob & Mike Bryan? 15  Irving G Thalberg; Gordon E Sawyer; Jean Hersholt? 1  Alexander the Great (Alexandria Bucephalous). 2  Dipper. 3  Supercilious. 4  Nepal. 5  Fort Boyard. 6  The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance. 7  Fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square. 8  Tea For Two. 9  Born in Plymouth. 10  One shoe: lost slipper at the ball; in Diddle Diddle Dumpling rhyme; wearing one sandal in Greek myth. 11  Add “town” to make capital cities: Barbados; Sierra Leone; Guyana; St Vincent. 12  Title characters in Puccini operas: La Fanciulla del West; Tosca; Turandot; Madama Butterfly. 13  Inuit words used in English. 14  Most successful women’s and men’s doubles partnerships in tennis Open era (20 and 16 grand slams). 15  Names attached to honorary Oscars.
Killer sudoku 744:	Click here to access the print version. Normal sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within dotted lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by dotted lines. Buy the Guardian or subscribe to our  Digital Edition  to see the completed puzzle.
Crossword blog: American-style puzzle No 14 – Let Him Go:	Here’s another puzzle in  our American-style series , in  digital  and  printable  form. For those new to the style: Every square is part of an across as well as a down answer. The clues are straight, if at first ambiguous, and crossing letters much more important than with UK crosswords. The entries contain fragments of phrases and abbreviations as well as “dictionary words”. .puz files can be opened in  Across Lite  or  Crossword Solver  – solvers who don’t fancy that should use the print version. Your own puzzles are very welcome. The answers to this puzzle can be seen in the digital version or  in this pdf . And the previous crosswords are: And We’re Off! Cheers! PO … Store’s in what? Cryptic Currencies (miscellaneous) Money talks Shoot! Long shots [untitled] They’re not *always* rude Why do they suddenly appear? Barney and Virginia A safe Christmas to all, and here is our latest offering of  Healing Music Recorded in 2020 to Accompany a Solve or Even Listen to . See you in 2021, then.
Kakuro 1586 hard:	Fill the grid so that each run of squares adds up to the total in the box above or to the left. Use only numbers 1-9, and never use a number more than once per run (a number may reoccur in the same row, in a separate run). Buy the Guardian tomorrow or subscribe to our  Digital Edition  to see the completed puzzle.
Masks to be mandatory on all flights as Australia reduces international arrivals – as it happened:	This is where we’ll leave the blog for today. Here is the main news on a fairly newsy day: Thanks for reading along. Take a look at our global live blog to keep up with the latest news from around the world: Victoria’s Covid-19 response commander,  Jeroen Weimar , is on radio station 3AW talking about those in  Queensland  who want to come/return to Victoria. They should do it soon, unless they’re in Brisbane, he reckons. NOW | Victoria's COVID-19 Response Commander Jeroen Weimar's advice to Victorians in Queensland. "If you are in greater Brisbane, stay there. "At this point, there is no closure of other parts of Queensland. "My advice would be start making plans to come home." WA fire and emergency services incident controller  Sven Andersen  is giving an update on  bushfires north of Perth  from the town of Gingin. He says they have been  downgraded to a “watch and act”  warning, meaning firefighters are confident it is under control. It  could have been far worse , he said, with the fire pulled up within a kilometre of a housing estate. But Andersen says today will still be a big test, and conditions could be difficult tomorrow, with firefighters expected to be working at the fire for the next five days. “It’s a credit to them all. It’s hard work really so we are doing our best to make sure that they are hydrated and fed and that we are looking after their welfare.” During the Victorian lockdown, I think we all had suspicions about non-mask wearers who appeared to be lingering over a beer/water/coffee just a little too long ... they’re not standing for it at the SCG, apparently. Tales of the pandemic: cricket edition. A spectator has been booted from the SCG for not drinking enough. Police officer said either drink more or leave your mask on for longer. Spectator remained between the two worlds, escorted out! The Victorian government has  added another exemption  to its list of reasons why people can apply to  return to the state from NSW . People can apply for an exemption if they  “haven’t been in a part of NSW since it was classed as a red or hot zone” . This means those who were in NSW but not in any of the areas linked to Covid-19 clusters (so basically not the northern beaches, or parts of western Sydney and the central coast) can apply for an exemption on that basis. Again, as mentioned earlier this week, there is a difference between an exemption (for people who are in NSW since the border has closed) and a permit (for those who wish to transit through NSW from  Queensland  or the ACT). The  details are here . The  Victorian government  is saying that those who are in the Covid-19 hotspots around Brisbane should  stay there for the next three days  (and that nobody in  Victoria  should be travelling to them) but it is not formally introducing any restrictions at this time. If you’re a Victorian who’s been in a hotspot area, stay there,  @VicGovDHHS  says  pic.twitter.com/Cwvw6ybdXP And sorry to bring that mood back down again, but people. Brisbane, there is no need to panic buy today. Police are responding to traffic congestion and crowd issues around shops across the South East. Please be considerate of others, social distance and wear a mask in public.  pic.twitter.com/0nr8ITZnea It is Friday afternoon and it has been a mighty heavy week so you should read this from  Brigid Delaney  to lighten your mood a little. The  Sydney Festival  has assured Guardian Australia it  is adhering to social distancing  rules, despite a number of patrons attending last night’s production of Force Majeure’s The Last Season at the Carriageworks in Eveleigh commenting about what appeared to be  an almost capacity crowd . Complete strangers were  seated next to each other with less than half a metre  between them, and although masks are mandatory for everyone over 12, because patrons are allowed to take their drinks into the theatre,  many went unmasked for the duration  of the performance as they watched and sipped.  All festival patrons are  seated in line with current NSW Public  Health  regulations , a festival spokesperson told the Guardian. “The current regulations allow patrons to be seated alongside each other [but] patrons may not move between seats unless directed by an usher,” he said. The  venue adhered to the current 75% capacity rule  he added. Also this on the  scores of people fleeing Brisbane  ahead of the 6pm lockdown (could just be commuters getting out early too, I guess?). Bumper to bumper conditions on the Gateway Motorway northbound this afternoon as commuters leave  #Brisbane  early this afternoon. Please remain patient and drive to conditions.  #RACQTrafficAdvice   pic.twitter.com/3AyT31zzZm It appears there’s  quite the exodus from Brisbane  towards the Sunshine Coast, only hours before that lockdown comes into effect. We're seeing peak hour-like conditions between Brisbane and the  #SunshineCoast . There's heavy congestion on the Bruce Highway as commuters leave  #Brisbane  early ahead of lockdown. Please pack your patience and drive to conditions in the wet weather also!  #RACQTrafficAdvice   pic.twitter.com/sb7ZHl97qm
Naked fugitive found in crocodile-infested waters near Darwin charged with fresh offences:	A naked alleged fugitive found by two fishermen sitting on a tree branch in Australian crocodile-infested waters has been slapped with additional charges of breaching bail and aggravated assault. Cam Faust said on Wednesday that he and fellow recreational fisher Kev Joiner heard Luke Voskresensky, 40, yell for help as they set crab traps from their dinghy in mangroves on the outskirts of the northern city of Darwin. Faust said Voskresensky – who was covered in mud, cuts and insect bites – explained on Sunday that he had been lost for four days, survived by eating snails and had used his clothes “for bits and pieces over the way”. “It didn’t make sense to us,” Faust said, referring to the explanation for his nudity. “He had a nest made up in the tree, and he was only laying a metre above the water and there were crocs in the water so he has done well to survive.” Two fishermen have bizarrely stumbled across a naked fugitive in the Northern Territory, who had been hiding in a mangrove tree over croc-infested waters.  The wanted man said he'd been eating snails and was desperate for water. The full story tonight at 6.00pm on  #9News   pic.twitter.com/8URzjwk3x3 Joiner said the friends hesitated before bringing Voskresensky on board their small aluminium boat. “Once we’d seen how bad he was and how many cuts he had all over him and he was dehydrated and pretty weak ... we thought we’d better get him in the boat,” Joiner said. “We thought he just must have had a big night after New Year’s and got lost and done himself a mischief in the bush.” Faust said he stripped to his underwear and handed Voskresensky his shorts and a beer as the trio made their way back to Darwin. “He looked like he needed a beer, although he was in a bad way,” Faust said. An ambulance was waiting at a Darwin boat ramp when they arrived. Voskresensky was taken to a Darwin hospital where he was placed under police guard as he was treated for exposure. Northern Territory  police said Voskresensky had been free on bail after being charged with armed robbery. But they allege he had cut off his electronic monitoring device last week and attempted to evade authorities. A police spokeswoman told Guardian Australia after Voskresensky was re-arrested he was charged with aggravated assault and breach of bail. He was remanded and is scheduled to appear before court on 9 February. Faust said he decided against visiting Voskresensky in hospital after discovering he had been wanted by police. – additional reporting Guardian staff
‘I can’t comprehend it’: woman who miscarried on Australian roadside says public backlash is hurtful:	The public’s response this week to Nicole Clark’s harrowing story may be the most shocking part. On New Year’s Day, Clark, 31, had a miscarriage in a gully on the side of the road in Berri, in rural  South Australia , after a combination of bad luck, incomplete advice from some authorities and apparent indifference from others. Clark, who had been four weeks’ pregnant, told her  story to the ABC on Monday  in a television story and online article that was widely shared on social media. While there were many empathetic comments, there was backlash too. Her ordeal – traumatic and personal – was quickly  sucked into the politicised debate  about Australia’s state border closures. Commenters accused Clark of blaming her miscarriage on those closures (she did not) or questioned the legitimacy of her pregnancy entirely. One reply, which really hurt,  labelled her a “Karen” . Now quarantining at home in Adelaide with her partner, Mike Poyzer, she has found herself replying to a few of the most egregious responses on Facebook. “I ended up defending myself and trying to fill in the gaps,” she says. “Some of the comments from some of the women, they blow me away.” To be clear, Clark does not blame her miscarriage on border closures, nor the bumpy ride on the unsealed road that she and Poyzer were directed to after being turned away at the Victorian border, en route from  New South Wales  to South Australia. “Absolutely not,” she says. Clark and Poyzer had been visiting her elderly grandparents in Dalmeny, on the NSW south coast, in late December when South Australia closed the border. With their pet dog, the couple began the 15-hour drive back to Adelaide on 31 January, stopping overnight in Hay. The next day, they were waved away by Victoria police at two border crossings (permits are available for  those who are passing through the state , yet their permit was not accepted in Mildura) and they were instead directed along the unsealed Wentworth-Renmark road through NSW. There, their car suffered damage to one of its tyres about 1km from the border checkpoint. As Poyzer tended to the wheel, Clark says her uterus suddenly “did this backflip and then I had this insane pain”. “And then I was keeled over,” she says. “I’m a woman, I know what was happening.” Their car limped to the SA-NSW border crossing and when they arrived they told the South Australian police officers their car was damaged and Clark believed she was having a miscarriage. Poyzer called an ambulance. “I was crying and sobbing and visibly distressed,” she says. “Not one person got out of the booth to ask me how I was. Nobody offered me a drink of water. Nobody asked me if I wanted to use the bathroom.” As she was carted away on an ambulance stretcher, Clark says a female police officer approached to ask where she had been in NSW. Poyzer stayed behind with the car, which was eventually towed to a car yard at Berri, the same town where Clark was taken to hospital. A doctor told Clark that the miscarriage had not been completed but that it would likely conclude sometime in the next two weeks. She was not admitted to the hospital but told she needed bed rest. In the foyer, she was still in pain. She was uncomfortable. She had no change of clothes. Moreover, she was devastated. She recalls “hysterically crying” there. “I’m beside myself with grief and disbelief and shock,” she says.  Clark did not want to stay in the waiting room, where locals seemed worried by her mask and the talk about “quarantine” that had taken place around her. But police insisted they would not give her a lift back to her car, where Poyzer, her clothes and toiletries and relative privacy were waiting. She says she was also unable to take a taxi, or stay in a hotel, given they had been instructed to quarantine. “[The police] just said, ‘Well, you just have to rough it. That’s just the way it is,’” Clark says. “You know, ‘That’s the way Covid-19 is.’” Clark says Poyzer had been unable to stay in the hospital due to Covid-19 restrictions but he was allowed to come and collect her. They started the 20-minute walk back to their car, though it took longer because Clark was still in pain, and continually hitching up her pants, worried about the bleeding. “We passed a service station – I desperately wanted to use a toilet but I had the feeling I’m going to be in trouble for this.” They reached the car but after some time there, the pain reared again. There were other vehicles driving past on the highway and “no toilet in sight”. “I found a gully, and there was a big eucalyptus tree and I was just trying to hide behind the eucalypt,” Clark says. “But I couldn’t stop what was happening. Then I miscarried.” After about four hours, Poyzer’s parents arrived in Berri with two cars and took the couple home. Clark decided to speak to the media this week, in part because she wanted to draw attention to the lack of compassion she says she was shown. “I felt like a farm animal,” she says. What came next was unexpected. For some commenters, political impulses appeared to trump a more human response. One woman, replying to the story when it was shared by the ABC, tagged Clark on Facebook and told her: “Don’t you dare blame the authorities … it was your selfish behaviour and arrogance.” For Clark, who will start a PhD this year researching a Covid-19 treatment, it was confusing and hurtful. “I just can’t comprehend it,” she says. “Every night since it’s happened, I have had nightmares. I cannot get the images out of my head of what I would have looked like.” In response to specific questions about Clark’s experience, a spokesman for SA police provided a general statement. In part, it says police were aware of the incident, and that “the couple was informed of their requirement to have a Covid test and to self-quarantine, following medical treatment”. “Police are not responsible for arranging quarantine accommodation arrangements for people travelling from NSW into SA under Covid-19 restrictions,” the spokesman says. Clark is pushing for an official apology from the police and says she has filed a complaint. “I want an acknowledgement of the fact that I was a woman in distress. I had a miscarriage and I was grieving,” she says. “And I was humiliated.”
Who should pick up the tab for the costs of climate change in north Queensland?:	I s it fair that young men pay more for car insurance than older women, or that we make young healthy people buy private health insurance to keep the price of health insurance low for older customers? How about the fact that those who live in far-north  Queensland  are paying far more for home and contents insurance than those in the southern states? While there’s no right answer to those questions, there is a wrong person to ask: namely, an economist. Economists, quite literally, don’t do “fair”. We didn’t learn anything about it in our degrees beyond the belief that democratic forces – not market forces – should answer questions of fairness. But while economists have got nothing to say about fairness, we do have something very simple and very important to say about risks: someone has to pay for them. So concerned are we with the expensive harm car crashes can do to people, we force them to buy third-party insurance when they register their car. But when it comes to insuring the car itself, if you resemble a person who crashes cars a lot, or your car resembles the kind that crashes a lot, it will cost you much more to insure your car. Is that fair? Again, don’t ask me, I’m just an economist. Democratic notions of fairness play a big role in private health insurance as well. While most people can’t predict a car accident, people have a fair idea if they’re going to need a hip replacement, obstetric care or glasses. As a result, people who know they’re going to need expensive health treatment (particularly older people) are keen to buy insurance and those in good health (most often young single blokes) aren’t so keen. So in Australia, we have developed a range of carrots and sticks where we effectively force a lot of young people to take out private health insurance, even when they don’t think it’s good value. It means young people spend more on private health insurance than they’d like, and it keeps the price of insurance for older people down. Sound fair? So, what about house and contents insurance in northern Australia? As we heat the planet, the risk to property of cyclones and hurricanes continue to increase. Likewise, as sea levels rise with our coal exports, the risks of storm surges and coastal erosion destroying beachfront property rise as well. Should the people who own houses in high-risk areas pay higher insurance premiums as global emissions and climate risks continue to rise? Should young renters who don’t own homes subsidise the cost of home insurance for those fortunate enough to own their own home up in north Queensland? The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission offers a defiant maybe. A recent  report by the ACCC,  demanded by Scott Morrison back when he was treasurer, makes clear that just as it’s more expensive for young men to insure sports cars than for older women to insure a new sedan, it’s a lot more expensive to insure a house in cyclone-prone north Queensland than in the western suburbs of Sydney. But unlike young sports car drivers, north Queensland homeowners have powerful political representatives and, in turn, the Morrison government is looking seriously at the idea of subsidising north Queensland homeowners. While the ACCC chose its words carefully when it recommended that “if governments want to provide immediate relief to consumers facing acute affordability pressures, subsidies [should] be used in preference to other measures”, headline writers typically dropped the “if” and reported, “ACCC recommends government subsidise insurance in top end”. Job done. So assuming those north Queensland MPs, who rage against policies for climate action, succeed in convincing their southern colleagues to subsidise the costs of climate change up north: who should pick up the tab? Would less spending on other services fund it, or should a new levy be introduced? Contrary to popular belief, economists love a good tax or levy. While we don’t know anything about fair, we do know there’s no such thing as a free lunch, so we tend towards “user pays” for the simple reason that it’s often superior to non-user pays. When people and companies have to pay for the things they use, it’s a good way to test if they really value them. Take buffets, for example: when the price of a return trip to the bacon and eggs is zero, people tend to eat a lot more breakfast than they ordinarily would. While user pays is widely accepted as fair for bacon, eggs and most consumer goods, when it comes to things like vaccination and education, where there’s a public benefit associated with private consumption, the majority of the public, and economists, think subsidies are OK. While most people don’t mind if high insurance prices discourage young men from buying fast cars, most people do mind if high prices discourage parents from sending their kids to school, or from vaccinating them. Which brings me back to the risky activity of owning a house by the ocean in tropical north Queensland. Queensland MP  Peter Dutton once appeared to laugh  at the impact of storms and sea level rise on Pacific Island nations, but when it happens to his own state, it’s clearly no laughing matter. As an economist I’m in no position to determine what the fairest way to deal with the growing risks of climate change in north Queensland are, namely: Homeowners pay:  Let insurers do their job and assess the risk of each property. If insurance for some properties is “too expensive”, then the price of those properties will fall as new buyers factor in expensive insurance to what seems like a “cheap house”. Taxpayers pay:  Let the general public pay for the risks in north Queensland. While the costs will be small when spread across 25 million Australians, there will be no price signal to discourage people from building ever more expensive houses in ever more cyclone-prone regions. There’s also the question of whether non-homeowners in southern cities should fund the lifestyle choices of hom owners in north Queensland. Disaster levy:  If we don’t want homeowners  or  the general public to pay, we could simply  put a levy on the companies  that profit from causing climate change. Such a levy could help not just homeowners, but local councils and other groups that will inevitably bear the costs that come with other people’s decisions to buy and sell coal. Economists don’t do “fair”, but we do have a preference for user pays to change consumer behaviour, and levies to change producer behaviour. But somehow I reckon, when it comes to picking up the tab for the  costs of climate change in north Queensland , the coal lovers in the National party will have no problem asking the “inner city elites” to pay. The interesting question is how long the Liberals from the southern states will let them get away with it. •  Richard Denniss is the chief economist at independent thinktank The Australia Institute
I've come to the realisation that my passions have to be no more than hobbies:	Name: Bethany Castle Age: 17 Dreams of: being a psychologist 2020 was a year of unexpected change, and as 2021 begins, life as I know it is changing again. I’m moving to the city, to Adelaide, and taking my first steps into university. I’ll be left to my own devices with no more than my savings and my belongings. I know that I should expect some harsh life lessons. But despite the fear I have, I am determined to tackle this chapter head-on. After receiving my Year 12 results, I am eagerly waiting for offers from universities and I’m confident that I will be able to enter the course I want. This week I am in the process of finding accommodation in Adelaide and trying to navigate getting some financial assistance from the government. As I start this new chapter of my life, money is lingering in the back of my mind. Not only the practical day-to-day of paying rent, buying textbooks, food and whatever else; I’m hyper aware of the cost of a university degree itself. Losing my casual job back in March means I have had less time to prepare for my new life financially, and I feel like that places me at a disadvantage. I also feel slightly guilty for seeking Centrelink assistance, as I want to be self-sufficient and truly independent once I leave home. On top of this, I plan to go into a masters course with the goal of becoming a fully qualified psychologist – meaning I have to study for six years. This will leave me in a substantial amount of debt, and I feel apprehensive whenever I consider how long it will take for me to repay these loans. The cost of my psychology studies will actually go down with the changes in university fees, which is lucky for me. It is a bit of a relief. But that being said, I still feel disappointed that humanities and social sciences courses are to become more costly – that the time needed to repay student debts will double for other students starting out with me. I’m a little resentful about the fee spike in humanities-based courses. Just a few months ago I was eager to study political journalism, an area which will see an increase in fees. I had also considered studying creative writing and drama at university before choosing psychology. The fee change was not the determining factor or the main reason for changing career paths – personal issues and changes in my life caused my change of heart. Despite this, it was an aspect I was forced to consider. I spent time comparing course fees and trying to estimate how long it would take me to repay my student loans, which consequently generated more fear regarding my future financial stability. It seems like a whole group of emerging creative leaders are being undermined by our society. As I touched on in my last diary entry, I am an artistic person. I write and play music, I create artworks, I perform spoken word, I act in theatre productions. I live and breathe creativity. But when I look around me I see a very blatant devaluing of the arts and those in it, exemplified by making qualifications more expensive. As a creative person, it feels like my talents and passions are less valued by the government and more importantly, our society. It makes me feel like my talents are disposable and not worthy. We need a thriving arts industry during adverse times like now. The arts have been of great benefit to me, as an escape from the ever-changing world, an emotional outlet – they have allowed me to form new hobbies that helped me grow. I know that despite rising barriers, young people will still passionately pursue creative careers. Creative souls who are torn between society’s expectations during Covid and their own passions should be encouraged to strive for what they want, and should not feel undervalued or unappreciated. I will be continuing my passions while studying psychology this year, but due to the lack of support and security society provides the creative sector, I have come to the unfortunate realisation that my passions are going to have to be no more than hobbies. Right now, I’m still not 100% certain of where I will be studying, so I have created multiple plans, which can at times be confusing and disorientating. Nothing is concrete. I am feeling a lot of unrest and stress as the big move draws closer. However, I know that once I move, I will have a new independence. I am incredibly excited to start my new life, and I am eager to become a functioning member of society.
Scott Morrison should shut down his MPs who dance with disinformation propaganda:	W ashington’s Capitol building is a mess of shattered glass and sharp recrimination. A violent pro-Trump mob overran the physical seat of American government, and Australians watched it play out on Thursday on TV, with horror. The Australian prime minister,  Scott Morrison , condemned the violence in the American capital as “extremely distressing”. So why did so many Australians consider his consternation so jejune? The American mob demanded Trump’s reinstallation as president despite his convincing loss in a free and fair election. They carried American flags, and bedecked themselves with the iconography of mass-market Americana – from eagles to trucker caps – and they claimed “patriotism”. Alas, for all their self-conscious stars-and-stripes, the mob represents an international problem, not merely an American one. It’s a growing awareness of that problem’s tentacle reach that has Australians concerned at a conspicuous division between Morrison’s words and his actions. The immediate context for America’s failed coup attempt was two months of false, repeatedly disproven insistences that the Republican Trump re-election was stolen. These have been pushed by the candidate himself, activist members of his party and a pro-Trump media infrastructure unbound to old-school press traditions of truth-telling. Networks like Fox News, OAN and Newsmax speak to and of rumours and conspiracies generated on social media whose users then rebroadcast their announcements. It’s a tight triangulation that has solidly entrenched an audience over the five years of Trump’s ascendancy and rule. Edited out are any uncomfortable truths, fair criticism and doubt. Instead, what’s offered are simple, good-guys/bad-guys narratives that explain politics and the world with substantially less complexity than a Netflix drama. So emotionally potent are these invented partisan stories – Trump’s “stolen” election, antifa under the beds, Pizzagate, the QAnon mythos – that they can persuade thousands of ordinary people to catch planes across continents to commit federal crimes and treasonable offences in a confected belief that they’re really performing acts of heroism. It’s a refined, effective political/media model that’s been used by American politicians to manipulate a critical mass of people to do things and buy things. It’s arrived in Australia, and it’s being used by members of Morrison’s own government. It was noteworthy on Thursday that Morrison refused to explicitly condemn Trump as the instigator of the Capitol chaos – despite Trump’s exhortations at the pre-riot rally for his supporters to “show strength” and march on the building, despite him tweeting “We love you! You’re very special!” to the mob after the violence had started, despite his years of violent rhetoric. Even more significant was Morrison refusing to condemn, specifically, his own MP George Christensen, the member for Dawson, who’s been sharing Trump’s own election falsehoods on his social media properties since November, and Trump-style conspiracy theories long before that. Christensen has spent years engaging the conspiracy-sphere – from appearing on podcasts with the far right  The Dingoes  white supremacist community   (although he later said he regretted his decision to appear on the show), to speaking at the fash-friendly “ Reclaim Australia ” rallies. Then there is Craig Kelly, the Liberal member for Hughes, whose wildly popular Facebook page – alongside Christensen’s – was pushing Trumpist conspiracy theories  even as violence erupted  in Washington and a police officer and four rioters died. “Australia’s a free country, there’s such a thing as freedom of speech in this country. And that will continue,” said the prime minister on Thursday of his own party members spreading disinformation and lies from the same propaganda framework that inspired Americans in the Capitol to kill and to die. As members of a wealthy, western government with the resources of briefings and information infrastructure, the sharing of mistruths about American politics or those elsewhere is wilful choice. The lure for politicians – painfully demonstrated in the willingness of American legislators to excuse Trump’s lies and attach themselves to his election conspiracies – is that the intense communities created by the propaganda model are activist, and generous. Whether it’s fronting for preselection votes, riots or fundraisers, they show up. The appeal of solid numbers and reliable donations tempts any power-building politician. Australia also has the media infrastructure to foment the creation of these communities. It’s not only the shared English language that allows American propaganda to go global; there are Australian media sources themselves direct marketing to the American audience, “ laundering ” spurious mythologies  into international news  under theoretically reputable mastheads. The cosiness of relationships with media sources – however compromised – also has  great appeal  for politicians. The experience of America’s Republicans has demonstrated the risks of playing to the propagandised mob. Mike Pence, the American vice-president, spent four years loyally facilitating Trumpism only to find himself this week the subject of the Twitter trending topic “Judas” and accusations of treason when he could not meet the mob’s demands for an impossible reversal of the US election. The collection of states such as Georgia and Arizona in the recent Democratic election haul represents an equal and opposite risk – that brand association with the believers of lies and fanatics is damaging on a broader electoral scale. Australia, of course, is not America. Our electoral systems are not comparable, and the precise risks or opportunities to Morrison’s own political interests posed by the behaviour of Christensen, Kelly or others is not clear. What is clear is that thousands of Americans have recently been politically manipulated into doing dangerous, treasonous things that have smashed up their Capitol and battered their nation’s democracy. Morrison should show leadership and shut down Kelly, Christensen and any other MP willing to dance with disinformation propaganda, merely because it is right.
It is astonishing to witness the Australian 'border wars' given our Covid response so far:	O n Wednesday the ABC published a story that is a fairly straightforward example of journalism. Nicole Clark  began miscarrying her four-week pregnancy while trying to get home to Adelaide from coastal New South Wales  as the borders shut. She was told confusing advice, turned away from one border crossing and then rung by the policeman to say he had been mistaken, turned away again at another point and sent down 150km of unsealed road before ending up sobbing while in pain as police questioned their movements in NSW. It’s a story that does not suggest any cause for the miscarriage – they do just happen – but illustrates with a very human face the issues with how border closures have been managed in past few weeks. A standard way to frame a story, used pretty much every day for a range of topics. The responses on Twitter were appalling. “Four weeks pregnant? Really? Most of us call that a missed period! More media sensationalism! Sick of it!” one person posted. “4 wks, barely enough time to really know if she was pregnant ... wasn’t just a period was it?” another said. “If you only had to go down a bumpy road to miscarry a baby why do we have medical terminations?” Most of those dismissing the miscarriage were attacking the perceived criticism of the border closures which they are strident supporters of, and most of them were devoted to Victorian premier Daniel Andrews in particular. It is astonishing to witness the “border wars” as people have become warriors for their state and developed particularly strong parasocial relationships with their premiers along the east coast of Australia. It has featured in Western Australia, Tasmania and South Australia too but is most venomous in NSW,  Queensland  and Victoria. The Northern Territory seems to be chilling. The borders NSW share with South Australia and  Victoria  were closed last month with very short notice despite NSW regularly recording fewer than 10 cases a day, with 18 being the peak so far and six of those from one family. The debate that has accompanied has verged on hysterical at times with Gladys Berejiklian being attacked for not mandating masks sooner, allowing the SCG cricket test to go ahead, not locking down more of Sydney, and being a Liberal. Each premier has certainly used the coronavirus response to their political advantage at times and in the process helped fuel what is becoming quite deranged behaviour from various sides. I jokingly joined in at one point, declaring NSW the “best state”, but no longer can see the funny side of the discourse as it descends into pure viciousness. After enduring a harsh lockdown it is understandable Victorians are skittish – when my sister arrived in Sydney from Melbourne just before Christmas there were certain outings that gave her anxiety after so long wearing a mask and seeing only her boyfriend and his family. Who could forget reports of Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk’s  “Queenslander!!”  text message amid requests from NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian to discuss when the NSW-Queensland border would open – I certainly won’t as my parents-in-law, who live in Queensland, waited to be able to meet my baby. Border closures were understandable, the rhetoric around it though ( Queensland hospitals are “for our people only” ) was at times blatantly political and agonising for anyone affected. NSW took four months to successfully suppress the virus after the Crossroads breakout and could possibly do it again without a harsh city-wide lockdown. It is shocking an inquiry can find  “no one was responsible”  for the hiring of private security for the Victorian hotel quarantine scheme that those cases originated from. It did not go unnoticed that the report was released on the same day Andrews announced closing the border to Sydney and surrounding areas. Similarly in NSW we got an apology for  2,650 passengers being allowed to disembark the Ruby Princess ship  when hundreds had respiratory symptoms, but nobody has taken responsibility. It is also concerning that there seems to have been more than one Covid-19 leak from Sydney hotel quarantine since the beginning of December and no explanation so far. (Although NSW has taken far more international arrivals for quarantine than Victoria or Queensland). What Australia’s pandemic response needs is intense coordination across state health departments and clear guidelines about what should lead to border closures and when we need them at all. National cabinet last met in mid-December and since then premiers have been happy to take potshots at each other with the prime minister being borderline partisan in comments he has made supporting NSW. It’s a relief the cabinet has been  reconvened to meet on Friday  to discuss the UK strain but concerning a meeting initially wasn’t scheduled until mid-February as cases rose and borders shut. Despite these issues the response over the past year has been a very good one. Whether you’re a Dan Stan, a Gladys Gladdy or an Annastacia Admirer, the facts are that no single premier has been solely responsible for Australia’s successful response to Covid-19. And overall, it is successful. It’s a combination of the actions of our premiers, the prime minister, various state health departments, contact tracers, nurses, doctors and every person in Australia who stayed home when we had to. It is kind of a joke that such hateful political tribalism has been bred in the wake of a total of 28,519 cases when the UK has recorded more than 60,000 cases in a day and 74,570 deaths in total. The punchline is not exactly funny though. As someone who gave birth during the pandemic, with a father who works in hospitality, a mother who is a nurse, a brother who treated Covid patients in a Sydney ICU and a sister working as an AIN in a nursing home, I am most of all just so thankful that this is the way it has turned out (so far). But there have been failures of political leadership at different points and our leaders should be held accountable for that without people turning it into some ridiculous State of Origin spectacle.
Australian Liberal MP Craig Kelly stands by US Capitol 'antifa' claim, despite discredited evidence:	The Liberal MP  Craig Kelly  is standing by unsubstantiated claims antifa may have been present in the US Capitol mob, even though the article on which they were based has been corrected. As the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison,  declined to repudiate misinformation about the US election from within his government  on Thursday, both Kelly and the Nationals MP George Christensen shared an article from the Washington Times claiming facial recognition had identified far-left protesters in the mob. That claim was  rejected by XRVision,  the technology company cited as its source, has been  proved false by independent fact-checkers the Dispatch  and Lead Story, and has been labelled false on Facebook. On Thursday, Christensen shared the article, which claimed to have identified a Stalinist sympathiser in the crowd based on a tattoo. The Nationals MP remarked on Facebook: “well this is something”. XRVision said the article was “outright false, misleading and defamatory” and it had in fact identified two members of a neo-Nazi group. But when the post was labelled “false” by Facebook, Christensen said “ANOTHER FAKE FACEBOOK FACT CHECK IS POLLUTING MY PAGE”. Christensen attempted to rebut  the fact-check by Lead Story , arguing it had only debunked claims about the prominent figure  pictured in the Capitol wearing horns . “The fake fact check talks about some guy with horns. I mention nothing relating to that. Facebook need to stop this censorship.” Kelly’s post suggested the Capitol mob may have been the result of “neo-fascists and Marxists engaged in a highly co-ordinated ‘false flag’ operation, by infiltrating the protest and invading the parliament so the world’s media would falsely blame and discredit Trump supporters”. The Washington Times has since corrected the story and apologised for claiming to have substantiated “speculation” from Donald Trump supporters that Antifa members may have been present. “The Washington Times erroneously reported late Wednesday that facial recognition technology backed up that speculation and identified two Antifa members,” it said. “In fact, XRVision has not identified any members of that far-left movement as being part of the attack.” But the Washington Times claimed there was “other evidence Antifa members may have been there”, citing the New York Post quoting an unnamed law enforcement source who said two Antifa members from New York were in the crowd. Kelly has now added to his Facebook post noting the correction but drawing attention to the “other evidence”, including the unnamed law enforcement source. Both Christensen’s Facebook page and Kelly’s update cite as evidence a video shared on Twitter in which Trump supporters appear to blame Antifa for the actions of one of the crowd attempting to break a window. OMG! BUSTED! Video shows Trump supporters stopping & pulling away Antifa men from breaking the Capitol windows. Trump supporters are heard yelling out “That’s Antifa!!!”  Dems set us up & GOP just threw us under the bus over a trap. Surreal! Wow!  pic.twitter.com/f7ExMZ0DcD Kelly told Guardian Australia he had noted the Washington Times correction about facial recognition but would not retract the Antifa claim because there was “other evidence”. “It hasn’t been disproven. The facial recognition aspect has been – but whether Antifa was there hasn’t been disproven.” Both Christensen and Kelly criticised Facebook for applying a warning label to Trump’s video in which he falsely claimed the election was “fraudulent” and the insurrectionist mob were “very nice people”. Christensen and Kelly have been contacted for further responses to the Washington Times correction. On Friday, the Labor leader,  Anthony Albanese , accused Kelly of seeking “to support conspiracy theories over what we saw in the United States yesterday”, which he labelled “reprehensible”. Albanese noted that Morrison had intervened to prevent Kelly being disendorsed by the  Liberal party , and called for Morrison to now “cut him loose”. “I think that at the next election, whether Craig Kelly stands as a Liberal party member or not, I just don’t think that he brings anything to our national parliament.” Asked on Thursday whether he would condemn misinformation in his government, including Christensen’s claims that Joe Biden benefited from “dodgy votes”, Morrison told reporters: “There’s such a thing as freedom of speech in this country and that will continue.” Morrison said he was hoping for a peaceful transfer of power in the US and condemned rioters for “terribly distressing” acts of violence, but declined to criticise Trump for continuing to lie about having won the election. Morrison’s predecessor, the Liberal prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, criticised his response as “a bit weak” and “a bit tepid” in comparison to condemnation from other world leaders. Albanese  was much more direct in his response to what he labelled “effectively an insurrection”, saying there was “no doubt that both the words and actions of Donald Trump have encouraged this activity”.
Australians stranded overseas say slashing arrival caps makes returning home 'near impossible':	Australians stranded overseas say a decision to slash the number of international passengers allowed to return each week by almost 50 per cent is a “disheartening blow” while others have labelled the move “despicable”. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced on Friday that national cabinet had decided to  temporarily halve the number of hotel quarantine spots  available each week in NSW, Queensland and Western Australia. The move comes as authorities work to keep a more infectious variant of Covid-19 – that has emerged in the UK and South Africa – from circulating in Australia. The caps reduction means about 2,500 fewer people will be able to enter the country each week until at least mid-February when national cabinet will review the policy. Many Australians stranded overseas have endured multiple flight cancellations with only those able to afford business class or first class fares able to return swiftly. Mona Grebing and her two young children left Australia in July to care for Grebing’s gravely ill mother in Germany. Her mother has since recovered and the family had planned to return to Australia at the end of 2020. They were bumped from a Qatar flight on 31 December and are currently rebooked for 3 February but Grebing said she now expected to be bumped again. “I am totally disheartened and don’t even know how to tell my girls such sad news,” she told Guardian Australia. “So far I always felt the government was trying its best to get us all home – so this is obviously a blow in the face.” Grebing said she feared  the cap reduction  would make it “near impossible” to get back home. “I knew the risk I was taking when leaving Australia so I can’t complain too much [but] I felt I had no choice at all in the matter,” she said. Coronavirus  breaches from hotel quarantine might be making Australians less sympathetic to those trying to return home, Grebing said. “I’ve got a bit of an inkling that the Australian people will start to get a bit of a fear of Australians overseas given [the virus] comes from overseas. That’s something this policy, and the virus, creates.” Grebing has registered with Dfat to potentially return on a government repatriation flight but she said “there are currently no more flights scheduled” that she can access. “And I can’t afford to pay the horrendous prices to return on other [commerical] tickets,” she said, noting some airlines advertised fares for 17,000 euros ($26,000). In late 2020, some  36,000 Australians were still registered  as being stuck overseas, unable to get flights back to Australia due to the caps on hotel quarantine. Australian commercial film director Tom Noakes endured a number of flight cancellations last year attempting to return from Europe but managed to fly into Sydney in November. His girlfriend, who flew out with an exemption on compassionate grounds, remained overseas with her family in the UK. She currently has a return flight booked for the beginning of February but Noakes suspects she could be bumped due to the reduction in the number of arrivals allowed into the country “The pessimist in me feels that’s probably going to get postponed,” he told Guardian Australia. “I just think it’s fucking despicable of a government to put the burden onto other governments overseas at the expense of the well-being of Australians who are trying to get home. I just don’t see how it’s in any way a reasonable reaction.” Noakes argued the situation was made worse by the number of foreign nationals allowed to fly into Australia for work. Noake said he was aware of an international film crew that visited to make a commercial – taking up quarantine spots in the process – despite contributing little to the economy. “It’s a little alarming knowing other people are trapped overseas and seeing the priority been given to foreign nationals,” he said. “They’re taking up a fair number of quarantine spots … [and] that’s where the bottleneck is.” Noakes suggested a  New Zealand-style system  where people book a place in hotel quarantine before booking their flight could provide greater certainty. Morrison said on Friday that government-chartered flights to bring back some of the most vulnerable were still operating. “There is one arriving next week because with chartered flights we have total control of who gets on the plane so we can ensure that it is vulnerable people who get on those flights,” he said. “It’s important that we keep those chartered flights going where they can be done in a safe way.”
In many ways, families are the real victims of alcoholism:	I  lived with an alcoholic for a decade without realising it. This was because he held down a 9-5 office job and “only”   drank on Saturday nights. Like many, I had a completely clichéd and inaccurate image of an alcoholic. I thought they were people who sat on street corners with bottles in paper bags. I thought they were unemployed, smelly and homeless. Only after 10 years did I finally start to educate myself with the facts – rather than the myths – of alcoholism. It is estimated that 3% of the population are alcoholics. In Australia that amounts to 750,000. The vast majority of that number have families. That means more than a million Australians are living with alcoholism. In many ways, families are the real victims of the disease, the ones who suffer most, who are on the receiving end of the verbal and physical abuse, who feel the social embarrassment and shoulder the financial hardship. Families feel the consequences more because the alcoholic has found a way of avoiding feelings altogether: by getting drunk. As the great Irish writer Frank O’Connor observed about his countrymen: “We drink to forget, and the amount we drink corresponds roughly to the amount we have to forget”. When people are drunk they forget what they’ve said, how they’ve driven, at whom they have lashed out. But the families don’t. The families observe, absorb, clean up afterwards, rearrange social events, make excuses, pay overdue fines, and find a million ways to cover up. They also remember, often for years afterwards, particularly the children. For the hundreds of thousands of families across Australia who live with alcoholism, the holiday season is a particularly difficult time of the year. Do we invite him? What will we do when he inevitably gets drunk? Even harder is the decision about inviting the family member who has finally found sobriety. How is she going to cope when everyone else is drinking? What happens if the occasion causes a relapse? It will be all our fault! I have seen perfectly good marriages ruined in the attempt to fix, cure and control In rehab circles, finding sobriety is also referred to as finding recovery. But admitting to being “in recovery”, according to my friend with 30 years in Alcoholics Anonymous, is particularly difficult in Australia. “To say you are a recovering alcoholic is arguably more socially damaging than just being a drunk bloke who’s ‘having a hard time’”, he says. The relatives of alcoholics spend much of their time dreaming of the day their loved one will find sobriety and practising solutions as simple (and as pointless) as hiding the six-packs and pouring the vodka down the sink. But what families often don’t understand is that they too are equally in need of recovery. Living with an alcoholism often leads to serious mental and physical deterioration in spouses, sisters, brothers and children. But the carers of alcoholics don’t have time to attend to their own ill-health because the drinker’s problems are so much more urgent. He is the one winding up in the hospital emergency department on a regular basis or being admitted for surgery to mend the alcohol-related damage wreaked on his organs and intestines. Then when the doctor warns him that the alcohol is going to lead to an early death and he attempts to give up the bottle, it is the family who tiptoes around him in the hope that the sobriety will last – hyper-conscious of their every comment, their every action, constantly on edge and in fear of upsetting him and therefore “causing” a relapse. When I was living with an alcoholic I failed to acknowledge the symptoms in myself that I now find so recognisable in others living with alcoholism: over-responsibility, self-isolation, confusing pity with love, prioritising the health of the alcoholic over one’s own, making excuses for the drinker, continually anticipating the next problem and then, when it arises, trying to force a solution (which inevitably fails). I have watched the father of an alcoholic daughter drive himself into such a frenzy of hypertension that he had a heart attack. I’ve seen others mortgage their houses in the hope that the next $2,000-a-day rehab would work the miracle. I have seen perfectly good marriages ruined in the attempt to fix, cure and control. In essence, because alcoholism is so uncontrollable, the families of alcoholics become control freaks. My freedom from this mad merry-go-round only arrived when I finally understood the three C’s: “Didn’t cause it, can’t control it, can’t cure it.” There are things that families  can  do to help but, paradoxically, it usually doesn’t involve helping. Although it runs against the grain – and especially against the motherly instinct – often the best help is in the form of getting out of the way. It necessitates a seemingly contradictory and almost impossible task: continuing to love them without trying to fix them. It means not covering up their mistakes or misdeeds. It means not doing for them what they can do for themselves. It means not allowing ourselves to be used by our loved one in the interest of their sobriety. Even though their sobriety is what we want most in the world. In my experience, drinkers rarely find sobriety without the support of their families. On the other hand, out of a desperate desire to “help”, there are many behaviours that can develop within the family of an alcoholic that make the situation worse. When it comes to alcoholism, the problem does not belong to the drinker alone; it is the entire family who needs recovery. Until medical, health and social services realise this, thousands of families will continue to struggle. •  Support services for families of alcoholics or those suffering from alcohol dependence:  Catholic Care Family Recovery Services ;   Al-Anon Family Groups Australia ;    Family Drug Support •  Further facts: The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has analysed  the impact of alcohol disorder  in terms of “burden”, finding that it contributed to 40% of the burden due to liver cancer, 28% of the burden due to chronic liver disease, 22% of the burden due to road traffic injuries involving motor vehicle occupants and 14% of the burden due to suicide and self-inflicted injuries. But there are no statistics on the burden in relation to the physical and mental health impact on families
Sydney cycling: has the city that 'hates bikes' finally turned the corner?:	When the officials charged with making cycling safer and more accessible in  Sydney  meet their international counterparts, they can expect to be greeted with a mixture of incredulity and sympathy. “I don’t think anyone has a tougher time than we do,” says the City of Sydney’s executive manager of cycling strategy, Sebastian Smyth. That has a little to do with Sydney’s hills and a tangled road network that grew without a plan. But the main reason for the tag “the city that hates bikes”,  as the Sydney Morning Herald called it in 2010 , is the long-running division between the council responsible for the inner city and a state government that has been historically hostile to cycling. “Most cities around the world have jurisdiction over their own traffic light systems, speed limits, roads,” says Smyth’s colleague Fiona Campbell, the council’s manager of cycling strategy. “It’s really unusual to have a situation like we have, where the city government has so little control. “I’ve spent a lot of time going to other cities and talking with bike planners and so on, and when I describe the situation we have they’re always astounded that we’ve got anything done.” But got something done they have. After adding only about 1.5km of separated cycleways a year over the past decade, the city has put in almost 7km in the last six months of 2020. Its latest and most striking proposal is to  run a cycleway down the middle of Oxford Street , the city’s main artery to the eastern suburbs, to link with existing separated paths in the city’s central business district. As in  other cities around the world , Covid shutdowns have stimulated the acceleration of longstanding ideas about refashioning city transport. But the sudden progress in Sydney is also the result of a gradual warming of relations between the council and the New South Wales government since the miserable period when the National party’s Duncan Gay was roads minister. That reached its peak when Gay authorised the separated cycleway along College Street  to be ripped up  in 2015, shortly before he proposed regulations requiring cyclists to carry photo ID and  massively increased fines  for breaching traffic laws. But Sydney’s  reputation as “the city that hates bikes”  – a reflection of the aggressive attitudes of drivers as well as its dysfunctional infrastructure – goes back much further. Campbell points to the closure of George Street to car traffic  to make way for the light rail  as an example of how attitudes can change quickly, challenging “people who say it’s impossible, that you can’t remove road space – the sky will fall”. The same is true for cycling projects that aroused furious opposition when proposed, such as the  “battle of Bourke Street”  over the cycleway to the south of the inner city a decade ago. Smyth says 80% of submissions to that proposal were hostile but the project is now “universally loved”. “People are buying property there, setting up shops and bakeries on that street as a result … people who’ve witnessed this, the shopkeepers on Oxford Street, they do understand what’s killing that place, and that’s the traffic at high volumes and high speeds … They know [the new cycleway] will be good for business. There’ll be some people you can never win over but we are definitely seeing a shift.” Part of that shift has been a change in political rhetoric, not least from the current state transport minister, Andrew Constance. “The words coming out of the minister for transport’s mouth now are very enlightened, the conversations we’re having with the executive senior management of  Transport  for NSW are very enlightened,” Smyth says. “But it takes time for attitudes to change.” Bastien Wallace from Bicycle NSW suggests one other turning point in the tone of the debate – the  death of Cameron Frewer  in November 2018. Frewer was a cyclist who had campaigned vociferously for greater road safety before he was killed while riding on Queensland’s Sunshine Coast. Wallace says that was “the last time it was acceptable to talk about ‘a war on the roads’” and both the media and politicians have since moved away from “inflammatory language” about the rights and responsibilities of cyclists. And then came the pandemic, which ushered in the concept of “pop-up” or temporary cycleways, which the lord mayor, Clover Moore, called “quick and simple to implement, adaptable and inexpensive”. Six were installed in the City of Sydney in a  joint initiative with Transport for NSW  that again spoke of a much more positive relationship. They have proved so popular that some may become permanent. Unlike almost all other forms of transport, cycling showed an increase in traffic through the shutdown. The number of trips using the routes where pop-up cycleways were installed increased by 9% in just 12 weeks from September, according to Transport for NSW. “We had sustained growth during the Covid shutdown, so when everything else died in the arse, the counters on our cycleways kept going up,” Smyth says. “But driver numbers, driver speed and driver distraction, that’s [now] going up too. So we have to redouble our efforts to keep people cycling safe – that’s where the network of safe, connected, separated cycleways comes in.” To achieve that the council has developed a strategy of working “between the kerbs” – reallocating existing road space wherever possible rather than more extensive reconstruction from building line to building line – which has brought down the cost and time needed to construct separated cycleways. There is still a long way to go before Sydney becomes a city where it is as safe and welcoming to cycle as many in Europe, or even in the rest of Australia. The City of Sydney collaborates with surrounding councils to link their separated paths and other safe routes into a coherent network but this still accounts for a relatively modest geographical portion of the entire city. Wallace says her organisation is “incredibly encouraged by the moves to improve safe cycling” but remains critical of the state government for failing to reveal more details of its Principal Bicycle Network, which is supposed to deliver 5,000km of cycling infrastructure over the next decades. “It would be good if they just made the principal bike network public … so that people can really understand what the network looks like, so that they can connect in their minds all the little bits that get done piece by piece. “It’s actually good but they treat it as though it’s secret or it’s silly or something to be ashamed of, but it would just really help people support them.” The Committee for Sydney has also  called for the network plan to be drastically accelerated  in light of the pandemic. A spokesperson for Transport for NSW said it had undertaken “extensive consultation with the 33 councils in the Greater Sydney area to propose plans for a connected cycling network” but delivering it was “complex and requires a fundamental rethink to the allocation of road space”. Meanwhile, some of the old obstacles to progress remain. While many more dedicated traffic lights for cyclists have been installed in inner Sydney, they are still under the control of Transport for NSW, and offer riders a window of just six seconds on green. Transport for NSW says where possible it is “actively reviewing these traffic lights to determine if we can give more green time to bike riders or ban conflicting vehicular turning movements”. Frustrating gaps in the network persist, where sometimes tiny changes could unlock much longer safe commutes. Some proposals for better permanent infrastructure or pop-ups have been blocked at council level, including in  Manly  and  Bayside , which covers the area around Sydney airport. Above all, old habits die hard among officials in the roads bureaucracy. Smyth says: “It doesn’t matter what the minister or the executives at Transport for NSW are saying, you still have the people who’ve been doing this for 40 years who say, ‘Ah, no mate, can’t possibly happen.’” It’s historically been a profound philosophical difference, Campbell says: “Their priority has always been to maximise the flow of traffic, which doesn’t sit well with the city’s priority – which is creating a good place for people to be.” But the response to the “innovative and avant garde” proposal for Oxford Street – also developed in partnership with Transport for NSW – suggests that gulf is nowhere near as wide as it once was. “We got from in-principle design to consultation in less than five months,” Smyth says. “That’s a really positive indicator that the government’s prepared to say, ‘It’s OK if we lose one lane of traffic heading into the city’. “We’re not in utopia yet but at least all our strategies are consistent, our plans are consistent, our policies are consistent. There’s still a lot of inertia but I’m optimistic.”
Scott Morrison unveils new measures to stop Covid-19 super variant:	Australia has turned the screws on the Covid-19 super variant by reducing arrival caps, mandating masks and pre-departure tests for returning travellers, and requiring more regular testing for air crews and quarantine staff. The measures were announced by Scott Morrison after national cabinet on Friday, as  the Queensland government announced a three-day lockdown of Brisbane  to deal with the first community case of the more infectious variant. Until 15 February weekly international arrivals in New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia will be halved, a reduction of 2,500 places in hotel quarantine a week that will add to the strain of 38,000 Australians  stranded overseas still trying to come home . In total, the five-week reduction is set to result in 12,500 fewer arrivals. Prior to departing for Australia, travellers will be required to get a negative result from a coronavirus test, with limited exemptions granted such as for seasonal workers from low-risk countries with low access to testing. They will be tested on arrival. Travellers must wear masks on flights and in airports in Australia and overseas, one of a number measures Morrison said was “largely already practised” especially on flights chartered by the federal government. Masks will also be compulsory in domestic airports. International air crews will be required to receive a test every seven days or on arrival – to be decided by the state of arrival – and quarantine in dedicated facilities between international flights or for 14 days. Morrison said the changes meant there would be “no special rules” for crew allowing them to “move about” in the community before a further international flight. The New Zealand travel bubble is exempt from the new measures. Quarantine workers such as transport workers and cleaners will also be required to undertake daily testing, up from the current weekly requirement. Morrison said the new measures were designed to reduce the risk of spread of the new variant, although the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, warned there was no “silver bullet” that can guarantee it will not spread more widely in Australia. The Australian Medical Association supported both the  Queensland  lockdown and the enhanced screening measures. In a statement the AMA president, Omar Khorshid, said the new variant “appears to be a greater risk of breaking out of hotel quarantine, and then spreading quickly to outrun and overwhelm our last lines of defence – physical distancing and testing and tracing”. “It must be stopped before it enters the community.” Although the new strain was the dominant strain in the UK, Morrison said that 80% of arrivals to Australia were coming from countries with an exposure to it and the Australian  Health  Protection Principal Committee had recommended against blocking travel to Australia from those countries. Morrison described the Brisbane lockdown as “proportionate to the very real risk” of the new strain, but would not weigh in as to whether one case would become the new standard to trigger lockdowns. “We’ll see … I can’t tell you what we don’t know,” he told reporters. “We don’t want to learn the hard way on this, that’s why the decision of the Queensland premier in this case has been very wise and very prudent.” Morrison also clarified comments on Thursday that although Covid-19 vaccines would be voluntary, the national cabinet would consider when state and territory public health orders could make them a “requirement”. Morrison told reporters that “in certain workplace settings” flu and measles vaccines were required for public health and safety under the status quo. “This is the same thing that is done to ensure we don’t lose hundreds of people each year through the flu in our aged care facilities. “It’s not mandatory to work in an occupation but it can be a requirement of an occupation for public health reasons that certain vaccinations are in place.” Morrison said states and territories were yet to decide which occupations the requirement might apply to for Covid-19 vaccines. Kelly said that flu vaccines were required both for aged care workers and visitors. A spokesperson for the Northern Territory health minister, Natasha Fyles, told Guardian Australia it “welcomed a renewed discussion” of the vaccine rollout. “The Territory has a vulnerable population – decisions made locally regarding the rollout will be made with the health and safety of Territorians in mind; in line with our leading clinical advice,” the spokesperson said.
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales  health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the  NSW Health website . Anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed is a  casual contact  and must get tested immediately and self-isolate until you receive a negative result: Burwood : Artisaint Café, Wednesday 6 January ,  10.30am – 11am Burwood : Bing Lee, Wednesday 6 January ,  11.25am – 11.40am Pendle Hill :  Sydney  Marina Dine In & Take Away (Indian and Malaysian Restaurant), Sunday 3 January Anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed should  monitor for symptoms  and if they occur get tested immediately and self-isolate until you receive a negative result: Burwood : Westfield Burwood Shopping Centre, Wednesday 6 January, 11.45am – 1.30pm  and  Thursday 7 January, 1pm – 2pm Burwood : Kmart, Westfield Burwood, Wednesday 6 January, 11.45am – 12.15pm Burwood : House, Westfield Burwood, Wednesday 6 January,   12.20pm – 12.30pm Burwood : Coles Burwood, Wednesday 6 January,   12.40pm – 1.20pm  and  Thursday 7 January, 1.20pm – 1.55pm Burwood : Artisaint Café, Thursday 7 January,   1.10pm – 1.20pm Avalon Beach : Costume, Thursday 31 December, 2pm – 2.15pm All previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below. If you live in or have visited the following suburbs in the past two weeks,  get tested  even if you have mild COVID-19  symptoms  such as a runny nose or scratchy throat. Suburbs in the  Canterbury  Local Government Area Ashbury Belfield Campsie Canterbury Clemton Park Croydon Park Earlwood Hurlstone Park Cumberland City Council Northern Beaches Local Government Area Wollongong City Council Learn more about the  restrictions for Greater Sydney  (including the Blue Mountains), the Central Coast and Wollongong. Find your  local government area (LGA) Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Suppressed auditor general's report warned $1.3bn Australian defence deal not value for money:	A suppressed auditor general’s report warned that the government’s $1.3bn deal to buy a new combat vehicle fleet was not value for money, newly released material shows. In 2018, the attorney general, Christian Porter, deployed rarely used powers to suppress parts of an  auditor general’s report  that criticised the purchase of a new combat vehicle fleet, the Hawkei, manufactured by multinational arms giant Thales. The  Guardian revealed in 2018  that, in the redacted parts of the report, the auditor general had suggested the government could have spent half the amount if it had chosen to join the US joint light tactical vehicle (JLTV) program, instead of purchasing the Hawkei. Thales was furious at the auditor’s finding, believing it could threaten its ability to market the Hawkei abroad. The arms manufacturer lobbied Porter to intervene and remove references comparing the JLTV and the Hawkei in January 2018. Porter did so by using  largely unprecedented powers  that allow him to suppress audit reports, including on grounds of national security and commercial prejudice. In the almost three years since, the independent senator Rex Patrick has used freedom of information laws in an attempt to secure the full unredacted report. He  won his protracted battle in the administrative appeals tribunal last month , and a less redacted version of the report has  now been released . The newly unredacted findings largely reflect what was revealed by the Guardian in 2018: that the auditor found Australia could have saved money by going with the JLTV program instead of the Hawkei. One suppressed part of the report found that: “Defence has not clearly demonstrated that the acquisition provides value for money, as it did not undertake robust benchmarking in the context of a sole source procurement.” The redacted parts of the report detail a cost comparison between the JLTV and the Hawkei. One part finds the JLTV would have been significantly cheaper than previously suggested to the government in 2015 advice. “Although only one element of assessing overall value for money, the ANAO’s high-level cost-comparison indicates that the cost of the Hawkei capability exceeds the 23 per cent price difference advised to the government in 2015,” one previously redacted part of the report said. Thales has always argued the cost comparison is deeply flawed and unfair, because it seeks to compare two vastly different vehicles and fails to take into account the benefits of local manufacturing brought by the Hawkei. The government has continued to resist the publication of the unredacted report because it fears it would hamper Thales’ efforts to export the Hawkei abroad. The case prompted criticism in 2018 because it was widely seen as a threat to the independence of the auditor general’s office, one of the key accountability bodies in the country. Patrick said the government must now explain why it thought it was appropriate to redact the report on national security grounds. “I’m just astounded at what the attorney thought was security sensitive,” he said on Saturday. “I have written to the attorney general insisting he make an explanation to the parliament as to how he completely misjudged national security and issued a certificate under the auditor general’s act to censor the auditor’s findings from the parliament.” A spokesman for the acting attorney general Peter Dutton said the decision to suppress parts of the report was made “following careful consideration”. “Balancing the content of the report with the required s.37 security, defence and international relations issues and the issues relating to the commercial interests of relevant parties was the subject of a thorough and considered process conducted strictly in accordance with the act,” the spokesman said. “It is important to note that the relevant auditor general report is, and has been, publicly available since September 2018, with only a small amount of particular information of the report redacted on these grounds.”
Opposition leader Anthony Albanese to be discharged from hospital after car crash in Sydney:	The federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , said he would be discharged from hospital on Saturday afternoon nearly 24 hours after he was involved in a car crash in Sydney’s inner west. The Labor leader was driving in Marrickville on Friday when he was involved in a collision with a Range Rover at the intersection of Hill and Glen streets about 5pm. NSW police have said the driver of the Range Rover was not injured. The teenager, from Beverley Hills, returned a negative breath test at the scene and has been issued with an infringement notice for negligent driving. A spokesman for Albanese said he was “very shaken up by the car accident but he’s OK,” following the accident. The 57-year-old was treated at the scene but taken to Royal Prince Alfred hospital for X-rays. He has not broken any bones but was kept in hospital overnight for observation because doctors were concerned he may have sustained internal injuries. “I spoke to him earlier, it was a pretty serious crash,” a spokesman said. Albanese said on Twitter shortly after 3pm on Saturday that he would be leaving the hospital soon. “Will be discharged from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital this afternoon and continue treatment as an outpatient- thank you for all the good wishes and a huge thanks to the paramedics, police, doctors, nurses, orderlies, radiographers and other hospital staff - you are the best,” he wrote. Photos from the scene show Albanese standing up and talking to paramedics. Albanese was alone in his car.  BREAKING: Opposition leader Anthony Albanese has been taken to hospital after being injured in a car crash in Marrickville. His office tells ⁦ @10NewsFirst ⁩ he is shaken but OK  #auspol  ⁦ @AlboMP ⁩  pic.twitter.com/RQv8IiYRME NSW police said emergency services were called shortly before 5pm following reports a black Range Rover and a grey Toyota Camry had collided. “Police had been told the male driver of the Range Rover, aged 17, was travelling west along Hill Street when it struck the Toyota,” a police spokesperson said.
One new case in Australia as woman released from hotel quarantine tests positive for Covid variant:	A single case of community-transmitted Covid-19 has been recorded in Australia on Saturday, but concern remains about a woman released from hotel quarantine in  Victoria  despite testing positive to the highly infectious UK variant of the virus. New South Wales  recorded one new case of Covid-19, with Victoria and Queensland both recording zero new cases. Other states were yet to report their numbers, but have not had cases of community transmission for several weeks, if not months. But there was renewed focus on the handling of cases in hotel quarantine, a day after  stricter conditions for international travellers  were announced, and Brisbane entered a  snap three-day lockdown . On Saturday,  Queensland  and New South Wales both confirmed separate cases of patients being released from hotel quarantine who then tested positive to Covid-19 in the community. Both cases had tested positive for the UK variant of the virus in quarantine, and then spent the mandatory period in isolation before being released, but were found to still have Covid-19 days later. Neither case had been linked to community transmission and authorities said it was unlikely either case was still infectious when released. Queensland’s chief health officer, Dr Jeannette Young, said a woman with the UK variant of the virus arrived in Victoria from the UK on 26 December. She was tested the next day and found to have Covid-19. The woman remained in quarantine for 10 days and then flew on a domestic Jetstar flight from Melbourne to Brisbane on 5 January. She then travelled to Maleny, on the Sunshine Coast, to her parents’ home. Yesterday, it was found she was still testing positive. Queensland  Health  was checking on her close contacts, following up on her flight details, and encouraging anyone around Maleny with symptoms to be tested. The woman’s parents had been tested and were isolating. The woman’s case highlighted an aspect of the hotel quarantine system which had since been changed: that, in some instances, people who tested positive for Covid-19 could be released earlier than those who never contracted the virus. People who tested positive to Covid-19 in hotel quarantine had previously been allowed to leave after 10 days, or three days after their latest symptom, whichever was later. That had since been changed to 14 days since symptom onset, and testing before exiting hotel quarantine. Those who tested negative and had no symptoms were also released from quarantine after 14 days. “The risk is extremely low ... because she is right at the end of her potential infectious period, and with a normal variant, we would not be at all concerned,” Young said. “Ten days is more than sufficient and she is now up to day 15. So it would not be a concern, but because of this new variant, we are just being ultra-cautious, which is why we retested her when Victoria let us know that she had the new variant. “As I stress, this is ... low risk, but it is not zero risk, so we are just taking all of those precautions.” The Victorian health minister, Martin Foley, said the change had been made nationally after “advocacy” from the state. “As the chief officer of Queensland has pointed out, now the person is up to day 15 and has shown no signs of infectivity,” he said. “We are cooperating with them to make sure they have all the data they need and the manifest from the Jetstar flight is provided and followed up. “I commend Queensland for the extraordinarily thorough approach to this, to make sure every avenue is being run down, to make sure Queenslanders and all Australians are safe. Because an issue in any state is an issue for all Australians.” Victoria would not list any new exposure sites as a result of the woman’s case. The NSW health department also released details about a similar case to that of the Queensland woman. In a statement, it said a returned traveller arrived in NSW from overseas on 21 December and entered quarantine, where they tested positive for Covid-19. The person was discharged on 5 January, a day after being medically assessed as clear of the virus. On 7 January, genome sequencing found the person had been infected with the UK variant. NSW Health made contact with the person and asked them to be retested. The person returned a positive test with a high CT value, which indicates low levels of infection, and returned to quarantine. An expert panel, using advanced testing, had concluded the person was not contagious when they left quarantine, NSW Health said. But several venues visited by the person in Burwood, in Sydney’s inner west, had been listed in NSW health alerts as a precaution. In New South Wales, the one new community case was linked to the Berala cluster. Five cases were detected in hotel quarantine. Saturday marked Brisbane’s first full day of lockdown, after panic-buying and heavy traffic flowing from the capital occurred yesterday afternoon. “We are not going to run out of food. There is no need to panic buy ... please, everyone, just be patient and calm,” the Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, said. “This weekend is a good weekend to stay at home with your family and to do some odd jobs around the house or indulge in some watching of Netflix or whatever you desire to watch.” There were 14,784 tests recorded in Queensland yesterday.
Anthony Albanese leaves hospital after car crash in Sydney:	The federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , has been discharged from hospital after being injured in a car accident. The 57-year-old Labor leader left Royal Prince Alfred hospital on Saturday afternoon, telling waiting reporters that he had been injured externally and internally and had suffered considerable shock in the immediate aftermath of the impact. Albanese’s car was allegedly “T-boned” by a 17-year-old driver in a Range Rover on Hill Street in Marrickville on Friday afternoon when he was on his way home from his electorate office. “I hope that this experience leads this young man to commit to becoming one of the safest drivers that Australia has ever seen,” he said. He noted that the young driver apologised to him at the time of the accident. The Labor leader, who will run against Scott Morrison as Australia’s alternative prime minister at the next federal election, was kept in hospital overnight on Friday and will need ongoing medical support as an outpatient. “We all hoped, I think, that 2021 would be better than 2020,” he said. “I was always very confident that I could deal with any of the challenges that 2021 threw up. After yesterday I’m not just confident, I’m absolutely certain of that.” Albanese praised hospital staff for their care and remarked that Australia had the best healthcare system in the world. He said Kerry Packer came to the Royal Prince Alfred when he had a heart attack, as did his own single, working class mother. “Whether you’re the richest Australian or a pensioner you get the same level of care,” he said. BREAKING: Anthony Albanese has been released from hospital. He says he has “external and internal injuries” and will require ongoing medical care.  @7NewsSydney   pic.twitter.com/j2KZIj1rHO He gave a “shout out” to an off-duty nurse who assisted him immediately after the accident. The opposition leader said he would hold the federal government to account and put forward a better plan for Australia’s recovery out of the coronavirus pandemic. The 17-year-old driver from Beverly Hills was not hurt in the incident, but has been handed a ticket for negligent driving.
Queensland Covid hotspots: list of Brisbane and regional Qld case locations:	Queensland  authorities have released a list of hotspots where Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. More detailed information is available on the  Queensland government website . This list will be updated as more locations are added or removed. Queensland  Health has determined anyone who attended these venues to be  close contacts  and to get tested and quarantine for 14 days: Sunday 3 January:  Woolworths Calamvale North, Calamvale, 11am to 12pm Tuesday 5 January:  Coles Sunnybank Hills, Sunnybank, 7.30am to 8am Anyone who has been in the below locations during the relevant time periods, regardless of whether they have symptoms, is asked to come forward for  testing  and isolate until they receive their results. Saturday 2 January:  train from Altandi station to Roma street, Sunnybank, 7am Saturday 2 January:  train from Central Station to Altandi station,  Brisbane  City, 4pm Tuesday 5 January:  Nextra Sunnybank Hills Newsagent, Sunnybank, 8am to 8.15am Tuesday 5 January:  Jetstar Flight JQ570, Melbourne to Brisbane, arrived 11pm AEST Wednesday 6 January:  Cappriccios Italian Pizza Restaurant (kerbside pick-up), Maleny, 6:30pm to 6:00pm Thursday 7 January : Purple Palate Cellars, Maleny, 4:15pm to 4:25pm Thursday 6 January : Woolworths, Maleny, 4:30pm to 4:50pm Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
The baby-selling scheme: poor pregnant Marshall Islands women lured to the US:	Rolson Price still scans Facebook for her picture. He’s seen her occasionally, at the periphery of someone else’s photo, instantly recognisable. But he’s never met her, and concedes he never will. He still doesn’t know his daughter’s name. Price is one of dozens of victims of an extraordinary and brazen human trafficking ring, operating for years across the  Marshall Islands  archipelago and three states of the United States of America. The scheme involved pregnant Marshallese women being lured to the United States and enticed, with offers of $10,000 and the promise of a new life in America, to give up their babies, which were then adopted out to US couples willing to pay four times that amount for a child. Prosecutors believe at least 70 babies were adopted this way - “sold” in a court’s scathing judgement - for up to $40,000 each. Paul Petersen, a 45-year-old former elected county official in Arizona, pleaded guilty to human smuggling, conspiracy to smuggle illegal aliens, and fraud in a US federal court. He has been sentenced to six years in prison, and faces further jail time still on more charges. But across the Marshall Islands, families have been left irreparably damaged: fathers who will never know their children, children left without mothers. “For years, the US used to drop actual atomic bombs in our backyard,” a reporter in Majuro with knowledge of the scheme told the Guardian, a reference to America’s massive 20th century nuclear testing regime which devastated the Marshallese environment. “But this, this is like a bomb going off inside your house. In your family. It destroys everything.” Price and his eight-year-old son Kyhon live in Uliga, part of the Marshall’s small and close-knit Muslim Ahmadiyya community, on the fringes of the low-slung capital Majuro. Theirs is a hard-scrabble existence. Home is a concrete-floored single-roomed house, lit by a single bulb and fed by an intermittent cold water supply. Kyhon eats most of his meals at the mosque, which feeds families who would otherwise go hungry. Despite the privations of his family’s life, four years ago Price was excited about the impending birth of his second child. He was expecting a girl. Offered a short-term job on a nearby island building a seawall - three days’ work cash-in-hand - he jumped on a boat for nearby Kumit island. When he returned his wife was gone, leaving him with their young son. “To America,” his extended family told him. “She just left.” His wife never returned. In the beginning, she would send money back, and they communicated occasionally – through mutual friends online - about what might happen to their family. But the messages became less frequent, then stopped. The money dried up. Price is resigned: she will never return. “She got a passport and just left. I got mad, I got depressed, but there was nothing I could do. “She wanted the money. That’s why she went… because they offered her money. “But they don’t think about who is left behind. Why would you do that to families? Why would he want to take my wife and my baby?” In a virtual sentencing hearing in a US district court in early December, the mastermind of the illegal Marshallese adoption scheme, Petersen, was sentenced to 74 months in prison, and fined $100,000. As part of his plea agreement, he has also agreed to pay nearly $680,000 in restitution and fees. In January, he faces sentencing hearings in Utah and Arizona on state charges, with the potential for further jail time and more fines. He told the court his intentions were good, and lamented he would miss raising his own four children while he was in prison. “To any [birth mother] that felt misled, slighted, disregarded, disrespected or even coerced, I say, ‘I’m sorry’... I tried to make happy families, and in so doing ruined my own.” In an interview, Petersen’s lawyer Kurt M Altman told the Guardian: “no-one was mistreated. That has been Mr Petersen’s position throughout, and that is borne out in the evidence”. But US district court judge Timothy Brooks was excoriating in his condemnation, calling Petersen’s adoption practice “a get-rich-quick scheme ... hidden behind the shiny veneer of a humanitarian operation”. “He subverted what should be a joyous time for everyone into a  baby-selling enterprise . We don’t sell babies. That is the public policy of the United States of America.” Court documents seen by the Guardian detail the brazen nature of the adoption scheme he established: smuggling pregnant women and their unborn children in plain sight. Peterson’s connection to the Marshall Islands dates back more than two decades. In 1998, then just 23, Petersen served on a Church of the Latter Day Saints mission on the archipelago. In two years, he picked up the language quickly, developed a keen understanding of Marshallese culture, its faultlines and pressure points, and made good contacts in the capital Majuro. Upon return to the US, he set up an adoption agency, seeking to leverage the close links between the US and the Marshalls. Citizens of the Marshall Islands, an archipelago Pacific nation halfway between Hawaii and Papua New Guinea, can travel freely to America under a ‘compact of free association’ signed between the two nations in 1983. After years of abuse of the system, in 2003, the compact was amended to specifically forbid women from traveling for the purposes of adoption. But court filings show there was still a market of childless couples in the US seeking babies - who would pay up to $40,000 to Petersen to “facilitate” their adoption - and of vulnerable women in the Marshalls who could be enticed with promises of cash, and a new life in the US. Petersen’s website boasted he could help couples adopt children “without the direct involvement of… an adoption agency or a state agency”. Petersen’s co-conspirator, Marshallese woman Lynwood Jennet, has also pleaded guilty to conspiracy and theft. Jennet told investigators that over six or seven years working alongside Petersen, she targeted poor women, and those with little education, some of whom, she said, worked in prostitution camps in the Marshalls. She also said she had previously given up two of her own babies for adoption using Petersen as her attorney. Jennet said she would seek out pregnant women in the Marshall Islands – and befriend them with offers of assistance and money. She would organise identity documents and passports for the women - often within days - and travel with them to the US, placing them in one of a series of rented safe houses in Arizona, Utah, or Arkansas while they waited to give birth. The homes were often overcrowded, with women sleeping on floors, their newly acquired passports sometimes taken from them so they could not leave. Jennet would also help the women unlawfully sign up for Medicaid, so the US government’s health care system would cover the cost of hospital births. Once the baby was born, Petersen would charge US families up to $40,000 to “facilitate” their adoption of the child. Birth mothers would be given “postpartum” money for one or two months, and a plane ticket back to the Marshalls, or to somewhere else in the US. Few women ever returned to the islands. Birth mothers were paid between $7,300 and $10,800. There is no suggestion adoptive parents were aware of the illegality of Petersen’s scheme and US authorities have said there is no intention to invalidate or reverse any of the adoptions. Prosecutors have alleged Petersen engineered at least 70 illegal adoptions, the scheme funding a lavish lifestyle: a home in a gated community in Arizona, vacation properties, luxury cars. The acting US attorney for the western district of Arkansas David Clay Fowlkes said there was no altruistic element to Petersen’s illegal adoption practice, describing it as “nothing more than a sophisticated scheme to not only take advantage of the Marshallese community, but also to  swindle prospective adoptive parents  out of large sums of money”. On the islands, the Marshalls’ attorney general Richard Hickson said Petersen, “ left a trail of destruction behind him ”. “There’s a whole pile of Marshallese women and children who are effectively stateless in the United States.” Petersen “preyed upon vulnerable pregnant Marshallese women who were in an extremely stressful position… for his own profit,” Hickson said. And he has devastated families left behind. In Majuro’s densely populated Jenrok neighbourhood, eight-year old Richard Lejka waits for his grandmother to return home from work. He will eat when she’s home. He’s given up on waiting for his mother and father to return. His mother was caught up in Petersen’s adoption scheme. She left three years ago. His father soon followed in an effort to encourage her to return to the Marshall Islands. Neither has yet come back. In the care of his grandmother and other extended family, Lejka’s life has been thrown into a kind of stasis, a family life disrupted, an education stalled, a place in the world upended. For months, his family say, Lejka told his friends “my father’s going to take me to the States, I’m going to America, I’m going to America”. But he’s stopped saying that now. In nearby Uliga, Rolson Price knows there are dozens of other families like Richard’s and like his, irreparably cleaved, grieving for lives not lost but taken from them. He swings between rage and resignation. He says he holds his wife and Petersen   equally responsible. “I think I blame them both … she made the choice to go, but he came trying to take my baby from me. They need to stop destroying families, they need to stop selling babies.”
'Forms of structural violence’: Waikeria highlights injustice of New Zealand's prisons:	When images appeared last week of 16 prisoners standing on the smoking roof of Waikeria Prison’s high-security unit, justice advocate Julia Whaipooti was not surprised. The prisoners had been involved in a six-day standoff with guards that started as complaints over alleged inhumane conditions. They had created make-shift weapons and started several fires, setting mattresses alight. They lounged in collapsible chairs while guards waited below, clad in riot gear. By the end of the standoff, much of the prison’s top level was burned out, the roof partially collapsed. “How it’s been framed is a riot but it’s a very intentional protest,” Whaipooti said. “They weren’t being heard, for access to their basic human rights. They eat, sleep and shit all in the same place.” Last August, a  report by chief ombudsman Peter Boshier  found inmates ate meals on their bunks close to an uncovered toilet. The cells were “poorly ventilated and hot”. Boshier said this was unacceptable, particularly because 67% of the prison population was Māori. “Tāne (men) having to eat in such close proximity to the toilet is, in my opinion, both unsanitary and culturally inappropriate.” Central to Māori custom, or “tikanga”, is the concept of “tapu”, or sacred things, and “noa”, ordinary things, which should never mix. Toileting is thought of as sacred and food is ordinary. The department of corrections has said there were many channels for prisoners to complain and the avenue they took was a criminal act. It also said it had received no formal complaints from the prisoners. However, Whaipooti said the incident was a symptom of a larger systemic issue with the way  New Zealand  society deals with its prisoners. The 16 prisoners involved in Waikeria were largely Māori. “We shouldn’t be surprised this happened. As a country, we pride ourselves on being progressive on human rights, but the country should be measured on how it treats its worst and that’s looking inside prisons,” she said. After  Jacinda Ardern became prime minister  in 2017, Kim Workman took her on a tour of Waikeria. Workman had been the former head of prisons 30 years ago and has since become the country’s most prominent criminal justice reform advocate. Before that election, the National Party had proposed turning Waikeria into a mammoth project capable of housing 3,000 inmates – twice as big as any similar facility in the UK or Europe. After  Ardern  visited, however, the government proposed a smaller facility that would instead house 600 people. That is due to open next year. But Workman said that his impression was that until that new facility is built, the old one has been left to fall into disrepair. And that has bred increased levels of discontent. “One of the unfortunate things about this riot [is] it might give people the impression that the whole prison is run like that or that it’s very common in the whole of the prison system and that is not true,” he said. Workman said that there are often “pockets of excellence” within a prison, but the difficulty is that it does not always translate to a general commitment to humane treatment of inmates. He points to the research of British criminologist Alison Liebling, which shows that prisoners who feel they have a higher “moral quality of life,” have better outcomes when released back into the community. This includes feeling like they have a legitimate right to challenge situations they feel are unfair. “What we need is prisons which treat people with basic decency and humanity,” Workman said. “We haven’t had consistent values that underpin the criminal justice system. There has never been a consistent expression of what justice should look like and what is the purpose of prisons.” So, in 2019, the government committed to “ Hōkai Rangi ” a strategy aimed at transforming the prison system. It promised that prisoners would be treated with dignity and respect and have their mana upheld. It was created with help from Māori to help address the disproportionate number of that community who are in prison. The strategy has a target of cutting the number of Māori in prison from 52% down to 16% – in line with the overall Māori population. However, since then,  another ombudsman’s report  into the country’s only maximum security prison, Paremoremo, has highlighted that prisoners were being shut in cells for up to 23 hours a day. The report also found two breaches of the United Nations convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It was released just days before the Waikeria incident. Workman said that such incidents suggest the difficulty of implementing a strategy that is reliant on huge cultural changes. “Sometimes those cultures are so ingrained in the prison.” he said. “Some are worse than others and they are very hard to change the culture. Often 10% of staff will support change and the other 5-10% will oppose change and do everything they can to upset it and the rest will just follow along.” Tracey McIntosh, professor of indigenous studies at Auckland University, said that a culture of systemic racism has been in play for generations. “Gross disproportionality of Māori within our system is one of the most enduring social facts in  New Zealand ,” she said. She said there was disproportionality not just in the prison system, but also in the numbers of people who have been abused in state care, and those with poor education and health outcomes. “These are forms of structural violence … This is what significant entrenched disadvantage looks like.” However, she said, if New Zealand could create the conditions for a just society then everyone would benefit. Therefore the Hōkai Rangi strategy was still worth pursuing, she said: “But like all strategies it’s the implementation that is important.” There have been “so many reviews” but “very little meaningful action,” Whaipooti said. Two reports are planned by Corrections into Waikeira and there are calls for another independent inquiry. Whaipooti suggested reallocating part of the $2.2 billion spent on running Corrections into Maori-led solutions that address poverty, housing and mental health support. For example, the organisation she is involved in, JustSpeak, has suggested funding a nationwide network of community-based mental health, drug and alcohol addiction and “hauora”, or wellbeing hubs, with a mandate to work with people referred by themselves, their whānau, or justice agencies. However, Whaipooti suggested going further and simply giving funding and resources to Māori, along with the political will to allow them to come up with their own solutions to problems created by historical injustices. “Do that and in five years’ time see what the difference looks like. We are a small country so it’s possible to turn around cultural systems. It just requires a kind of leadership that can implement change. It’s hard work, but it’s possible.”
Global report: Asia-Pacific countries toughen Covid curbs as cases grow:	Coronavirus  is surging again in countries across the Asia-Pacific region, forcing states of emergency and a fresh spate of lockdowns to prevent it taking hold. Thailand  has extended its state of emergency by another month, until 21 February, and tightened travel restriction in parts of the country. Taweesilp Visanuyothin, a spokesperson for the Covid-19 coordinating centre, said on Thursday there were 305 new cases and one death. That brought total confirmed cases to 9,636, with 67 deaths. The government has ordered a partial lockdown around  Thailand . Schools, bars, gambling parlours and other public gathering places have been closed. Malls, departments stores and restaurants remain open but with limited hours. Since case numbers began growing again in mid-December – after months of few or no local reported cases – most of the new infections have been migrant workers from neighbouring Myanmar who were employed in seafood markets and factories in a province next to Bangkok. Many are housed in dormitories that have been closed off to the public. Indonesia  is due to start a mass inoculation programme using a Chinese vaccine in mid-January. It plans to launch vaccinations on 13 January after obtaining 3m doses from China’s Sinovac. The highest Muslim clerical council aims to issue a ruling on whether a Covid-19 vaccine is halal, or permissible under Islam, before the vaccinations begin.  With nearly 800,000 cases and more than 23,000 deaths, Indonesia is struggling with the worst Covid-19 outbreak in south-east Asia and authorities are relying on a vaccine to help alleviate dual health and economic crises ravaging the country. Japan  declared a  state of emergency in Tokyo  as the capital region reported a 24-hour record of almost 2,500 infections, while China imposed emergency measures to tackle an outbreak in the northern city of Shijiazhuang. Japan’s outbreak has not been as severe as those in Europe and the US, but the government announced a month-long state of emergency in the capital region on Thursday with new rules targeting restaurants and bars. Businesses are being asked to stop serving alcohol by 7pm and to close an hour after that, and people have been requested to avoid going out after 8pm. The number of new cases reported in  China ’s Hebei province – which surrounds most of Beijing – fell slightly from a day earlier, which had been the highest tally since July with 63 cases. The total number of cases across mainland  China  fell to 53 on Thursday with Hebei accounting for 33 of the 37 new locally transmitted cases reported. Authorities in Shijiazhuang, the provincial capital of Hebei, have closed schools, cut travel links and begun mass testing. Elsewhere in the region, residents of  Australia ’s city of  Brisbane  have been put into a snap three-day lockdown in an attempt to prevent the spread of the highly infectious UK variant of coronavirus. Taiwan  has managed to maintain its early successful response and  daily life is largely normal : of its total 822 cases, the vast majority have been found in returning travellers in hotel quarantine. Mandatory mask wearing has been expanded to most public places ahead of the flu season, and in the new year  border restrictions were tightened again  in response to the emergence of the UK strain. Globally, there are nearly 1.9 million people known to have died out of just under 88 million confirmed cases, according to the Johns Hopkins University  tracker . The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that  Europe  needs to ramp up efforts to deal with the new variant that is spreading more quickly. “This is an alarming situation,” said the WHO Europe chief, Hans Kluge, who called on everyone to follow rules on social distancing, mask wearing and staying at home. Experts see mass vaccinations as the best route back to normality, but the first rollouts have coincided with alarming spikes in deaths and cases across many parts of the world. The world’s poorest countries can expect to start receiving their first vaccine doses between the end of January and mid-February, the WHO has said. Other key global developments include: Quebec,  Canada ’s hardest-hit province,  toughened its restrictions  with a night-time curfew, with historians saying it was the first such order in the country for more than a century. The  UK  said it would extend a ban on travellers entering England to southern African countries in a measure to prevent the spread of a new Covid-19 variant identified in South Africa. The restriction would go into effect on Saturday and remain in place for two weeks, the government said. Israel’s  prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said supply agreements with Pfizer meant all Israelis over the age of 16 would be able to be vaccinated by the end of March, perhaps earlier.
Seoul court orders Japan to pay damages over wartime sexual slavery:	Japan  has denounced as “utterly unacceptable” a South Korean court ruling ordering it to pay damages to women who were sexually enslaved by the Japanese military before and during the second world war. The Seoul central district court on Friday said Japan was liable to compensate 12 women who were forced to work as so-called “ comfort women ”, in a ruling that is expected to inflict further damage on the countries’ already fraught ties. Some historians say that as many as 200,000 women – mostly Koreans, but also Chinese, south-east Asians and a small number of Japanese and Europeans – were coerced or tricked into working in military brothels between 1932 and Japan’s defeat in 1945. While some survivors of wartime sexual slavery have accepted “humanitarian” payments from the Japanese government, many others have called for formal compensation and an official apology. Legal experts say it is unlikely that Japan will abide by the court ruling. A support group for the women said it may take legal steps to freeze Japanese government assets in  South Korea  if Japan refuses to compensate the women. Japan  insists that all compensation claims were settled when the countries normalised diplomatic ties in 1965, adding that the issue had been resolved “finally and irreversibly” by a 2015 agreement that has since been scrapped by Seoul. The court ruled that each of the 12 women were entitled to 100 million won ($91,000), adding that said the bilateral agreements cited by Japan did not impact the plaintiffs’ right to seek compensation. “It was a crime against humanity that was systematically, deliberately and extensively committed by Japan in breach of international norms,” Justice Kim Jeong-gon said. The court said the women were the victims of sexual abuse by Japanese troops that caused bodily harm, venereal disease and unwanted pregnancies, and inflicted “big mental scars”. “Even if it was a country’s sovereign act, state immunity cannot be applied as it was committed against our citizens on the Korean peninsula, which was illegally occupied by Japan.” Japan, which boycotted the court proceedings, has maintained that sovereign immunity – a principle under international law that grants states immunity from the jurisdiction of foreign courts – applied in the case. Japan’s chief cabinet secretary, Katsunobu Kato, described the verdict as “regrettable” and “unacceptable, while the foreign ministry summoned South Korea’s ambassador to Japan, Nam Gwan-pyo, to lodge a complaint. Nam said he would strive to prevent the ruling from having an “undesirable impact” on bilateral. “I emphasised that it was most important for both sides to respond in a calm, restrained manner in order to resolve the issue,” he told reporters after meeting Japan’s vice foreign minister. Time is running out for Japan and  South Korea  to resolve an issue that has blighted bilateral ties since survivors first went public more than 30 years ago. Only 16 registered Korean survivors are still alive, and seven of the 12 victims have died since the suit was filed in 2013. They are now being represented by family members. The countries – both US allies with strong trade and people-to-people ties - are also at loggerheads over  compensation for wartime labourers  who were forced to work in Japanese mines and factories during its 1910-45 colonial rule, and  rival claims to the Takeshima/Dokdo islands . In late 2015, the countries said they had “ finally and irreversibly ” resolved the comfort women issue when Japan agreed to contribute ¥1bn to a foundation to support survivors and their families, while the then prime minister, Shinzo Abe, offered his “most sincere apologies”. But in 2018, South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in,  effectively nullified the settlement  – which had been agreed under his predecessor – saying it did not reflect the wishes of the surviving women or the strength of feeling among the South Korean public. The court in Seoul is due to rule next week on a similar case brought against Japan by another 20 women and their families.
'This is British history': the radio series preserving the nation's south Asian past:	“A  lot of them had survived partition, they were living in difficult conditions, working hard shifts in the factories. It was so expensive; they must have been so lonely. But they made these extraordinary lives for themselves and their grandchildren …” The broadcaster and author Kavita Puri has spent much of the past six years interviewing people from  India  and Pakistan who relocated to British migration hotspots such as Bradford, Birmingham and Southall, west London, in the 1950s and 1960s. Many have spoken of a country more cold, grey and hostile than the majestic, golden streets and idyllic green countryside they had been propagandised to imagine as faraway colonial subjects, and some were carrying significant trauma from the horrors of partition. Puri was first inspired to delve into their history by her own father, Ravi, whose own distant past she knew little about until she interviewed him on his 70th birthday in 2005 – a consequence of a wall of silence which still exists in many South Asian households. At the age of 24 he arrived at a cold and wet Heathrow airport in November 1959. Lacking a winter coat, he took a dressing gown from his suitcase and wore it over his suit to keep warm on the solo train ride up to Middlesbrough, in the north-east of England, where he began work as a graduate trainee engineer. He later moved to Kent - where Puri grew up - with his wife, to start a family. “I remember thinking: why have I never read or heard about these stories,” says Puri. “I was worried that they would be forgotten within families and the British South Asian narrative, but also within the wider British narrative”. Puri’s interest in the subject led her to write a book, Partition Voices, and to mastermind a Radio 4 documentary series,  Three Pounds in My Pocket . The first oral history of British south Asians, its title is a nod to the amount of money that men like her father were permitted to bring to the United Kingdom. It sees Puri interweave personal testimonies with snippets from the BBC archives. Each series hinges around a period of history, providing a moving yet divided portrait of the successes and failures of British multiculturalism. Puri juxtaposes the Race Relations Act, which protected ethnic minorities from housing and workplace discrimination, with Enoch Powell’s infamous “rivers of blood” speech, contrasting the growing presence of south Asians in Britain with events such as the publication of Salman Rushdie’s book The Satanic Verses in 1989, which saw the British Asian umbrella identity split along religious lines. Second-generation voices enter the frame by the second series, bouncing between dialogues with Puri and their elders, revealing a deepening texture of parent-child relationships, civil rights movements,  “day timer” club nights  and hybrid identities. The new, fourth, series starts in 1990 with  Norman Tebbit ’s “cricket test”, which asserted that a British Asian’s loyalty could be measured by who they supported in international cricket matches. It was a crude simplification, speaking to an undercurrent of awkwardness and hostility towards cultural diversity which remained at the end of the millennium – and which is familiar today. Puri also delves into the impact of the racist murder of Stephen Lawrence in 1993. “He was a black 18-year-old boy, but British south Asians looked at him and thought: it could have been us,” Puri says. “Families started having conversations. One interviewee said it was the first time she realised she was a minority in this country, when her dad talked to her about how to protect herself after the murder. She was six years old.” But Puri also refers to the 1990s as a “golden era” in which the staying power of blackness and brownness came to be reflected in UK pop culture. The first weekly south Asian-themed club night, Bombay Jungle, started at London’s Wag club in 1993. Cornershop’s 1997 hit Brimful of Asha, a tribute to the Indian singer Asha Bhosle, went to No 1 in the charts. And films such as East Is East and the TV show Goodness Gracious Me shot to popularity; the Queen was said to have watched the latter. “People described it as feeling cool to be Asian. It was celebrated,” Puri says. However, tensions remained. While in the first half of 2001, in the buildup to the general election, Tony Blair made a speech defining chicken tikka masala as the national dish, weeks later, riots erupted among young British Asians in Oldham, in the north-west of England. The attack on the twin towers in New York on 11 September caused a drastic spike in Islamophobia. Turban-wearing Sikhs donned T-shirts that read “Don’t Freak, I’m A Sikh”. As ever, apparent progress for some meant little when deep-seated divisions remained within and between communities. Twenty years on, Puri considers how the theme of belonging has evolved. Now, with the Black Lives Matter movement growing, demands among third- and fourth-generation British south Asians for a better historical education about Britain’s empire have taken on a new lease of life. “In the 90s, it was about seeing yourself in music and on the telly. I suppose for this generation it’s about seeing yourself in the history books,” says Puri. “It matters because it’s about your place here, and how you are part of the story of Britain. I don’t think it has to be a divisive thing. That’s why I’ve always said it’s British history.” Three Pounds in My Pocket airs on BBC  Radio  4  from 8 Jan; Kavita Puri’s book Partition Voices is published by Bloomsbury
Why the delay? The nations waiting to see how Covid vaccinations unfold:	T hey are the nations that have been held up as shining examples of coronavirus management. In Australia,  New Zealand  and Taiwan, daily Covid infections are in the single digits and outbreaks are quickly suppressed. But there is one area where these nations lag well behind the pack in vaccination. Countries with some of the most enviable healthcare systems in the world – including Australia, New Zealand, Japan and South Korea – will not begin to inoculate until the end of February  or later . The delay is deliberate. The millions of people already being vaccinated against Covid-19 will provide valuable data to those countries who have – for various reasons – decided to wait for more information about the vaccine, its efficacy and side effects before rolling it out to vulnerable populations and the public. Australia’s health minister,  Greg Hunt , said on Thursday that Australia was proud to be part of this group of “the most successful countries in the world in dealing with” Covid-19, and that he would  not be pressured  to bring forward the start of vaccination. A significant driver of the expedited rollout in some countries is the severity of their situations. The US registered  a record 3,900 coronavirus deaths on Wednesday , with numbers surging in almost every state. On Thursday the UK’s death toll rose by 1,162, its second-highest increase since the pandemic began. The urgency for the vaccine in those countries is palpable, with hospitals and morgues  struggling to manage the number of deceased,  and  healthcare workers who were burning out  months ago. Why would you put people at risk when if you wait a bit longer, you can get more information? By comparison, most Australian states and territories have had no local cases of the virus for months, while  there has been no community transmission in New Zealand since 18 November . Prof Jennifer Martin is a physician in Australia who is also a member of the pharmacology and therapeutics advisory committee of Pharmac, the sole purchaser for pharmaceuticals in New Zealand. She said people often asked her about the pace of the rollout.  “The reason it’s such a prolonged approval process in Australia and New Zealand is because there is lots of double checking and reexamining of the statistics, because if we make an error, it will become an error on a big scale by the time the drug is rolled out across a large population,” Martin said.  “It’s not that uncommon that the regulator might look at the data and say, ‘Well, it looks OK in terms of how it works in European people, but we’re quite worried about how this might affect Indigenous people, and the Asian population seem to respond differently too’. “Australia and New Zealand are saying; ‘Why would you put people at risk when if you wait a bit longer, you can get more information?’” Regulators are already learning from those who have been vaccinated. On Wednesday, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  published data on allergic reactions to the Pfizer/ BioNTech mRNA vaccine  seen in the US between 14 and 23 December.  That data will prove useful to countries such as South Korea, which has ordered enough vaccine doses to inoculate all of the country’s 52 million people, but is delaying mass vaccination while it observes possible side effects elsewhere. Meanwhile, New Zealand’s health ministry said regulators were waiting to “take into account the assessments of trusted regulators, such as in Australia, the UK, Europe, Canada and the USA”. An infectious diseases and vaccine expert from the University of Sydney, Prof Robert Booy ,  said the Pfizer/BioNtech mRNA vaccine, which is being issued first in many countries, has “five incredible advantages” over other types of vaccines. “mRNA vaccines can be quickly developed, they’re cheap, they’re effective, they appear safe, and you can adjust them by putting in a slightly different antigen if the virus changes its spots,” he said. “But the overarching concern is, we’ve never used this type of vaccine before, so we have to do our darnedest to do the surveillance to check that it’s well tolerated.” Booy said there was always a country that needed to be first with introducing any drug or medical device, and that no steps had been skipped, such as conducting phase-three clinical trials. This meant the vaccines were very likely to be safe, he said, but some countries, forced to choose between exponential deaths and overwhelmed health systems, or introducing a vaccine before having time to analyse the full results, had made the logical decision to issue the vaccine, starting with vulnerable populations. Even  Japan , which on Thursday reported a record 2,447 new cases and declared a state of emergency in Tokyo, is not rushing the rollout. Japanese media have reported that vaccinations will not begin until late February, with the first going to about 10,000 frontline health workers. Those over 65, care home workers and people with underlying health conditions will follow in March. There is a particular need to first build public confidence and trust in the Covid-19 vaccine in Japan. While Japan doesn’t have an anti-vaccination movement comparable to the UK and US,  there is a relatively high level of vaccine hesitancy .  There are other benefits to countries moving steadily with vaccination. Health authorities will have more time to sort the logistics of transporting vaccines, some of which require cold-chain storage, across vast landscapes including deserts, forest and bushland. Technology can be established to track doses across the supply chain and monitor for wastage. There is more time to train staff to administer the vaccine and run education and safety campaigns to ensure public trust. Martin said people living in those countries waiting for more data before approving and distributing the vaccine should feel gratitude to those receiving it in places such as China, the US and UK. “These people are helping us to get data, in the same way as any patient that’s in a clinical trial, and that’s really going to benefit everyone,” she said. “But at the end of the day, when I speak to my colleagues in these places like the UK, they say they’re so desperate for the vaccine that they would take it in their eye if they had to. “They’re just so stressed, they’re on the frontline, they’re worried about catching and spreading it. So they’re just so unbelievably grateful to be among the first.”
Three men filmed beating dolphin to death arrested in India:	Three men in India have been arrested after they were filmed brutally beating an endangered river dolphin to death in a video that went viral. The attack, which happened on 31 December, involved a gang of young men violently hitting a Gangetic dolphin with wooden rods and an axe until it bled, and then suffocating the animal beneath the water of the Sharda canal in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. In a graphic video  of the attack, one of the men can be heard shouting “you are attacking it for no reason” while another adds “hit it now, hit it now”. The dolphin was later found dead by a local official from the forest department with deep lacerations on its body, but villagers had been unwilling to reveal how the animal had died. But after footage of the attack went viral, prompting a national outpouring of disgust, three men were identified and arrested. The Gangetic dolphin – a freshwater mammal usual living in India’s Ganges river and Pakistan’s Indus river which can be recognised by its long snout nose – is an endangered and protected species and the national aquatic animal of India. There are thought to be fewer than 5,000 Gangetic dolphins left. The opposition politician Sanjay Jha called for criminal laws to be amended to “impose the same fine and punishment for hurting and killing animals as we have for human beings”. “Those monsters who murdered the dolphin must stay in jail,” said Jha.
Olympics official says he is not certain Tokyo Games will go ahead:	Dick Pound, a senior member of the International Olympic Committee, has said he “can’t be certain” that the delayed  Tokyo 2020 Games  will go ahead this summer, as a coronavirus state of emergency was declared in the host city. Asked about the prospects that the Games will open on 23 July, the Canadian told the BBC: “I can’t be certain because the ongoing elephant in the room would be the surges in the virus.” Organisers and the IOC president, Thomas Bach, have insisted the Olympics, which were  postponed by a year  due to the pandemic, will go ahead, and have agreed it will not be possible to delay them a second time. Tokyo, however, is at the centre of a  third wave  of infections that has struck Japan in recent weeks, prompting the prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, to  declare a month-long state of emergency  in the capital and three neighbouring prefectures. The measures, which are not enforceable by law, went into effect on Friday but experts have warned they may have to stay in place beyond February to have any effect. Tokyo reported a record 2,447 cases on Thursday, a 50% increase from the previous day – while the number of infections across  Japan  rose above 7,500, also an all-time high. Although Japan has  fared better  than many other countries – with 3,900 Covid-19 deaths in a country of 126 million – it is not expected to begin vaccinating frontline health workers until the end of February at the earliest, with older and other vulnerable people following in March. A requirement to conduct domestic clinical trials and a history of vaccine hesitancy among the public mean authorities will have very little time to immunise a significant number of people by the time the Games open in just over six months’ time. Concern that visiting athletes, fans and officials could spark a fresh outbreak and rising costs attributed to the delay have combined to  turn public opinion against the Games . A recent poll by the public broadcaster NHK found 63% of Japanese people supported another postponement or cancellation. “I think it’s difficult … it’s impossible to hold the Olympics,” said 75-year-old Tatsuhiko Akamasu, who was visiting Tokyo on Friday from nearby Saitama. “It’s only two and a half months until the torch relay. I don’t think we can get the virus under control during this period.” Yuki Furusho, a 23-year-old student, was similarly sceptical. “I think the interaction between people will cause the coronavirus to spread, and it is more likely that the virus may mutate if the infection numbers are increasing. That’s a bit scary.” The Tokyo 2020 organising committee is not due to reveal its plans for a “Covid-safe” Olympics until March, when 10,000 runners are due to begin a 121-day torch relay around the country. When asked if he had any concerns about the Games’ viability given the worldwide spread of the virus, the organising committee’s president, Yoshirō Mori, said “none at all,, according to the Sports Hochi newspaper. “It will happen in July. Almost all of the Olympic preparations are in place.” In an interview with Sky News, Pound, the longest-serving member of the IOC, suggested  vaccinations should be a condition  for competing at the Olympics, putting him at odds with Bach, who has said only that athletes should be “encouraged” to receive the vaccine. Pound said: “Athletes are important role models, and by taking the vaccine they can send a powerful message that vaccination is not only about personal health, but also about solidarity and consideration for the wellbeing of others in their communities.” Agencies contributed to reporting
Last voices of dissent: Hong Kong's remaining activists lament assault on opposition:	Lee Cheuk-yan has seen a lot during his 63 years in  Hong Kong , but this week for the first time he felt horror. On Wednesday at dawn, 1,000 police swept the city, carrying out  mass arrests of 55 people  associated with a move to bring about a democratic election. Dozens of students, social workers, lawyers and politicians  were rounded up  without warning in the biggest assault on opposition since the implementation of the  national security law  (NSL) in June. For Lee, a veteran activist, former legislator and one of the few people who were not caught in the dragnet, the “absurdity” of the crackdown was chilling. “Yesterday’s events, the horror of them, was so unimaginable and unpredictable, in how the Communist party is using the national security law,” he says, his voice ringing with incredulity. “[The primaries] were not remotely close to anything concerning national security but they used the law anyway.” The NSL was imposed by Beijing after the mass pro-democracy protests of 2019. It  broadly defined  and criminalised acts of subversion, secession, foreign collusion, and terrorism. Those arrested on Wednesday   – including the already jailed activists Joshua Wong and Tam Tak Chi - were   accused of subversion. The group included six alleged organisers and every single candidate involved in an unofficial primary by the pro-democracy camp last year. You can’t dare to oppose anything. There can only be obedient lawmakers Their arrests were revealed by a drip feed of social media posts and dramatic live streams. World governments condemned the crackdown, and in the US Mike Pompeo, the outgoing secretary of state, threatened further sanctions over the “campaign of political repression”. But inside Hong Kong the aftershocks of the unprecedented day were felt the strongest. It was as if  opposition itself had become illegal . “The purpose is twofold,” says Lee. “One is to continue putting fear in the minds of the people so they can rule by that fear. And the second is to wipe out any opposition in Hong Kong who might try to challenge them.” Lee expects to go to jail. He is facing at least four separate criminal trials this year over protest-related charges, but  has not stopped speaking out  in the meantime. “Anyone in Hong Kong in a way has to be ready for spend some time in jail,” he says. “You can still fight on with your spirit, and physically we can’t be restrained by jail sentences.” His is one of the few voices of dissent left in Hong Kong. The entire democratic caucus has either  resigned or been disqualified  from the legislative council. Dozens have been arrested under the NSL for acts of speech, and veteran leaders such as Martin Lee  stopped talking about democracy  in public months ago. The movement’s most well-known figures –  Jimmy Lai ,  Joshua Wong, Agnes Chow, Ivan Lam , and  Tony Chung  – are in jail, while others like  Nathan Law ,  Ted Hui, Pastor Ray Chan , and  Sunny Cheung  have fled overseas. Cheung, 25, left Hong Kong after he ran as a candidate in the primaries, and watched from afar as “the whole pro-democracy camp was eradicated by the Beijing government, totally crushed”. “I’m really concerned about the future of activism,” he tells the Guardian. “You can’t really fulfil the responsibility of being a lawmaker any more. You can’t dare to oppose anything, there can only be obedient lawmakers.” Wednesday’s roundup more than doubled the number of people  arrested under the NSL . At least four media groups were ordered to hand over information, reportedly including contact details. Staff at the public broadcaster, RTHK, were warned by their boss  not to interview any of the group . In the wake of the arrests,  civic groups began disbanding  or moving their operations and servers overseas. Others  shut down WhatsApp groups , deleted membership records, and reassessed the security of donors. The Hong Kong Alliance, chaired by Lee, accelerated its digitisation of historical documents about the Tiananmen Square massacre to move it out of the jurisdiction. Carl Mizner, Fordham University law professor and Chinese governance expert, says “decapitating civil society” was a crucial step in Beijing’s plans to “ thoroughly dominate Hong Kong ”. “Rounding up and arresting anyone with a demonstrated capability to mobilise significant popular support is just a start,” he said. The legal basis for the arrests lies in article 22 of the NSL, defining the crime of subversion to include organising or planning to seriously interfere, disrupt or undermine “the performance of duties and functions” by the Central or Hong Kong governments. The primaries  drew an estimated 600,000 people out to vote. Under the banner of “democracy 35+” candidates pledged to win the majority of the legislative council’s 70 seats and vote down the government’s budget, eventually forcing the resignation of chief executive Carrie Lam. Government statements said this was enough to fit the NSL’s definition of subversion, but many disagreed. Alan Leong, a lawyer and member of the Civic party who remains in Hong Kong, says authorities had failed to explain how the actions of the 55 were illegal and the accusation was “ridiculous in the extreme”.  Leong and others said there was a belief in political circle that even if the arrests never amount to convictions, the move was designed to prevent them from running in elections, and scare others away, effectively ending political resistance . Lee says there is now no chance of fair elections in Hong Kong in the future, because the authorities had “cleansed the opposition”. “Once you start to say you want to win, they’ll use the national security law against you. The whole primary exercise was to say we want a majority,” he says. “So what’s the point of an election if trying to win is a national security threat? That’s the absurdity.” Yet Regina Ip, a pro-Beijing legislator, believes there will at least always be an opposition. “In the [previous] elections, many complete unknowns were elected so long as they ran under a pro-democracy banner. There will be sympathy for those from the pan democratic camp,” she says. As an aspiring candidate in exile, Cheung still believes there is a future. “When the repression is obviously much stronger than the resistance we can provide right now, maybe many of us have to stay low and be patient, to wait for the next wave to come out on the streets,” he said. By Friday morning nearly all the arrested had been released on police bail, their passports confiscated. None had been charged. “Hong Kong has entered a cold winter, the wind is strong and cold,” Tai said on his release. “But I believe many Hongkongers will still use their own way to move forward against the wind.”
US charges three Sri Lankans over role in 2019 Isis Easter attacks:	The US justice department has charged three Sri Lankans with supporting terrorism for their participation in the  Islamic State-claimed Easter attacks on churches and hotels in 2019  that killed 268 people. The department said the three were part of the “Isis in Sri Lanka” group behind the attacks on three churches and three luxury hotels in three cities on the Christian holiday on 21 April 2019. Five Americans were among the dead. The  Islamic State  claimed responsibility and called the well-planned attacks a retaliation for western coalition actions against the group in Syria. The three charged are Mohamed Naufar, the “second emir” and a recruiter and trainer for Isis in  Sri Lanka ; Mohamed Anwar Mohamed Riskan, who allegedly helped manufacture the bombs used in the attacks; and Ahamed Milhan Hayathu Mohamed, who killed a police officer in the attack, the justice department said. All three are in custody in  Sri Lanka , and the department said on Friday it would support their prosecution in that country while maintaining the US charges in the event they gain their freedom. “This case clearly demonstrates that the United States will take decisive action to ensure terrorists face justice when they target Americans anywhere in the world,” said Nick Hanna, the US federal prosecutor in Los Angeles, where the case was filed. “The United States remains confident in the Sri Lankan authorities’ ability to bring the perpetrators to justice – and this complaint makes clear that we stand ready with these charges in the event the defendants attempt to evade justice,” he said in a statement. The three were charged with providing material support to a designated foreign terrorist organisation, and Naufar and Milhan were charged with helping in military-type training for the Islamic State.
Maradona lifts the World Cup: David Yarrow's best photograph:	O n the final day of exams at Edinburgh University in the summer of 1986, most students partied, but I flew directly to  Mexico  City. I was 20 years old and studying business and economics while taking photos on the side. I’d never been to the Americas before, and I wasn’t at all a good photographer; in fact, I was incredibly average. I arrived at the 1986  World Cup  under the guise of being a freelance photojournalist, but I was a Scotland fan first and foremost – they always used to say that Scottish journalists are just fans with typewriters. I did have a press pass that I’d managed to blag off the Times, which granted me access to the media pen, but I was much more interested in watching football than taking photographs of it. There was a moment in the first round of a match with Uruguay when Scotland missed an open goal. Back at the Times they were watching the TV coverage of the game and could see the striker with his head in his hands, and in the background  me  with  my  head in my hands and with my camera nowhere near the moment. And they thought: “Well this guy, Yarrow, he’s not focused on the task at all.” These were the days in sports photography before auto-focus, meaning that to capture a moving figure clearly, you had to do a thing called follow focus. Essentially, you moved a ring on the camera in unison with the movement of the players. So if you had a 100-metre sprinter coming toward you, you would try to get as many different pictures of them in focus as possible. It’s a real skill and not one I was good at, which meant that the only decent pictures I got at the tournament were of the players lining up at the beginnings of matches. I got to the stadium at six in the morning – even though the match was at midday Fifa had a rule though that every country that qualified for the tournament would be allowed one photographer on the pitch for the final. Scotland had been the first team to get knocked out. This tends to happen habitually, so all the photographers on expense bills for the newspapers were sent home along with the Scotland team. It left me, as a 20-year-old, with a press pass for the pitch of the World Cup final. I remember going to the stadium at six o’clock in the morning, although the game was at midday. I bribed a Mexican guard with a bit of whisky and said: “Do you mind if I walk on to the pitch?” In those days, the Azteca stadium held around 120,000 people. He allowed me to walk from one goal to the other, and I could see my footprints in the dew on the grass. It was a bit of an epiphany. There’s that Mark Twain saying: “The two most important days in your life are the day your born and the day you find out why.” On the pitch I thought: “Well, I’m doing this at 20; photography has surely got to be a big part of my life?” But this experience didn’t change the fact that I was still a fairly rubbish photographer, but I got lucky. I was in the right position for the first Argentinian goal in the final, and when Argentina won the most extraordinary thing happened. Probably about 20 to 30,000 Argentinians ran on to the pitch. It was just a scrum. I had two lenses and two cameras, like most football photographers in those days. The long lens was for covering the midfield area, and the wide-angle lens for the goalmouth areas. I thought: “If I take my wide-angle and get as close to Maradona as possible, I might get a picture.” But to be nimble, I would have to leave my long lens in the goalmouth. It was a split-second decision, but I figured that if I lost the equipment, as long as I’ve gotten close to  Diego Maradona  it’s the right call. As it turned out, I got dead close to him, square on to him, just as he was lifted on to another player’s shoulders. It was like a biblical scene, with the thousands of people behind him. Maradona looked right in my eyes while holding up the World Cup. Those were the days of film, so you didn’t know if you’d gotten the shot – you didn’t know whether you’d captured it sharp or got the lighting right. I wouldn’t find out until later just how well the photo had come out, but I did return to the goalmouth to find, to my surprise, the $7,000 lens and camera still sitting there among the thousands of people. I remember that day as if it were yesterday, and I was so fortunate to have my moment in the chaos. Maradona looked magnificent riding high on Argentinian shoulders, but little did I know back then that my photograph would stand the test of time. Maradona was a genius, and I owe him so much.  Born:  Glasgow, 1966 Training:  “Pitch side at the local football club.” Influences:  Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, Don McCullin. High point:  “Christmas 2014, photographing South Sudan – the rawest place left on Earth.” Low point:  “Realising there was no film in my camera at a World Cup semi-final.” Top tip:  “Be your own biggest critic.”
Hear Here podcast recommendations: sign up for unexpected audio pleasures:	Hear Here hunts out the best podcasts every week. Sign up and we’ll send you an email filled with shows you’re unlikely to see featured on the major podcatchers but that are instead hidden gems whose listeners are desperate for the rest of the world to tune in.  See the latest edition of Hear Here ... here. No sign-up button?  Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault.  Please  click here  to reload the page on theguardian.com  which should correct the problem. *** More emails from our culture team: Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Film Today : get the day’s insider news and our latest reviews Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Art Weekly:  the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitions *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Art Weekly: sign up to start the weekend with a splash of colour:	Art Weekly is your one-stop shop for all your arty needs. Jonathan Jones handpicks the best ideas and things to see and delivers the week’s must-read news, so you won’t miss a thing.  See the latest edition here. *** More emails from our culture team: Film Today : get the day’s insider news and our latest reviews Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Hear Here : podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Sign up to our Film Today email:	Every weekday we bring you the latest movie news, blogs, big name interviews, reviews and more. We’ll also point you towards  Peter Bradshaw ’s film of the week, and a host of quizzes, features and festival coverage. You can also also follow us on Twitter  @guardianfilm  or like us on  Facebook . You need never miss a film story again. *** Want more film? Try this: Guardian Documentaries : be the first to find out about our new documentary films, created by top international filmmakers and following unseen global stories More emails from our culture team: Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Art Weekly:  the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitions Hear Here : podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
The Guide: Staying In – sign up for our home entertainment tips:	Who needs to go out when there’s so much to do indoors? If you’re looking for inspiration, let The Guide – The Guardian’s Saturday arts and entertainment supplement – help you out. Every week, we’ll send you some hot picks, guaranteed to keep you entertained. Expect the best of everything available to watch, play, hear or read. You won’t have time to be bored. No sign-up button?  Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault.  Please click here to reload the page  which should correct the problem. *** More emails from our culture team: Hear Here : podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers Sleeve Notes : music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every week Film Today : get the day’s insider news and our latest reviews Bookmarks : discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10s Art Weekly:  the art world low-down, along with in-depth articles *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Tina May: 52nd Street (and Other Tales) review – a fitting tribute to Duncan Lamont:	T he late  Duncan Lamont  was a remarkable man: jazz saxophonist, first-call session musician, composer and highly original songwriter. He was also uniquely productive, intent on writing a song a day – “because you never know when a good one will turn up”. When one did, it was likely to be a sharp little vignette of a person or a place: Hymn for Jobim, The Algonquin Hotel, Fred Astaire, The Apartment – all among the 13 of his songs  here .  Tina May  is just the right person to sing them too, with the sensitivity to step gently into a persona and the technique to handle the bravura intricacies of 52nd Street, a song celebrating the jazz hotspot of 1940s New York. Which brings us to the  James Pearson Trio , house band at Ronnie Scott’s, who as accompanists play an absolute blinder throughout. Lamont himself was originally meant to join them, but his death, aged 87, in July, called the whole thing off for a while. Another saxophonist just didn’t seem right somehow, so his place is taken by  Mark Nightingale , one of the finest trombone players in the world today. 
'Teaching us wonder': Turkey embarks on cultural mission to preserve its fairytales:	O nce upon a time, in the old, old days when the mouse was a barber, and the donkey ran errands, and the tortoise baked bread, there was a great mountain called Kaf Daği on the border of the spirit realm, from which many of the fairytales and myths of the Middle East sprang forth. Today, Kaf Daği is thought to be somewhere in the Caucasus mountain range that separates the Black Sea from the Caspian. In this magical place – also known as Jabal Qaf in Arabic and Kuh-e Qaf in Persian – princes are cursed by witches, who turn them into stags; beautiful maidens are birthed from oranges; and sultans, courtiers, slaves and farmers alike are at the mercy of the  peri  (fairies) and  ifrit  (demons) that populate the Turkish fairyland. The oral folktales of the Anatolian plateau are a remarkable blend of storytelling motifs and traditions, drawing on the Arabian Nights and Brothers Grimm, as well as Kurdish, Persian, Slavonic, Jewish and Romanian influences. Dr Ignatuis Kunos, a Hungarian Turkologist who was one of the first academics to collect and write some of them down in the 1880s, compared the treasures of Turkish folklore to “precious stones lying neglected in the byways of philology for want of gleaners to gather them in”. He worried that the steady creep of modernisation – particularly the railway – would erode Anatolia’s cultural heritage. Happily, more than a century later, the oral storytelling tradition has survived, and a mammoth academic project called  Masal  is collecting and indexing a goal of 10,000 stories to preserve for future generations. Members of the public and academics from university literature departments around the country can submit a fairytale to Masal’s online portal, where it is then examined by three rounds of researchers and language editors. The project is funded by the Atatürk Cultural Centre in what is the first undertaking of its kind in  Turkey . The stories are indexed according to which of seven regions they are from and which of five different types of stories: animal tales, magical or extraordinary tales, realistic tales and humorous tales.  Zincirlemeli  tales follow a strict formula, almost like a poem, in which characters and events at the beginning and end form mirror images. There are often several different variants of one story, requiring painstaking cross-referencing to figure out how a tale can differ over time from one region to another: there are 20 different versions of  Tın Tın Kabacık , about two little girls abandoned by their father, in the province of Muğla alone. Many stories and poems over the years have morphed into Turkish from original Kurdish, Laz, Armenian and Circassian versions. If a submitted tale is approved it becomes part of Masal’s online database, which will eventually be available to the public. More than 3,300 tales have been collected from 77 different areas to date, and the project’s directors hope the corpus will be completed by February 2022. Motifs such as magic carpets, animals and birds gifted with speech and enchanted mirrors, apples and pomegranates echo throughout the canon. Characters who brave the dragons and giants of Kaf Daği or survive a trek across the desert are rewarded with marriage proposals in beautiful gardens, and the phoenix-like Zumrutu Anka or Simurgh bird is always on hand to help a hero out of a tight spot. The tales can be ugly, too. Black or Moorish servants, Jews and elderly witches almost always take the part of the villain; pashas have their innocent wives stoned to death and enemies ripped apart by wild horses; a sparrow comes to tell a young woman that death is her  kismet  (fate). Turkish fairytales also took on an important political dimension during the early days of the republic, when modern Turkey’s founder, Mustafa Kamal Atatürk, attempted to force what was left of the Ottoman empire into the modern world. Folk culture was rejected as backwards, and Turkish scholars such as Pertev Naili Boratav, who pioneered the study of folktales, became a target of Turkish nationalists in the 1940s for highlighting the country’s ethnic diversity in his work. “Boratav’s meticulous scholarship and courageous public intellectualism inspired me,” said author Kaya Genç, whose book The Lion and the Nightingale criss-crosses modern Turkey in an examination of the “contradictory soul of the Turkish nation”. “In folk tales, the heroes are mostly outsiders who suffer the violence of powerful autocrats; for politicians, their defiant tone is dangerous,” he said. Dr Mehmet Naci Önal, a lecturer at Muğla Sıtkı Koçman University’s department of Turkish language and literature, who serves as one of Masal’s researchers, hopes that academics, writers and artists will be able to draw on the project’s database of stories for generations to come. “Fairytales teach us to wonder, to use reason, to be patient, to dream, to overcome obstacles, not to be intimidated, to struggle, to be good people, to fight against evil, to tell the truth, to detect lies and deceit, to resist, and to listen. These values are universal human values: times change, people don’t.”
Rapper DaBaby arrested for possession of loaded handgun:	Chart-topping rapper DaBaby has been arrested in  Los Angeles  for possession of a loaded and concealed gun. The rapper, whose real name is Jonathan Kirk, was arrested on the high-end shopping street Rodeo Drive after staff at Gucci called the police and reported that one of a group of men was carrying a gun in his waistband. Officers found a loaded 9mm pistol when they conducted a search of Kirk and his entourage. Kirk was briefly held on $35,000 bail but has since posted live studio footage from his Instagram account. He has become one of America’s most successful rappers since his breakthrough 2019 hit Suge, twice topping the US album charts and having a global hit with 2020 single Rockstar. He is nominated for four Grammy awards this year. In 2019, Kirk was found guilty of carrying a concealed weapon after a shooting incident in a Walmart store in North Carolina that left a 19-year-old man dead. Kirk said he was involved but was acting in self-defence. In January 2020, he was arrested and charged with robbery and battery following separate incidents. The battery charges were later dropped.
UK lockdowns fuel record year for home entertainment spending:	British consumers spent a record £9bn on entertainment last year as the pandemic fuelled a boom in the popularity of digital services such as Netflix, Amazon and  Spotify  while the public sought to alleviate lockdown boredom. Overall spending on entertainment, which covers digital and physical video, music and gaming including sales of CDs, DVDs and video games software, soared by 17% year-on-year in 2020 – the fastest annual rate in the 25 years the Entertainment Retailers Association (ERA) has been compiling figures. Frozen II was the best selling video, with Fifa 21 topping the game charts and Lewis Capaldi’s Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent the biggest album. The figures highlight how the pandemic has accelerated the pace of the shift in consumer habits away from physical products, with a record £7.8bn spent on digital-delivered services, accounting for 86% of total UK entertainment spend last year. Spending on digital video services, led by  Netflix , Disney+ and Amazon’s Prime Video, surged by 38% year-on-year to £2.9bn, by far the fastest-growing sector of the UK entertainment market. Last year proved the biggest ever for new UK subscribers to streaming services,  hitting 32m , more than double the number signed up to traditional pay-TV providers such as Sky, BT TV and Virgin Media. This week Netflix, the UK’s biggest streaming service with 13 million UK subscribers, raised its prices, with its most popular package increasing by £1 per month to £9.99. Disney’s Frozen II sold 973,000 copies including renting and buying or downloading a copy physically or digitally – as families sought to keep their children entertained while stuck at home. Overall, the physical and digital music market rose 6.8% to £1.5bn, with Lewis Capaldi producing  the most popular album of the year of the pandemic , with total sales of 455,900. The total digital and physical games market grew 14.5% to £4.2bn last year wit FIFA 21 shifting 2.18m copies. Music streaming  revenues leapt by more than 15% to £1.2bn as a rush of new subscribers to services such as Spotify, Apple Music and Amazon Music pushed the overall music market to £1.5bn – the highest level since 2006. Music streaming revenues are now bigger than the entire music market was worth as recently as 2016. Earlier this week the industry body the BPI revealed the  amount of music streamed last year rose 22%  last year to 139bn audio streams, up from 114bn in 2019. The trend was the same in gaming, by far the largest segment of the overall UK entertainment market, which saw a 16% rise in spend on mobile and streamed games to £3.6bn. “If there was ever a year in which we needed entertainment, it was 2020,” said Kim Bayley, the chief executive of the ERA. “The trend towards an increasingly digital entertainment market may be long established, but no one could have foreseen this dramatic leap as digital services filled the gap left by shuttered cinemas, concert halls and retail stores.” Last year, UK consumers spent almost £150m less on physical entertainment products, such as buying and renting DVDs and CDs. Total sales of physical entertainment products fell by 10.7% last year, from £1.4bn to £1.2bn. In just a decade the physicals entertainment market has shrunk by three-quarters, from £4.7bn in 2010. The closure of high street stores exacerbated the downward spiral of sales of most physical products last year. Sales of music CDs plummeted 28% to £156m while DVD and Blu-ray disc sales fell by a quarter to £355m. And the UK’s physical video rental market is edging closer to disappearing completely, falling 28% to just £16.9m. However, the lockdown proved to be a boon for the vinyl market, which enjoyed its  best year in decades  as fans deprived of going to gigs diverted their spare cash to their record collections. Sales of vinyl, which has seen a revival in recent years, rose 13% to £110m, and rather remarkably now accounts for 40% of the total £271m physical music market.Overall, the physical and digital music market rose 6.8% to £1.5bn.
'They adored each other': book casts new light on Francis Bacon's lover:	He has been portrayed as a heroic fighter pilot in the Battle of Britain, with a sadistic streak that bordered on the psychopathic, beating his lover  Francis Bacon  and once hurling him through a glass window. But new research paints another picture of Peter Lacy, revealing that he was never a fighter pilot and that, beyond the sexual violence, the relationship with Bacon was real love for both men. The Pulitzer prize-winning authors Mark Stevens and Annalyn Swan are publishing a major biography about one of the greatest artists of the 20th century. With the full cooperation of Bacon’s estate, they received access to archives and interviewed family and friends of the artist and his lovers, among others. Their research reveals Bacon as a man who pursued life’s excesses – from drink and drugs to promiscuity – while desperately longing for affectionate love and companionship, coming close to it with Lacy. In the book, the biographers write: “Lacy has usually been assigned a devilish supporting role in Bacon’s life, described as a dashing fighter pilot during the Battle of Britain and a sexual monster in the bedroom. In fact, Lacy was never a fighter pilot, and he passionately loved Bacon. He became violent when he drank, but Bacon also intentionally provoked him, finding the eruption of his demon-riddled soul inexpressibly moving.” Stevens told the Guardian the two authors had fleshed out Lacy’s character, showing him as a “genial and reserved” man who adored Bacon: “Lacy appears as a real person for the first time. This was not simply a passionate, brief S&M fling. It was … the most important relationship in each man’s life. “There’s no doubt Lacy was ‘the love of Francis’s life’, as Bacon’s late sister Ianthe and others put it to us. We looked into Lacy’s life, speaking to his two nephews, Father David Lacy and Gerald Towell. Both were utterly aghast at the cruel and caricatural way Lacy has been typically presented – sadistic fighter pilot and drunk, etc … “Yes, Bacon and Lacy had brutal sex. There was S&M, and they were not cuddly guys, but the real news is that they absolutely adored each other from beginning to end, until Lacy’s death in 1962. That’s new. They couldn’t live together very well. They were often separated. They never got over each other.” Stevens and Swan, a husband-and-wife partnership who have written extensively about the arts, won the 2005 Pulitzer for biography for De Kooning: An American Master, a study of the Dutch-American artist Willem de Kooning. Their forthcoming biography, Francis Bacon: Revelations, offers fresh insights into Lacy and the artist’s other lovers, many of whom Bacon depicted as tormented and twisting figures in masterpieces that captured the pain and loneliness of human existence. In  Study for Three Heads ,  a 1962 triptych painted shortly after Lacy’s death, Bacon showed himself as a grief-stricken man between two portraits of his lover. Their relationship spanned most of the 1950s, on and off. The biographers found it went beyond “pain and rage” to “intimacy and reconciliation”. They traced parallels between the two men, showing that Bacon had never before fallen passionately in love with someone as close to his own age and from a similar social background and he would never do so again. Both men came from wealthy Midlands families with Irish links and whose fathers condemned homosexuality. Swan said: “It’s really interesting that the love of Bacon’s life came from his own social and monied background, someone who also had a thwarted childhood and faced family and class disdain for homosexuality. In every way, Lacy stands out as the true – if tortured – match for Bacon.” The biography shows that, during the war, Lacy was an aircraft mechanic and then a pilot: “He did not see action, but delivered bombers to distant theatres of the war.” It portrays him as a man who loved playing jazz piano, particularly Fats Waller, dabbling at being a stockbroker and driving stylish cars. In 1948, he inherited a significant fortune from his stockbroker father, only to lose it through a failed investment. Stevens said: “Not long before his death, Lacy confessed his ‘extraordinary love’ for Bacon to a stranger in Spain in an astonishing letter in the Tate that has never been thoroughly analysed.” Responding to the latest research, Barry Joule – Bacon’s friend who  gave the Tate  about 1,200 sketches from Bacon’s studio in 2004 – showed the Guardian a previously unpublished photograph he took in 1986 of Bacon next to a “paint-smeared mid-1950s photograph of Lacy in suit and tie” that he had kept all those years. Joule recalled that it was just after Mike Tyson had won the boxing world championship: “Francis became hugely attracted to Tyson, collecting photos of the boxer … We were talking about violent sports … Then our conversation shifted to violence in a lover’s bed … My question posed: ‘Was Peter Lacy really a violent man as the press had painted him?’ He readily answered me: ‘No, Peter was never a violent man in the sense that I have known some real hard men, as I suspect the boxer must be … But what couple, when they’ve been together long enough, don’t fight and quarrel? In fact compared to  moi  – Peter was a real pussycat.’ “There was a long pause as Francis looked down, tears welling up … He poignantly added, whilst stabbing at the Lacy photograph so hard it fell over with a loud clack, ‘you know, Joule, I really did love that man’.” Francis Bacon: Revelations is published by William Collins on 21 January .
War of the words: HG Wells coin also features false quote:	It is a mystery that HG Wells’s characters would have been quick to leap on, but one that would doubtless have enraged the fastidious Wells himself: what is the origin of the quote chosen by the Royal Mint and attributed to him on the new Wells £2 coin? Intended to mark 75 years since the death of the author, the coin  has already been criticised  for depicting the “monstrous tripod” featured in The War of the Worlds with a fourth leg, and for giving his Invisible Man a top hat, which the character never wore. Then the Wells expert Prof Simon James spotted the quote chosen for the edge of the coin: “Good books are warehouses of ideas.” James and his fellow academic Adam Roberts, a vice-president of the Wells Society, could source no such quote in Wells’s writing – although it is credited to him on various inspirational quote websites. “Wells is one of those authors who is often given as the author of misattributed or invented quotations on the internet – there’s a notorious one about seeing a human being riding a bicycle for which neither I nor any other Wells scholar has been able to identify a source,” said James. “Surely the Royal Mint hasn’t just plucked a quotation off the net without checking the source … has it?” Author Eleanor Fitzsimons solved the mystery. She tried searching Wells’s writing for a quote with “warehouses” in it, and found an approximation in his obscure work  Select Conversations With an Uncle (Now Extinct) and Two Other Reminiscences . That quote, however, is not what appears on the coin: it reads, “Good books are the warehouses of ideals.” “I absolutely love solving literary mysteries,” said Fitzsimons, whose biography The Life and Loves of E Nesbit features an appearance from Wells; Nesbit taught her fellow author how to play badminton, and he seduced her daughter. Unfortunately for the Royal Mint, not only is the Wells quotation inaccurate, the actual sentiments expressed are likely to be far from what the author intended. The words are spoken by a character who believes that ideals should be hidden away in books, and goes on to say that “there is a time for ideals, and a time when they are better out of the way”. “The correct quotation is not Wells speaking in his own voice, but in the voice of a character whose opinion is definitely not always to be trusted. English academics exhort our students to check the original source when they can – what a shame the Royal Mint didn’t think to do so before producing all these coins with a letter missing,” said James, adding that Wells had an antipathy to 19th-century notions of high culture: “He would have been all for people reading The Republic or The Origin of Species or Wells’s own work … [but] the notion of ‘books are wonderful’ would make his blood boil.” The error echoes a previous literary mistake by the Royal Mint: the £10 Jane Austen bank note was printed with the quote, “I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading!” – a line spoken not by Austen but by her character Caroline Bingley, who has no interest in books at all. Asked about the source of its quotation, the Royal Mint told the Guardian that “Good books are the warehouses of ideas” was “widely associated with HG Wells”. Its four-legged tripod, meanwhile, is “an interpretation of the various machines in War of the Worlds”, and the invisible man is “wearing a Victorian top hat to signify the era”. It added that all themes considered for Royal Mint coins go through a planning and design selection process governed by an independent panel known as the Royal Mint Advisory Committee, which includes experts in art, heraldry, typography, sculpture, history and numismatics. It did not mention that any literary experts had been consulted.
Indie bookshops defy Covid to record highest numbers for seven years:	Jane James was a freelance bookkeeper until the pandemic hit and most of her business disappeared. Rather than waiting for it to trickle back, she decided to embark on a dream she’d held for more than a decade and open her own independent bookshop in Thetford, Norfolk. She’s not the only one. Last year might have seemed like a strange time to launch a new business, but according to figures from the Booksellers Association, more than 50 new bookshops were opened in 2020, taking the body’s independent bookshop membership to 967 shops in the UK and Ireland. This is up from  890 shops in 2019 , 883 in 2018 and 868 in 2017.  The latter figure marked the end of a decline  that started in 1995, when 1,894 indie bookshops were recorded. “It is extraordinary. Can you imagine, if you’ve been planning to open a bookshop for a year and then you open it into this pandemic?” said BA managing director Meryl Halls. “I’m wondering if the opening of bookshops by new entrants will be quite a thing in 2021, because there are so many people who are taking stock of their lives in the pandemic. Running a bookshop has always been an attractive proposition for a certain kind of person, so I do think that people who are looking to change their life might try to make it work.” However, there is a more complicated picture behind that figure. While 50 new bookshops opened in the UK and  Ireland  in 2020, 44 closed their doors – around 5% of the 890 shops recorded in 2019. The rest of the net increase is due to an influx of existing shops joining the BA for the first time, probably in order to get support during the pandemic. But 967 is the highest number of independent bookshops recorded since 2013. “It has been an incredibly difficult year for booksellers, and the high street as a whole, so it is fantastic to see the number of independent bookshops in the UK and Ireland increase for a fourth consecutive year,” said Halls. For James, who opened Thetford’s Not Just Books in October, it’s been a “rapid learning curve”. Her first month saw sales that exceeded her expectations, as locals rushed to embrace the shop. November was a “mixed bag”, as non-essential retailers closed their doors, and then she “threw everything” at the shop in the run-up to Christmas. She has now closed again and is isolating with her family after her husband tested positive for Covid. “We are pressing pause at the moment, which is a shame,” she said. Julie Richardson signed the lease for her shop, Ginger and Pickles children’s bookshop in Edinburgh, as the UK headed into its first lockdown. She had wanted to open a bookshop for about 30 years, and when the shop under her flat came up for rent, she couldn’t resist. She refitted it herself, using furniture from her flat,and opened at the end of the summer. “There were many times I had thought this was a bad idea given the current situation,” she said. But customers have loved it: “I am fortunate to live and work in a neighbourhood where the residents really like to shop locally. I have also had so many people tell me that they are so happy to find a bookshop solely dedicated to children and teens. I love books and I think it is so important for young people to read.” Bear Bookshop, another children’s bookshop, was opened by English teacher Jenny McCann in Bearwood, West Midlands, just as the November lockdown ended. “I’ve always dreamed of having my own bookshop. I was on maternity leave and during a night feed saw someone had tweeted that their own bookshop was about to open. I had a moment of absolute clarity that this was what I wanted to do,” McCann said. “When we did finally open, I was overwhelmed by how many people walked in and said, ‘I’m so glad you’re here.’” Pandemic restrictions mean she’s been able to trade for only one month. “I had so many events planned that we can’t do now, which has been disappointing and frustrating,” she said.  But sales in December were strong and McCann remains positive. “There was a moment early in the pandemic where I wondered if this was a terrible idea, but I think we need these things more than ever now,” she said. “Leaving an established career to open your own business is always an act of optimism. I’ve always been a very optimistic person. Last year was definitely a test, but I remain hopeful.” At the BA, Halls believes that the shuttering of high streets around the country brought home to many consumers the importance of their local high street. “We’ve campaigned for years about the high street being in jeopardy, and you could not have designed an experiment to illustrate the point better than Covid did,” she said.  While many booksellers adapted to the pandemic by establishing websites, offering click-and-collect services and sending staff out to hand deliver books, many shops, including chains Waterstones and Blackwell’s, have had to stop even click-and-collect due to the third lockdown. Halls predicted 2021 would be challenging. “We’ve not seen mass closures yet because shops have all been fighting for survival. Mainly, they’ve survived. I would like to think that our numbers might hold steady for 2021. But I’m anticipating that we’re going to lose a slew of businesses that are, maybe for other reasons, feeling unviable,” said Halls. “However, 2020 proved the resilience, resourcefulness and dedication of booksellers. We will do everything we can to support them as they look ahead and plan for a post-pandemic future.” This article was amended on 8 January 2021, to correct the number of independent bookshops that closed in 2020. 
Top 10 most dislikable characters in fiction:	A t reader events to promote my novels, I find that one question crops up more often than any other: ‘Why do you write such dislikable characters?’ Well, I usually reply, swallowing my defensiveness, don’t all novelists write characters who are dislikable to  someone , given that likability is entirely subjective? If niceness is a spectrum, then we’re all on it, for better or worse. Take Kit and Melia Roper in  The Other Passenger . The debt-ridden millennial friends of wealthy Gen Xers Jamie and Clare, they are envious of the older couple’s lifestyle and prepared to take all sorts of risks to raise their own status. You might be sympathetic to their plight (I know I am) or you might take a harder line, but chances are your view on their likability is far more to do with their personalities than their social standing – or even their criminal actions. In other words, dislikable is not the same as irredeemable, and for this reason, there is no place on my list for any love-to-hate Tom Ripleys or morbidly mesmerising Humbert Humberts. With the exception perhaps of Uriah Heep, there’s no reason to call the authorities on any of my top 10. 1. Clara Stackhouse in  The Blunderer by Patricia Highsmith In a chilling novel of uxoricide, it’s the killjoy not the killer who finds herself qualifying for this list. Clara is the beautiful but neurotic wife of the well-heeled and good-natured lawyer Walter Stackhouse. Determined to make his life a misery, she isolates him from his friends, disapproves of his hard drinking (always a sign of a stick-in-the-mud in a Highsmith novel), refuses to have children (perfectly laudable now, not so much in 1950s American suburbia) and is even hard-hearted towards her own mother. Modern readers might forgive her on account of her devotion to her pet dog Jeff, but it’s clear Highsmith did not. 2. Kenneth Widmerpool in  A Dance to the Music of Time by Anthony Powell Secretive, egotistical and with an “exotic drabness” about him, Kenneth Widmerpool is subjected to an extended rise and fall across the 12-volume series. Early on, Powell alerts us to one of the key characteristics of the truly repellent: small-mindedness. “It doesn’t do to read too much,” Widmerpool warns. “You get to look at life with a false perspective.” And we get to look at  him  as a fish – he has a “piscine” demeanour, Powell tells us, which should put an end to any rogue positive vibes we feel towards him. 3. The other children in  Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl One way of signalling who your hero is in a children’s book is to make every other child deeply detestable. The Oompa Loompas explain far better than I can the vices of Charlie’s rivals: Veruca Salt is “the little brute”; Augustus Gloop is “unutterably vile”; and Violet Beauregarde is “some repulsive little bum”. Square-eyed Mike Teavee is the least offensive, so we’ll be kind and spare him. 4. Uriah Heep in  David Copperfield by Charles Dickens “Too humble to be called a friend”, the obsequious, clammy-palmed Uriah Heep is one of the few characters in literature whose name instantly evokes a whole personality type. We’ve all encountered a Uriah Heep – though hopefully recognisable for his or her sycophancy rather than any true malice. Since this is Dickens, the hateful get their just deserts and Heep is last seen in jail, awaiting transportation overseas. 5. Lady Brenda Last in  A Handful of Dust by Evelyn Waugh I still remember the exact moment when reading Waugh’s classic as a teenager that I twigged that the blithe-spirited Lady Brenda was in fact repugnant. On hearing of the death of John, she assumes it is her lover and is distraught, but on clarification that the John in question is in fact her young son, she responds, “Oh, thank God.” Brenda belongs to a particularly dismaying subset of dislikables that also includes The Great Gatsby’s Daisy Buchanan: only after you’re charmed into submission by their  joie de vivre  is the true emptiness of their souls revealed. 6. Mildred Rogers in  Of Human Bondage by W Somerset Maugham The vapid and self-centred Mildred downgrades Philip’s life single-handed in Maugham’s semi-autobiographical masterpiece. How the reader rejoices when this soul-sucker is sidelined in favour of kindly Norah! Then, just as Philip is set to salvage something of his pride – and his income – she reappears, and the whole sad dance starts over. Maugham leaves her eventual fate open, but a more overtly bleak option is offered in the 1934 movie, in which a young Bette Davis nails every note of her callousness and self-pity. 7. Edward Casaubon in  Middlemarch by George Eliot Long before the notion of a feminist reading of the classics entered my young head, I had identified Edward Casaubon as a threat to female ambition. A pompous, dusty pedant, he was the 19th-century ancestor of the men I met in my first job, who called young women “popsies” and cut us out of the interesting projects. So jealous of his young wife Dorothea that he even plots posthumous revenge on her, Casaubon is as mean spirited as he is tedious. What’s not to dislike? 8. Alistair Robertson in  The Cry by Helen FitzGerald A PR man whose job is to “quash shitshows”, Alistair possesses a ruthlessness that extends all too smoothly to family matters, cleverly exposed in the narratives of his ex-wife Alexandra and new younger model Joanna. I love FitzGerald’s willingness to embrace the ignoble in her characters. When we met, I asked her about the pressure to write likable characters, and she said, “I don’t think I’ve ever written one. I’m not sure I’ve ever  met  one.” 9. Sherman McCoy in  The Bonfire of the Vanities by Tom Wolfe I’m veering into love-to-hate territory here on account of remembering the 80s firsthand, but I’m confident younger readers will loathe Sherman McCoy unreservedly. He’s a bond trader who lives on Park Avenue, a self-styled Master of the Universe who is “proud of his chin” and has, by his own admission, “no conscience”. Following an unfortunate automobile incident in the Bronx involving his mistress Maria, Sherman finds himself on the highway to Comeuppance – and no one describes that particular journey quite so rhapsodically as Wolfe. 10. Topher St Clair-Bridges/Tiger-Blue Esposito in  One by One by Ruth Ware In Ware’s wonderfully atmospheric locked-room mystery, set in a snowed-in Alpine cabin, she assembles a cast of young tech types hoping to become very rich indeed thanks to a buyout offer. If that isn’t enough in itself to rouse your dislike, then the names of the shareholders should tip us off as to who might irritate in the pages ahead, Topher and Tiger-Blue among them. You can almost taste the author’s relish as she decides which of these entitled horrors to dispatch first. The Other Passenger by Louise Candlish is out now in paperback (Simon & Schuster). To order a copy,  go to guardianbookshop.com .
Nicki Minaj to pay $450,000 to Tracy Chapman for copyright suit:	Nicki Minaj  has agreed to pay $450,000 to Tracy Chapman over a copyright infringement dispute. The rapper had been set for trial after the singer sued her for using a sample of 1988 song Baby Can I Hold You in her track Sorry, a collaboration with Nas which was never officially released but was played on New York radio station Hot 97. Court documents have now revealed that late last month, an out of court settlement was made instead. Minaj and her reps had approached Chapman to use a sample for inclusion on the album Queen but their request was rejected. Chapman is reportedly on a “do not sample” list of artists who do not give the rights to use their work. “I’m torn, y’all help,” Minaj tweeted in 2018. “Tracy Chapman, can you please hit me. omg for the love of #Queen.” In a since-deleted tweet, she also claimed to have “no clue” that the song sampled Chapman. She had also openly considered delaying the album to wait for a response. “I am glad to have this matter resolved and grateful for this legal outcome which affirms that artists’ rights are protected by law and should be respected by other artists,” Chapman said in a statement. “I was asked in this situation numerous times for permission to use my song; in each instance, politely and in a timely manner, I unequivocally said no. Apparently Ms Minaj chose not to hear and used my composition despite my clear and express intentions.” Minaj has yet to make a comment.
Strictly sparkle delivered direct to your ears – podcasts of the week:	How Did We Get Here? Claudia Winkleman and psychologist Dr Tanya Byron recently concluded the second series of their podcast, with another on the way. Focusing on aspects of parent-child relationships, Byron provides expert advice while Winkleman ties it all together with a light touch. With recent topics including a lifelong eating disorder and a man who believed he may be autistic, this is not casual doing-the-dishes listening. Rather, it’s an empathetic look at the complexities of life that is sure to appeal to fans of Esther Perel.  Hannah J Davies This City with Clara Amfo Clara Amfo’s warmth and friendliness radiate through her podcast as she chats with guests about their experiences of London. Whether it’s MNEK talking about being raised in Catford and absorbing his mum’s sense of glamour or Mark Ronson reminiscing about the not-very-mean streets of his manor, it’s always worth a listen. Nick Grimshaw is a particular delight as the two DJs giggle about his teenage years when he owned a silver knee-length puffer jacket and had big dreams of one day moving to London and working at Radio 1.  Hannah Verdier Chosen by Max Sanderson When the New York Times released  Caliphate  in 2018, it caused quite a stir. Here was a shining example of how to enhance impactful journalism with the powerful narrative potential of audio storytelling. Which is what makes the most recent episode – two years later – all the more disappointing. The original series focused on reporter Rukmini Callimachi’s journey into the heart of the Islamic State via a self-proclaimed former Isis fighter. And while the series managed to win many hearts – my own included – with compelling storytelling and immersive sound design, the NYT were recently  forced to admit to serious editorial failings  over the series’ main source, the supposed ex-Jihadi. These failings are addressed in the  most recent episode  as we hear Michael Barbaro (host of the NYT’s The Daily) chat with colleagues, including executive editor Dean Baquet, to go over some of the findings of an internal review that found the 2018 series failed to  “meet the standards for Times journalism” . I urge anybody who listened to the original series to listen. While much ground is covered in the episode, many questions still remain; is an extra episode and an editor’s note enough, or should the whole series be removed? And,  as   highlighted by NPR , was Michael Barbaro the right choice to host the  mea culpa  when he is  engaged to Caliphate’s executive producer , Lisa Tobin? The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have released  the first instalment of their Spotify podcast , and it’s a festive special featuring Elton John, tennis star Naomi Osaka, Tyler Perry, wellness icon Deepak Chopra and teenage activist Christina Adane. The pair kicked off the show with reference to the hardships of 2020 and a tribute to those who’ve helped us all get through it. “We also want to thank healthcare workers, frontline service workers, and so many others for their sacrifices,” said Harry. And a bit of positivity to the end the year was brought by Meghan, as she promised us that, ultimately, “love wins”. Why not try:  Fiasco  |  Holy Sh!t  |  Death of a Startlet
TV tonight: Spiral continues its final season:	Touted as the French answer to The Wire, this involved and slow-burning series has won a legion of fans for its intricate storylines and now reaches its final set of episodes. Following last week’s opening double bill, with the team assigned to the harrowing case of a murdered and unidentified Moroccan minor, they continue their investigation into the Paris neighbourhood of Barbès, where children are being exploited by gangs. Meanwhile, Laure (Caroline Proust) makes a secret visit to Gilou (Thierry Godard).  Ammar Kalia Now that all the competitors have had their solo shot in the spotlight, things are getting serious … or at least as serious as The Masked Singer ever gets, considering that the energised staging and eye-popping costumes give this OTT karaoke contest the slightly unhinged feel of a throbbing cheese dream.  Graeme Virtue The long-running hospital drama has a different tone as its patient storylines run against the backdrop of coronavirus. Some things don’t change: Amanda Mealing owns the show as badass A&E boss Connie Beauchamp, who’s keeping the shattered and grieving department going after Noel’s death.  Hannah Verdier Week two of the perpetually awkward but resilient talent show, and we’re still in the phase of the series that’s always worked best: the blind auditions. Tom Jones, Olly Murs,  Will.i.am  and Anne-Marie are the judges, hovering over their magic buttons and wondering who’s singing behind them.  Jack Seale This week’s episode of Cribs: Royal Edition peeks inside Balmoral. We learn from historian Jonathan Foyle that it is considered an “architectural absurdity” owing to its mix of chateau and fortress styles – ones that allow the palace to remain a refuge from prying eyes.  AK Chaser Paul Sinha makes the move to gameshow host in this new format, pitting captains Fay Ripley and Rob Beckett and their teams against each other in a battle to find out who has the most TV trivia knowledge. Expect questions on everything from Bake Off to Strictly Come Dancing.  AK Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy, 9.30pm, BBC Two The late John le Carré’s masterpiece gets a top-class remake from Tomas Alfredson. Cold war Britain is atmospherically evoked in all its world-weary, down-at-heel austerity as old-school spy George Smiley (Gary Oldman) negotiates a complex plot of double- and triple-cross.  Paul Howlett Biathlon: The World Cup 11.45am, Eurosport 2.  Featuring the women’s pursuit event, from Oberhof, Germany. Premiership Rugby Union: Exeter Chiefs v Bristol Bears 1.15pm, BT Sport 2.  Followed by Northampton Saints v Leicester Tigers at 4.15pm.  FA Cup Football: Arsenal v Newcastle United 5.20pm, BBC One.  Action from the third round.
Top 10 books about the unknowable:	E arly in every writer’s apprenticeship we’re likely to encounter the advice to “write what you know”. It’s a cliche, but like most, one with a kernel of truth, nodding as it does to the  author ity implicit in author and reminding us of our contract with readers; they give us their attention in return for some command, on our part, over our subject. One limitation of “write what you know”, however, is the tendency to interpret what we know narrowly as what we’ve experienced, rather than what we’ve learned or researched. But a little further along in our writing education, we’re liable to encounter a refinement of the advice, that “we write  to  know”, reflecting every writer’s intuition that writing is a mode of thinking, of inquiry, and that we often recognise we’ve finished revising a story when we finally understand it or know it. My new novel,  A Lie Someone Told You About Yourself , features a writer (and teacher of writing) as a protagonist, a character very familiar with these distinctions, but also in his personal life newly confronting the limitations of what any of us can know, in the form of uncertain prenatal test results. If “write what you know” implies we begin from knowledge, and “write to know” suggests we write towards it, my protagonist (and I) are glimpsing a third mode of writing in which we address the unknowable. Chekhov’s dictum – “The role of the artist is to ask questions, not answer them” – might apply here, but sometimes that role goes further, to include the asking of  unanswerable  questions and the dramatization of the state of uncertainty that results. This might seem to break that contract with the reader noted above, but such works rather that frustrating readers might seek to offer them some company or even solace in facing uncertainty in their own lives (something, of course, which has seemed ever more urgent and widespread in the last year). Here then are 10 books that each in their various ways face the unknown, less to dispel mystery than to accept it. The kind of books both I (and my character) cherish. 1.  10:04 by Ben Lerner Already a classic of the new mode of autofiction, Lerner’s by turns playful and mournful novel filters the many uncertainties of its protagonist (his health, his prospective fatherhood, the future), through the uncertainties of the form. The fact that the book’s protagonist is a writer who shares the same name as his author alerts us to the possibility that this might be fact or fiction and ensures that the flickering uncertainties of the character’s life ramify for the reader. 2.  The Friend by Sigrid Nunez Another book that seems to hover in the uncertain space between memoir and fiction. In this case the formal uncertainty reflects on, most obviously, the unknowability of a friend’s suicide, but also more subtly on the status of the friendship itself and the essential unknowability of even those we love – whether human or animal (in the form of a great dane called Apollo). 3.  Trust Exercise by Susan Choi Less auto- than meta-fiction, perhaps, Choi offers competing versions of a teenage trauma to reflect on the uncertainties of storytelling, of memory, and the gaps between competing points of view in a charged #MeToo context. 4.  When We Were Orphans by Kazuo Ishiguro Many writers – Paul Auster, Roberto Bolaño, Thomas Pynchon – have drawn on the tropes of the detective novel to probe the unknown and subvert the idea of a solution to every mystery. But Ishiguro’s take on the gentleman detective (while not as well known as his reimagining of the below-stairs novel in The Remains of the Day) gets my vote for its phantasmagoric re-imagining of 1930s Shanghai. 5.  Ficciones by Jorge Luis Borges The South American master of paradox had his own way with detective fiction in stories such as Death and the Compass but his flair for the unknowable may be most famously exemplified by The Library of Babel, which imagines a vast collection of all possible books – most of them nonsensical or incomprehensible – in which knowledge is lost. My personal favourite, though, is the last story in this famous collection, The South, a seemingly more conventional story poised on the knife edge of possibility (appropriately since it ends in a duel). Borges described it as “perhaps my best story” and noted cryptically “it can be read as a direct narrative of novelistic events, and also in another way”. 6.  Evening’s Empire by Zachary Lazar True crime, like detective fiction, often promises to dispel mystery, but can sometimes only reveal its depths. Lazar’s book is a pensive, mournful investigation into his own father’s murder at the hands of the mob when the author was a child, complete with what he describes as “conjurings” – imagined scenes that fill the gaps the facts leave behind, while simultaneously reminding us of their absence. 7.  Writing to Save a Life by John Edgar Wideman Another book that asks how to write nonfiction when the facts are unknown, and another centred on a father and son. But this is a book unlike any other, by a doyen of African American writers. Wideman offers a deeply personal inquiry into the life and death of Louis Till – father of Emmett Till, the victim of the notorious lynching in 1955 – who was himself executed by the US army during the second world war. Wideman stares down the gaps in the military court records, reading and writing between the lines to reveal the fatal uncertainties of black life. 8.  The Plot Against America by Philip Roth Alternate or counter-factual history is a genre designed to plumb the unknown and several writers (Philip K Dick in The Man in the High Castle, notably) have employed the form to provocative effect. Roth’s version, which imagines a fascist 1930s US under a President Charles Lindbergh seemed an allegory of the Bush years on its initial publication, and more latterly of the Trump regime, suggesting how such works always ask us to suspend our disbelief between the known and the unknown, the now and the  un then. 9.  The Rings of Saturn by WG Sebald A walk though the Suffolk countryside becomes the occasion for a series of spiralling, digressions part fact, part fiction – a book of circles without centre. As Sebald said himself: “Fiction writing, which does not acknowledge the uncertainty of the narrator himself, is a form of imposture which I find very, very difficult to take.” 10.  Hamlet by William Shakespeare This list wouldn’t be complete without the OG of uncertainty. “To be or not to be” may be our most famous expression of ambivalence, but it’s whether “to believe or not believe” his father’s ghost that initiates Hamlet’s drama, and whether “to act or not to act” in his revenge that underpins its moral stakes. Hamlet’s gnawing dilemma is that he can’t know the rightness or otherwise of his actions. The result is a play about the unknowability of our own souls. A Lie Someone Told You About Yourself by Peter Ho Davies is published by Hodder & Stoughton. To order a copy,  go to guardianbookshop.com .
Classical highlights: concerts and opera to watch in January:	The annual boundary-crossing weekend that takes the baroque repertory into new territory necessarily goes online this year. There’s a guitar and lute recital by Sean Shibe to begin, an evening of synthesiser-Bach from Art of Moog, “Cubaroque” from tenor Nicholas Mulroy with theorbist Elizabeth Kenny and guitarist Toby Carr, and “FolkBaroque” from soprano Lucy Crowe and La Nuova Musica. •   From 7 to 10 January (£) and then on demand until 31 March. For anyone with remaining vestiges of festive spirit – or who needs to come up with a belated Christmas gift – the Ryedale festival and Tidze have collaborated on 12 streamed programmes of seasonal choral music. All were recorded at Yorkshire’s Castle Howard; Echo Vocal Ensemble, the Gesualdo Six and the Swan Consort are the vocal groups taking part. •   Available on demand (£) until 31 January . Though its  autumn tour of staged song cycles by Britten, Tippett and Shostakovich  had to be cut short, ETO did get a chance to record their productions (at Hackney Empire) before the November lockdown. The four-part series is being released in weekly instalments throughout January; works performed include Britten’s Holy Sonnets of John Donne and The Poet’s Echo, Tippett’s Boyhood’s End, and Shostakovich’s Poems of Marina Tsvetaeva. •   Each episode available on demand for seven days from release. The Wigmore Hall plans to continue with as much of its new-year programme as practicable, all livestreamed on its website and YouTube. Among the events announced so far are a day devoted to the music of Morton Feldman, performed by Apartment House (9 January), a recital by tenor Ben Johnson (12 January), a programme by the Britten Sinfonia that includes music by Oliver Knussen and Jürg Frey (13 January), and a violin-and-piano recital by Alina Ibragimova and Cédric Tiberghien (14 January). •   All concerts available on demand for 30 days after the performance . The Orchestra of the Swan weaves an almost all-French programme around the life and writings of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, author of The Little Prince. The programme includes music by Ravel, Debussy, Saint-Saëns and Satie, and there’s some Piazzolla too, making a connection with Saint-Exupéry’s exploits in Patagonia. •   Available on demand (£) from 11 January until 9 February . Jonathan Bloxham takes over the baton for the third programme in the Hallé’s winter season. The poet laureate, Simon Armitage, reads two of his works, and there’s the world premiere of Hannah Kendall’s Where is the Chariot of Fire? together with Copland’s Quiet City, Ravel’s Mother Goose, and Glazunov’s Saxophone Concerto, with Jess Gillam as soloist. •   Streamed from Hallé St Peter’s, Manchester, 14 January (£) and   available   on demand until 14 April . There’s an eclectic range of repertoire in the SCO’s streamed concerts this month – chamber music by Dvořák, Krása, Haas and Martinů, Boulogne, Handel and Mozart with soprano Katie Bray, Hasse, Haydn, Bruch and Bottesini with the orchestra’s principal conductor Maxim Emelyanychev, and Sibelius and Tüür from violinist Pekka Kuusisto. •   Streamed on demand on 14, 21, 28 and 29 January, and each available for a month afterwards . The Bournemouth orchestra continues its livestreamed concerts with Beethoven’s Eroica Symphony. Karl-Heinz Steffens is the conductor, and he prefaces the symphony with the suite from Fauré’s incidental music to Pelléas et Mélisande. •   Streamed live from The Lighthouse, Poole, 20 January (£), and available on demand until 19 February . The BBCSSO launches its series of studio concerts with a portrait of composer-clarinettist Mark Simpson; he is the soloist in his own clarinet concerto, while his wind-ensemble piece Geysir is conducted by Ryan Wigglesworth. In the second concert, conducted by Ben Gernon, Steven Osborne is the soloist in Mozart’s A major Piano Concerto K414, alongside symphonies by Haydn and Mozart. •  Broadcast live on Radio 3 from City Halls, Glasgow,  21 January  and  28 January , and each available on BBC Sounds for 30 days afterwards. With its home at the Barbican currently closed, the LSO is rehearsing and recording close by at LSO St Luke’s. The first programme recorded there is conducted by Simon Rattle and pairs Berg and Schubert; Leonidas Kavakos is the soloist in Berg’s Violin Concerto, and Rattle conducts Schubert’s Ninth Symphony, the “Great C major”. •   Streamed on 21 January, and available free on demand until 28 January .
TV tonight: witches and vampires explore Elizabethan London:	This gothic supernatural drama, adapted from Deborah Harkness’s bestselling All Souls books, returns for a second season. Diana (Teresa Palmer), a reluctant witch, is still trying to come to terms with her powers, with the help of Matthew (Matthew Goode), a vampire; they have travelled back in time secretly to make their home in Elizabethan London. The pair are on the hunt for the Book of Life, but soon Matthew’s boss catches up with them and tries to convince him to go back to his job: spying for the Queen.  Ammar Kalia The pier-based restaurateurs are back for a new series of their cooking extravaganza. They rope the melancholic comedian Jack Dee into the kitchen – it was filmed before Covid – bringing back memories from his childhood camping holidays in Brittany with a rotisserie chicken recipe.  AK After three series of her cheery Secret Scotland travelogue, Calman expands her sightseeing remit to the rest of the UK. The first stop on her cute caravanette tour is the picturesque south-west of England, where highlights include a time-warp village and a gnome sanctuary.  Graeme Virtue A veteran-funded labour of love, this documentary sends members of the US Air Force’s 93rd Bomb Group back to the Norfolk airfield from which they launched crucial raids on Germany in 1943. They reminisce about their time there, while taking care to ensure that the legacy of the base is maintained.  Jack Seale If watching festive telly once the season is over is not in your rule book, look away now, because the Goggleboxers are here to pick over the leftovers of the Christmas viewing carcass. But if you missed all the seasonal specials, settle in for the usual genius commentary.  Hannah Verdier Following the New Year’s Eve special, the 10th season of this droll sitcom begins. Lee (Lee Mack) and Lucy (Sally Bretton) mistakenly receive a package meant for their neighbour; once Lee realises it is an embarrassingly personal item, the race is on to return the compromising missive.  AK The Wife (Björn Runge, 2017), 9pm, BBC Two Björn Runge’s darkly humorous drama boasts a riveting performance by Glenn Close as Joan Castleford, a loyal wife and, as she puts it, “kingmaker” to her novelist husband, Joseph (Jonathan Pryce). As he basks in the glory of a Nobel prize win, her resentment rises slowly to the boil.  Paul Howlett Basketball: Cheshire Phoenix v Manchester Giants  4.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Worcester Wolves v Glasgow Rocks is at 7pm on Sky Sports Arena. FA Cup football: Aston Villa v Liverpool  7pm, BT Sport 1. A third-round clash from Villa Park. Rugby union: Bath v Wasps  7pm, BT Sport 2. A Premiership match from the Recreation Ground.
Hottest front-room seats: the best theatre and dance to watch online:	The Royal Court has released a new audio version of Sabrina Mahfouz’s poetic, political lecture-cum-gig, first staged at its Theatre Upstairs in 2019. It explores – as the first of its several songs observes – the way water and imperialism have shaped “landscapes, lives, legacies”. Mahfouz is a compelling host and keeps the fact-filled story flowing, switching from personal to global perspectives, for this hourlong gig, directed by Stef O’Driscoll.  Listen until 30 January . Even with Louis Armstrong playing Bottom, a jazz musical with a cast of 150 performers riffing on A Midsummer Night’s Dream was a $2m flop when it opened on Broadway in 1939. A new work-in-progress concert performance from the RSC, with London’s Young Vic and New York’s Theatre for a New Audience, brings back music from Gilbert Seldes and Erik Charell’s original show. It’s presented by Young Vic artistic director Kwame Kwei-Armah and streamed live from the Royal Shakespeare theatre on 9 January.  Available on demand until 16 January . The mighty  Internationaal Theater Amsterdam  is one of the many major European venues to embrace streaming. Its online programme includes this award-winning musical adaptation of Édouard Louis’s autobiographical novel The End of Eddy, about growing up gay in a working-class village in France. Four young actors play all the characters in Eline Arbo’s production, which is  live-streamed on 22 January . Polly Lister plays umpteen parts in this spirited Hans Christian Andersen adaptation filmed at Scarborough’s Stephen Joseph theatre. Lister juggles the roles of a Sun Sorceress and the Snow Queen; best friends Gerda and Kai; a cigar-chewing granny who flirts with the audience like a panto dame; a scooter-riding reindeer; and a raven who specialises in scatological verse. Even if you’ve taken down your own decorations, it all adds up to a welcome burst of festive fun.  Available online until 31 January .  Read the full review . First staged at the Almeida in 2019, Shipwreck by Anne “Mr Burns” Washburn gave a sprawling account of modern-day American politics and the rise and potential fall of Trump. It was due to be staged at the Public theatre in New York in 2020 but was instead adapted by Saheem Ali as a  three-part audio play  in a co-production with Woolly Mammoth theatre company. Set during a getaway for a bunch of friends in upstate New York in 2017, it’s a knotty appraisal of an American moment that, strikingly, already feels like a vanishing era. As Norma Desmond insists, the pictures got small. But even streamed on a laptop, you won’t want to miss Leicester Curve’s concert version of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s musical, based on Billy Wilder’s classic movie. The tale of a flat tyre, a faded idol and a body in the pool is told with a 16-piece orchestra and stars Ria Jones and Danny Mac.  Until 17 January .  Read the full review . The Bush theatre reopened in December with this eagerly awaited new play by Travis Alabanza (Burgerz) but was forced to close just a week later when London was moved into tier 3. A film of Debbie Hannan’s production, in which Reece Lyons overflows with emotions while trapped inside a bathroom, can be seen online 18-23 January.  Read the full review . The Southbank Centre’s fifth festival celebrating disability arts goes digital with a range of theatre and dance. Sophie Woolley’s filmed performance Augmented tells how she became a “deaf cyborg” with a cochlear implant; Ellen Renton’s multimedia show Within Sight looks at running, the Paralympics and “inspiration porn”; there’s a night with autistic drag queen Oozing Gloop; Aidan Moesby probes the connection between wellbeing and weather in the brilliantly named I Was Naked, Smelling of Rain; and in One Woman, Cheryl Martin uses binaural technology to reflect on depression.  13-17 January . Goggles and headphones at the ready! With theatres and swimming pools closed for many of us, here’s a show that combines both. It’s a 35-minute experience created by Silvia Mercuriali who intends to transform your home into “a poetic space where the taps are waterfalls and the bath a primordial broth from which anything can emerge”. You perform it yourself in the bathroom, following audio instructions.  Until 15 June . Talk about a space oddity. David Bowie and Enda Walsh’s sequel to The Man Who Fell to Earth landed in London in 2016, with Michael C Hall playing the existential extraterrestrial Thomas Newton. Featuring new and old songs by Bowie, it was stylishly staged by Ivo van Hove and his regular designer Jan Versweyveld at the pop-up King’s Cross theatre. A film of that production will be available to  stream on Dice  from 8-10 January to mark Bowie’s birthday and the fifth anniversary of his death. We are enjoying more theatre at home than ever before – and it doesn’t have to be a passive experience. Plenty of shows invite audience participation, such as this “cinematic theatre play” written by Thaddeus Phillips and designed by Steven Dufala. It revolves around a mysterious motel room and involves card tricks, number games and a spot of mind-reading.  Until 30 January .  Read the full review . Fancy a bit of lockdown sleuthing? This online  Sherlock Holmes whodunnit  is designed by Les Enfants Terribles and the virtual reality company LIVR to be an immersive alternative to traditional boardgames. You can play with your family or members of the public, and the experience features live performances and promises more than 100 clues to decipher as you investigate the murky deaths of the home secretary, the foreign secretary and the Lord Chamberlain. 27 January-17 February. The experience of black frontline workers during the Covid-19 crisis is brought to harrowing life in this series of short plays from Talawa theatre company, using verbatim interviews with teachers, train workers, hospital and supermarket staff. The first two films are  available now . Further episodes follow in January and March.  Read the full review . After the success of its weekly Thursday night streams during lockdown, the NT has launched a  catalogue of past hits  online. You can either become a subscriber, or pay per play. Titles include classics such as Phèdre with Helen Mirren, Amadeus with Lucian Msamati and the Donmar’s Coriolanus with Tom Hiddleston as well as new writing including Lucy Kirkwood’s Mosquitoes and Shahid Hadeem’s Dara. New plays are added to the collection each month. The National’s 2020 panto,  Dick Whittington , will be available from 11 January for six weeks. The Unicorn and Filskit Theatre have created a new online version of their superb production about penguin love in a cold climate. Narrated by Madeline Appiah for an audience of two- to five-year-olds, it’s the tale of an Emperor penguin raising a chick and features imaginative animated surprises. Available to watch  on the Guardian website  until 13 February. Heidi Schreck’s phenomenal Broadway show has received  five-star reviews  from Guardian critics on both sides of the Atlantic. Now available to stream  from Amazon , it charts what the supreme law of the US has meant to generations of women, as Schreck recreates the debating competitions she took part in as a teenager. Directed by Marielle Heller, it’s shatteringly funny, deeply disturbing yet imbued with optimism. What does it mean to stage a play in an empty theatre, no matter how many are watching on Zoom? The Old Vic’s stream of Faith Healer – with the divine cast of Michael Sheen, Indira Varma and David Threlfall – begins by revealing rows of unfilled seats. Director Matthew Warchus accentuates the emptiness to bring out elements of Brian Friel’s four monologues, shared by three characters who colour in or contradict each other’s stories. It’s a spellbinding evening. The Old Vic’s recorded performance is available to watch from  20-22 January , and its equally impressive production of Duncan Macmillan’s Lungs, starring Matt Smith and Claire Foy, can be seen from  27-29 January . Mary Prince, a West Indian slave who became an abolitionist, was the first black woman to publish an account of her life in Britain. Her life is explored through music, song, drumming and dance in this show by Kuumba Nia Arts and Unlock the Chains Collective,  available until 12 January . It’s one of the winter offerings from Oxford’s  Old Fire Station , which also include Mike Bartlett’s An Intervention starring the comedy duo Britney (Charly Clive and Ellen Robertson). Bartlett directs a rehearsed reading of his punchy political comedy, first staged in 2014 and now updated. As a tribute to the acclaimed disabled dancer  David Toole , who died in October, the physical theatre company DV8 have shared their multi-award-winning 2004 film The Cost of Living  online . Shot on location at a faded seaside resort in Norfolk, it follows two street performers (Toole and Eddie Kay) in a portrait of friendship and prejudice, brimming with spellbinding images. Available on DV8’s Media Portal for a small membership fee. Unmissable. They’ve got magic to do, just for you: the original 1980 Broadway production of the Tony award-winning musical, with catchy songs by Stephen Schwartz and some glorious moves by Bob Fosse, is available to stream on  Amazon . Ben Vereen is the beguiling leading player of a troupe who may or may not lead the eponymous prince to self-immolation. It’s bizarre and frequently frustrating, but a fascinating chapter of Broadway history. Get the backstage view in the series  Fosse/Verdon  on BBC iPlayer. Director Ian Nicholson and designer Sam Wilde brightened up the first lockdown with their delightful puppet versions of the picture book I Want My Hat Back and its sequels. Now, they’re back with another homemade auditorium and another set of eye-catching characters for a 15-minute adventure based on Chris Haughton’s book Shh! We Have a Plan. And this one introduces kids to opera, too, with a new score by Noah Mosely sung by soprano Abigail Kelly. English Touring Opera’s production is  online until 25 January . This pandemic year has seen a boom in sales for classic fiction as we finally get round to reading  famous “bucket list” novels . Why not do the same for theatre – and why not start with some of the York Mystery Plays, which date back to the 1300s? Four of the biblical dramas, including the story of Adam and Eve, have been  adapted for BBC radio , with a cast of community and professional actors for York Theatre Royal’s  Collective Acts  project. Build yourself a cosy den and make your own props for this imaginative home theatre experience from Can’t Sit Still. Designed for children aged two to seven, it’s a gentle and playful circus show about how we can be boxed in by gender bias. The clowning duo are played by Jake England-Johns and Hobbit Humphrey, whose decision to  raise a gender-neutral child  was featured in a BBC documentary.  Online  on 16 February.  Full review . This new musical revue, conceived by Peter Polycarpou, was one of the November productions forced to close by England’s second lockdown. It has now been reimagined as a digital production, starring Polycarpou and Sally Ann Triplett, weaving together tunes from Charlie Chaplin, Irving Berlin, Arthur Freed and more through the tale of a lost songbook discovered in an antique shop. Available from  stream.theatre , 1-14 February. Feted at the Châtelet in Paris in 2014, Christopher Wheeldon’s resplendent staging of the Gershwins’ classic went on to conquer Broadway and the West End. It’s available on a new streaming platform,  Stage2View.com , which also offers the musicals Kinky Boots and 42nd Street, as well as Michael Grandage’s Mark Rothko drama Red, starring Alfred Molina as the artist. When we die, what becomes of our digital identity? Do all those tweets and posts endure for eternity – and who decides? The site-specific theatre company Dante or Die asked such questions, and many more, in a thoughtful and funny 2018 show by Chris Goode that was staged in cafes. It has now been reimagined as a 50-minute video podcast, available from  the Guardian  until 10 March. Robert Louis Stevenson’s gothic classic has been adapted by Nick Lane, who draws on his own injuries in a car accident to imagine Jekyll seeking a cure for his pain. (“If someone offered me a potion that was guaranteed to make me feel the way I did before the accident, but with the side effect that I’d become ruthless and horrible, would I drink it?” asks Lane.)  Blackeyed Theatre’s production  is available on demand until 31 January. The dual roles are played by Blake Kubena. This production by the theatre company Extant celebrates the rich history of Goze, itinerant blind performers who traditionally travelled around Japan to bring audiences a vast selection of stories – accompanied by music played on their shamisen stringed instruments.  Flight Paths  fuses old and new, bringing together archive material about the Goze, animation and filmed modern performance, in an accessible hourlong digital experience. Arinzé Kene’s poetic 2017 play good dog posed  unanswered questions  about the UK’s summer riots of 2011. Revived for a tour last year, it has now been adapted as a superb  20-minute film , directed by Andrew Gillman and Natalie Ibu for  Tiata Fahodzi . Anton Cross stars as a man looking back on his youth, his neighbours and his community. The film was commissioned by The Space and supported by BBC and Arts Council England. The ever-enterprising company  Stan’s Cafe  have put together a season of lockdown work including a version of their 2013 show The Anatomy of Melancholy, reconceived as 35 short split-screen films. They also have a new 25-minute production,  For Quality Purposes , which is set in a call centre, directed by James Yarker and devised by the company specifically to be performed online. It promises humour and pathos as it explores the dynamic between call-centre worker and customer. Available until 11 February.  Read the full review . Lockdown restrictions and cancelled travel plans have narrowed horizons for little adventurers. So this “seven-day theatrical experience” for families is both a delight and a relief. Created by Huddersfield’s  Lawrence Batley theatre ,  the Dukes in Lancaster  and theatre producers  the Big Tiny , it’s a series of mysteries encountered by Charlotte, a young girl evacuated to Yorkshire during the second world war. You solve the puzzles by watching jaunty online videos and opening up the envelopes and parcels inside an adventure box sent to you in the post when you book. The Big Tiny’s follow-up,  Balthazar Snapdragon , is just as fun.  Read the full review . Lin-Manuel Miranda’s phenomenal, Pulitzer prize-winning musical about the “10-dollar founding father without a father” was filmed over three nights in New York in 2016 with the original Broadway cast. Slated for a 2021 cinema release, it was instead  fast-tracked  on to the  Disney+ streaming service . It’s directed by Thomas Kail, who staged the musical, and according to Miranda gives “everyone the best seat in the house”. Watch it once and, to quote Jonathan Groff’s frothing King George III, You’ll Be Back.  Read the full, five-star review . Ben Weatherill’s play is set in the year 2025 when a flood has left Britain in a state of emergency. Originally planned for a stage production, it is now a  three-part audio drama  directed by Alex Brown and featuring teenage actors from the Almeida Young Company, who recorded their parts in isolation during lockdown. Released as part of Shifting Tides, the Almeida’s  digital festival  about the climate emergency, aimed at and created with 14- to 25-year-olds.  Read the full review . The Way Out , a single-take, 40-minute variety film, invites viewers to follow Omid Djalili through the mysterious, majestic and mundane corners of the phoenix-like Battersea Arts Centre. The film is part of the BBC’s Culture in Quarantine programme on iPlayer, which includes Jade Anouka and Grace Savage’s  Her & Her ; Crystal Pite and Jonathon Young’s  five-star  show  Revisor ;  Where I Go (When I Can’t Be Where I Am) , about living with chronic pain, conceived and directed by Rachel Bagshaw and written by Chris Thorpe; and Corey Baker’s marvellous mini Swan Lake,  performed in dancers’ baths . Sharon D Clarke has portrayed a long line of memorable characters but this is something else. In a  new short play by Bernardine Evaristo , directed by Adrian Lester, Clarke speaks for the National Health Service and those who work for it, reflecting on the NHS’s past and future. As she proudly says: “I am one of the best things that has ever happened.” First, Do No Harm is part of a series celebrating the NHS entitled  The Greatest Wealth , curated for the Old Vic by Lolita Chakrabarti. The  Old Vic  is also pioneering socially distanced live performances and rehearsed readings as well as archive recordings of past productions. Slam poet and playwright  Zodwa Nyoni  was born in Zimbabwe and grew up in Yorkshire. The locations are combined in her vivid 2016 monologue, in which Lladel Bryant plays Ishmael, a young gay Zimbabwean who flees homophobic violence in his home country and seeks asylum in the UK where he is dispersed to Leeds. Alex Chisholm’s hour-long production,  available on YouTube , was recorded at the Arcola theatre in London. The all-male theatre company, known for touring open-air Shakespeare productions around the UK, has postponed its Macbeth until next year but shared two past productions on  YouTube  and on their website:  The Tempest , staged in 2018, and  A Midsummer Night’s Dream , presented last year to mark the company’s 15th birthday. They encourage you to recreate the spirit of their productions at home – “whether it is on a picnic blanket in your living room or under the stars wrapped up warm” – and share the results on social media. Quite simply one of 2019’s most celebrated and momentous stagings of Shakespeare. Adjoa Andoh stars as Richard and co-directs, with Lynette Linton, a superb cast entirely comprising women of colour including Shobna Gulati and Ayesha Dharker. An English history play vividly staged for today in the Globe’s candlelit Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, perfect for a play full of plotting. Available  on YouTube . Directed by Jennifer Tang and Anthony Lau, this series of 10 short dramas by  Moongate Productions  and  Omnibus theatre  explores the pandemic of racism exacerbated by Covid-19 and enacted against Britain’s east and south-east Asian communities. With pieces by writers including Oladipo Agboluaje, Nemo Martin and Lucy Chau Lai-Tuen, it amounts to two hours of theatre on film that incorporates animation, poetry, music and dance.  Some catchup videos available on YouTube .  Read the full review . The  National Theatre of Scotland  was among the first theatres to announce a lockdown programme of work responding to the pandemic. Its growing collection of short films is designed to offer audiences “hope and joy”. There’s Brian Cox as Ian Rankin’s Edinburgh detective John Rebus, Two Doors Down’s Jonathan Watson as a shipyard electrician suffering from exposure to asbestos and Kate Dickie as brilliant as ever in a monologue by Jenni Fagan. The lineup of Scottish talent is extraordinary – Tam Dean Burn, Rona Munro and Douglas Henshall all contribute – and don’t miss Janey Godley’s two-hander with her adorable sausage dog.  Read the full review . One of the major dance productions cut short by the coronavirus crisis was Matthew Bourne’s tour of The Red Shoes, his rapturously received version of the Powell and Pressburger film. But Bourne’s company New Adventures has unveiled a  charming 12-minute film version , performed  by the cast from home  – among children’s toys in their living rooms, on tables, in gardens and backyards, and in the kitchen. The costumes include football kits and, in one case, a couple of towels. Antoinette Nwandu’s blistering, Beckettian play about police brutality was filmed at Chicago’s Steppenwolf theatre by Spike Lee for this 75-minute version, which crackles with humour, tension and tragedy. Lee skilfully weaves the audience, and the world outside the theatre, into a work that our critic Arifa Akbar gives five stars. Available on  Amazon Prime .  Read the full review . For Bristol Old Vic’s 250th anniversary, director Tom Morris staged a musical tragicomedy based on the Victor Hugo novel The Man Who Laughs, which was published a few years after Les Misérables. A grisly tale of fairground horror and romance,  The Grinning Man  was a twisted hit and transferred to the West End. Now, a “rare bootleg capture” of the Bristol production is available until 28 February as part of Bristol Old Vic’s  At Home  season of on-demand shows. How’s this for a lineup? The cast includes Katherine Parkinson, Paterson Joseph and Denise Gough. The writers include James Graham, Jasmine Lee-Jones, Prasanna Puwanarajah and April De Angelis. And Ned Bennett, Blanche McIntyre, Ola Ince and Tinuke Craig are among the directors.  Headlong  and Century Films have assembled an extraordinarily talented gang for their 14 short films about lockdown life. On  BBC iPlayer .  Read the review . Itching to get back into that wooden O on the South Bank? Happily, the  Globe Player  has heaps of full productions to rent, including international productions from the 2012 Globe to Globe festival such as a Lithuanian Hamlet, a Turkish Antony and Cleopatra, a Japanese Coriolanus and an Armenian King John. There is also the candlelit Sam Wanamaker Playhouse’s opening production, The Duchess of Malfi, starring Gemma Arterton. “She had us, both of us, absolutely round her finger…” From that first line, Andrew Scott will have you hooked in this half-hour monologue by Simon Stephens that captures truths about family life, art, nature and much else besides. Scott performed the play at the Bush in 2008 and it was a hot ticket when he reprised it at the Old Vic 10 years later. This version was shot in a single take in 2011. Directed by Stephens and Andrew Porter, it is available  online to buy . Brace yourself. With wonder, wit and sophisticated storytelling, performance poet Toby Thompson creates a beautiful show for over-sevens. Thompson steps in and out of his version of Hermann Hesse’s fairytale Faldum, riffing with the young audience and spinning a handful of jazz LPs.  I Wish I Was a Mountain  embraces big questions about time and contentment. This is a short but profound show, directed by Lee Lyford, hatched by the Egg theatre’s  Incubator  development programme and cleverly designed by Anisha Fields.  Read the full review . Belfast’s Lyric had to cancel its co-production of 1984 with Bruiser Theatre Company but instead launched the initiative New Speak: Re-imagined, in which Northern Irish talents including Amadan Ensemble, Dominic Montague and Katie Richardson respond to the lockdown crisis. They are being released in episodes  on YouTube . The Lyric has also collaborated on a series of five-minute drama commissions for the series Splendid Isolation: Lockdown Drama, available  on BBC iPlayer . The London theatre has launched a  Southwark Stayhouse  streaming programme, available free until it reopens its doors. Offerings include the “ fantastically witty ” Wasted, a rock musical about the Brontës, directed by Adam Lenson with music by Christopher Ash and book and lyrics by Carl Miller. There’s also a Twelfth Night relocated to a music festival, directed by Anna Girvan, and Jesse Briton’s Bound, about a maritime tragedy. A new British musical,  The Sorcerer’s Apprentice  by Richard Hough and Ben Morales Frost, had been due to open to the public in January but will now be streamed from 26 January-14 February instead. Tamara Rojo’s brilliant company has a steadily growing catalogue of productions, available as individual three-day rentals. There’s Akram Khan’s breathtaking Dust, about the first world war; his version of Giselle with Rojo in the lead role; and classics such as Alina Cojocaru and Vadim Muntagirov starring in the swashbuckler Le Corsaire. Plus, a series of five new short works destined for the stage but available to sample on screen first, from Russell Maliphant’s Echoes, directed by Michael Nunn and William Trevitt, to Arielle Smith’s Jolly Folly.  Rent from ENB . Stopgap Dance Company’s disabled and non-disabled dancers create a mood of quiet suspension in an abandoned shopping centre in this 25-minute piece, directed by Sophie Fiennes and available  from the Space .  Read the full review . Our revels have temporarily ended in theatres but you can watch a groundbreaking effects-laden version of The Tempest, with Simon Russell Beale as Prospero, with a subscription (or 14-day free trial) to the online service  Marquee TV . Antony and Cleopatra with Josette Simon and Richard II with David Tennant are two of the other gems in the selection of Royal Shakespeare Company plays available. The celebrated Berlin theatre, run by Thomas Ostermeier, is streaming a selection of archive productions, many with English subtitles, and often for one night only. It’s a rare opportunity for UK audiences to see works directed by Luc Bondy, Peter Falk and Ostermeier himself.  This month’s lineup . Five works by the Swedish choreographer are  on Marquee TV , including a new work for the Royal Swedish Ballet, Eskapist, which got a five-star review from Lyndsey Winship. On a vast stage, “Ekman offers a bombardment of fantastical images, realised with the help of Danish fashion designer Henrik Vibskov, who does a Mad Hatter’s couture party of eccentrically structured silhouettes.” Ekman’s other works to rent include Swan Lake and Midsummer Night’s Dream.  Read the full review . Joe Orton’s final farce, completed in the summer of 1967 just before the playwright’s death, is a subversive satire about an irrational world, set in a psychiatrist’s consulting room. Rufus Hound dons the white coat as the philandering Dr Prentice in  Nikolai Foster’s 2017 production  for Leicester Curve and Theatre Royal Bath. The cast includes Dakota Blue Richards and Jasper Britton. Curve’s productions of  Memoirs of an Asian Football Casual  and  The Importance of Being Earnest  are also online. Obsession! Haunting ballads! A shattered chandelier! And musical theatre’s most famous mask … Enjoy one of the world’s most successful shows, presented at the Royal Albert Hall in 2011, with Ramin Karimloo as the Phantom and Sierra Boggess as Christine, to celebrate its 25th anniversary. The film is available to  rent on Amazon . It was also streamed as part of  The Shows Must Go On , a series offering a different Andrew Lloyd Webber musical each week. Birmingham Royal Ballet’s new director Carlos Acosta has reworked The Dying Swan (originally choreographed by Mikhail Fokine for Anna Pavlova), and BRB principal dancer Céline Gittens  performs the piece  from her living room to yours. Camille Saint-Saëns’s Le Cygne, from Le Carnaval des Animaux, is performed by pianist Jonathan Higgins and cellist Antonio Novais. “This is a dance of promises,” says Acosta. The groundbreaking theatre company Imitating the Dog were midway through touring  Night of the Living Dead – Remix  when theatres shut down. Now, they are streaming this ambitious show in which a cast of actors remake George Romero’s classic horror film shot by shot in real time. The company have also opened up their archive to stream a selection of creations from the last 20 years,  available on a pay-what-you-like basis . What better time is there to watch a “grand-scale experimental pop opera about keeping it together”?  Ahamefule J Oluo ’s innovative show, staged at Seattle’s Moore theatre in 2014, mixes standup-style routines with a mesmerising musical accompaniment and explores his experience of a rare autoimmune disease. It is one of many films, including  Americana Kamikaze , that are available to rent or buy from  On the Boards .  Read the full review . With the help of a carrot, a sponge, the Miracles and some game audience members, Sam is going to tell you about five hook-ups he had through the casual encounters section of online classified-ads board Craigslist.  Filmed at the Push festival in Home, Manchester , YESYESNONO’s production is an open, affecting and troubling look at searching for intimacy and connection. This hour will leave you re-evaluating your own life. The outbreak of homeschooling caused by the coronavirus has found many of us playing the role of teacher while still in our dressing gowns. And here’s one unexpected tutor who really commands your attention: Jude Owusu, clad in a dirty bathrobe, with a pen behind his ear and a notepad dangling around his neck. Owusu is Cinna, the poet from Julius Caesar, in this  spellbinding film  of Tim Crouch’s monologue.  Read the full review . A handful of productions by San Francisco-based choreographer Alonzo King and his marvellous company  Lines Ballet  are available to rent on  Marquee TV . Dust and Light, Triangle of the Squinches and Scheherazade, all filmed in 2012, showcase the elegant nature of his work, which pushes beyond classical ballet.  Read the full review . Showtunes don’t get much more defiant or rousing than Don’t Rain on My Parade. Sheridan Smith wards off the clouds with a gritty rendition as Fanny Bryce in this production of the classic musical at Manchester’s Palace theatre in 2017. It’s one of the many productions available to rent from  Digital Theatre , whose offerings also include The Crucible starring Richard Armitage at the Old Vic in London, and Maxine Peake’s Hamlet at the Royal Exchange in Manchester. Is there a more fitting playwright for our current moment of isolation, uncertainty and endurance than Beckett? In this production,  filmed at the marvellously atmospheric Bouffes du Nord in Paris in 2015 , Peter Brook directs five Beckett shorts with a cast of three (Jos Houben, Marcello Magni and Kathryn Hunter). The production comprises Rough for Theatre I, Rockaby, Neither, Come and Go and Act Without Words II. Feel the rising panic and despair in Rockaby as the solitary, wide-eyed Hunter recounts a descent through long, lonely days. Even by Pina Bausch’s standards it’s an arresting opening: a huge wall collapses on stage and across the rubble comes  Julie Shanahan , in high heels and a floral frock. After desperately commanding hugs from two suitors, she takes a seat and is pelted with rotten tomatoes. And so begins an epic patchwork of masochistic rituals, nightmares and games, blending the quotidian with the phenomenal, all inspired by the choreographer’s trip to Sicily. A rare chance to watch one of Bausch’s creations  in full and for free online . All four productions in  Classic Spring ’s starry Oscar Wilde season in the West End can be watched on the online service  Marquee TV , which is offering a 14-day free trial. Edward and Freddie Fox play father and son in An Ideal Husband; Eve Best is a memorable Mrs Arbuthnot in A Woman of No Importance; Kathy Burke directs Lady Windermere’s Fan; and Sophie Thompson is horrified by theatre’s most famous handbag in The Importance of Being Earnest. If you missed its run at  Soho’s Boulevard theatre , here’s a chance to savour Dave Malloy’s song cycle,  filmed in New York in 2015 . Alternately rousing and yearning, this is a gorgeous hymn to barflies, precious memories and the joys of being a ghost, told with a dash of Edgar Allan Poe and Thelonious Monk. It’s a glorious get-together of a show, as warming as the whiskey handed out to the audience – but you’ll have to pour your own. Think dance on ice and you’d imagine sequins and staggering TV celebrities, but the Canadian troupe,  Le Patin Libre , has taken the art form into a new dimension. In their double bill, Vertical Influences, the skaters turned the rink into a mesmerising stage slowly decorated by the patterns cut by their blades.  Watch the 20-minute short film Vertical on YouTube . Travel restrictions needn’t prevent you from enjoying international theatre online. Paris’s esteemed  Odéon has released its 2018 production  of Molière’s satirical 1662 comedy of manners and cuckoldry. Claude Duparfait stars as the foolish Arnolphe, and Stéphane Braunschweig directs. English subtitles available,  évidemment .  Read the full review . Rosie Kay’s extraordinary  5 Soldiers: The Body Is the Frontline  was staged in army drill halls around the UK, but, since its livestream is still available online, you can watch it from the comfort of your own sofa. Performing in close quarters to a score that mixes punk and opera, Kay’s phenomenal company bring home the horror of combat and disarm audiences. Julian Fellowes, George Stiles and Anthony Drewe teamed up to deliver a merry new version of Kenneth Grahame’s classic, staged at the London Palladium in 2017, with Rufus Hound wearing 50 shades of green as Mr Toad. It’s available to  rent online , with the option to donate to help provide financial and emotional support to theatre workers. London’s Unicorn theatre has a world-class reputation for theatre for young audiences and its production of Evan Placey’s Girls Like That gripped the roomful of teenagers I watched it with in 2014. It’s  online in full  and offers a raw account of adolescent anxiety, slut-shaming and self-belief. In-your-face theatre that stays in your mind. Self-isolation may mean that many of us will use living rooms to both teach children and watch theatre. An opportunity to combine the two can be found courtesy of the super-charismatic John Leguizamo – an inspirational tutor if ever there was – whose one-man Broadway show, Latin History for Morons, is  on Netflix . The subscription service  LIVR  enables you to catch up on theatre in 360-degree virtual reality. Pop your smartphone into a headset they send you and experience a range of shows including  Apphia Campbell ’s show Woke, which interweaves the stories of Black Panther Assata Shakur and the 2014 Ferguson riots. The award-winning  Patricia Gets Ready , written by Martha Watson Allpress, is also available from LIVR. Two households, both alike in dignity … well, sort of. Our narrator, a talking portrait, lays our scene in Victorian London, and this musical comedy imagines the founding of the popular shoe-repair chain as a union between two companies, the Montashoes and the Keypulets.  Watch Gigglemug Theatre’s show on their website . This is cheating as it’s a TV series, but  BBC Three’s superb comedy drama  is based on one of the most uproarious and affecting fringe theatre shows of recent years. It’s inspired by Michael Patrick’s own teenage experience of a medical condition that left his testicle “ so big you could play it like a bongo ”. Wince. Love dance? Need to exercise at home? Then  join the queen of Belgian avant-garde performance Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker  as she talks you through how to perform her 1983 classic, Rosas Danst Rosas. All you need is a chair, a bit of legroom and enough space to swing your hair.  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set.  More information . 
Superhero sitcoms, hardcore sci-fi and Belfast noir: the must-see TV of 2021:	(ITV) The first series of The Bay existed to fill the hole Broadchurch left in your life; a scenic whodunnit set in a town full of the most suspicious people imaginable. The second begins in January and has the potential to be a simple do-over. However, with Morvern Christie’s spectacularly flawed DS Lisa Armstrong at the centre, and the addition of the splendidly gruff James Cosmo to the cast, it will hopefully avoid that trap.   •  13 January (Disney+) Marvel’s television offerings have been a mixed bag so far; the network fare was too broad and the Netflix shows too dull. But now, under the leadership of the film universe’s guiding hand, Kevin Feige, we might see a glimmer of promise. Wandavision is a show about Scarlet Witch and Vision, and exists to set up Phase 4 of the MCU. But it’s also going to take the form of several sitcom pastiches. This will either be amazing or awful, but it won’t be dull.     •  15 January (Channel 4) The second season of David Mitchell and Robert Webb’s pitch black sitcom had something of a stop-start production; pausing first so that Webb could undergo emergency heart surgery, and then because of Covid. Happily, the finished version maintains the high standards of the first, and Geoff McGivern’s uncle Geoff remains one of the best characters on television.   •  21 January (ITV) The third series of Anna Friel’s Nordic-noir detective series has been widely available to the rest of the world for some time now, but luckily we’ll be able to catch up in early 2021. It picks up where the previous series left off, with Marcella working undercover in Belfast. •   January (Channel 4) Following a quick apocalyptic tangent with Years and Years, Russell T Davies returns to Channel 4 with It’s a Sin; a five-episode series that takes a decade-long look at the effect of the HIV and Aids epidemic that tore through London’s gay community in the 1980s. •   January (Sky Atlantic) The first season of Euphoria was an unexpected hit – classier than its billing as “the US Skins” would have you believe – with Zendaya’s bracingly adult portrayal of recovering addict Rue landing her an Emmy. Season two promises more of the same – teens, sex, drugs, parties, crime and hallucinations – so let’s hope the novelty doesn’t wear off.   •  Special airing January, with series later in the year (Walter Presents on Channel 4)   The follow-up to Deutschland 83 and Deutschland 86, this promises to be truly momentous. Any sense of equilibrium gained during the last two seasons looks set to be swept away by the fall of the Berlin Wall, and all the upheavals that came with it. •   February (BBC One) Line of Duty’s strongest asset is its ability to dance on the line that separates unbelievable tension from preposterous silliness. Arguably, the last series got slightly too silly for its own good. But the new run, starring  Kelly Macdonald  as – and this is just a guess – a corrupt police officer, will hopefully set it back on course. •   Spring (ITV) By the time Covid hit, Love Island sorely needed a reset. It was getting too big, expanding too fast and taking in water from all manner of controversies, as well as the tragic death of host Caroline Flack. Now, after a lockdown-mandated rest, it will finally return to give us yet more vaguely exploitative reality fun. Will the show have learned any lessons from its down-season? Let’s hope so. •   Summer (BBC Two) The flipside to 2020’s  The Rise of the Murdoch Dynasty , The Fall of the House of Maxwell promises to tell a much grubbier story; the creation of  Robert Maxwell ’s media empire, its subsequent destruction, his bizarre and apparently accidental death and the prosecution of his daughter  Ghislaine  for allegedly grooming underage victims for sexual abuse.   •  Mid/late 2021 (BBC One) A 1960s East End thriller about neo-nazism, Ridley Road has lots to commend it. It’s based on the 62 Group, a coalition of Jewish men who stood up to the postwar far right. It stars Rory Kinnear, Tamzin Outhwaite, Tracy-Ann Oberman, Eddie Marsan, Samantha Spiro and Rita Tushingham. And best of all, it’s written by  Sarah Solemani , star of  Him & Her .   •  Late 2021 (BBC Three) Ignore the slightly offputting name, this drama based on  Nicôle Lecky’s one-woman Royal Court show , tells the story of a young slacker sucked into the superficially glamorous world of parties, influencers and sex work. But what makes Superhoe special is that the story will be told, in part, via the medium of original songs.   •  Late 2021 (BBC One)   There are lots of reasons to watch The Pursuit of Love. It’s a sumptuous adaptation of the Nancy Mitford novel.  Emily Mortimer  wrote the script. It stars  Andrew Scott  and Emily Beecham. That said, the reason you’re going to watch it is because it also stars  Lily James  and Dominic West, and you’re a sucker for that tabloid intrigue.   •  Date TBC (BBC One)  Stephen Merchant  stars as Stephen Port, a real-life serial killer who met his victims via gay and bisexual hookup apps, in a series told from the perspective of the grieving families.  Sheridan Smith  and Rufus Jones co-star in what is sure to be a harrowing drama.   •  Date TBC (Channel 4) Described by Channel 4 as “an audacious, celebratory and hilarious new comedy”, Lady Parts is a new musical sitcom about a female Muslim punk rock band written by the up-and-coming Nida Manzoor. If it’s anything like the Comedy Blap that inspired it, it’s going to be fantastic.   •  Date TBC (Sky Atlantic) Here’s prestige for you. Landscapers is a Sky Atlantic drama about a pair of real-life husband and wife murderers, starring Olivia Colman and directed by Alexander Payne (writer-director of Election and The Descendants). The series is written by Ed Sinclair, who happens to be Colman’s husband, but Sky is clearly positioning this to be a successor to Chernobyl.    •  Date TBC (Sky Atlantic) The Nevers was supposed to be Joss Whedon’s big return to television; a London-set sci-fi about Victorian women with unusual abilities, starring Olivia Williams, James Norton and Nick Frost. Then, in November – with much of the filming already completed – Whedon abruptly left, citing “exhaustion”. What this means for his distinctive voice and the future of the series is anybody’s guess.   •  Date TBC (Sky Atlantic) The premise for Mare of Easttown – “a detective in a small Pennsylvania town investigates a local murder while trying to keep her life from falling apart” – couldn’t sound more boilerplate HBO. Nevertheless, it stars Kate Winslet, whose last television appearance in Mildred Pierce won her an Emmy, so it’s sure to be impressive.   •  Date TBC (Sky Atlantic) The best show on television is finally returning. How did we cope without the dysfunctional Roy family? How did we manage to get by without seeing Roman’s weird posture, or Kendall’s anguish, or Shiv’s nice dresses, or the weirdly affirming Tom/Greg bromance? We’ve been teetering on season two’s cliffhanger for far too long now. Please hurry back.   •  Date TBC (Netflix) Remember Anna Delvey, the apparent Russian socialite who made a living from defrauding New York hotels? Remember the  New York magazine article  that made her famous? It’s going to become a series, created and produced by Shonda Rhimes. Might be brilliant, might be weird and exploitative, but definitely worth watching.   •  Date TBC (Netflix) With just one season left, Better Call Saul still has some big questions to answer. Will Lalo meet a sticky end? Will we meet Walter White? How will the black and white flash-forward conclude? What will happen to Kim? Most importantly, will Rhea Seehorn ever get the Emmy she so urgently deserves?   •  Date TBC (Amazon Prime)   Typical Amazon. In a bid to replicate Game of Thrones, it bought the rights to the Lord of the Rings books and used them to produce the most expensive television series ever made. Then the final season of Game of Thrones happened, and no one wanted to watch anything like Game of Thrones again. This will be worth watching, if only to rubberneck at the attempt to better Peter Jackson’s trilogy.    •  Date TBC (Apple TV+)   An adaptation of Isaac Asimov’s series of novels, Foundation sounds astonishingly ambitious. A sci-fi show as hard as you can imagine, it tells the thousand-year story of a band of exiles facing nothing less than the total destruction of the entire galaxy. Jared Harris stars, so this is likely to be very good indeed.   •  Date TBC (Apple TV+) Weird to think that a very expensive television series starring Jennifer Aniston and Reese Witherspoon could ever be seen as underdog, but here we are. Little-watched as it was, The Morning Show was one of 2019’s most thrilling programmes; a meditation on #MeToo-era sexual politics that delivered solid entertainment as well as a knotty exploration of the issues. If season two can keep up the pace, it’ll be unmissable.   •  Date TBC Here’s something that you didn’t know you needed – Gossip Girl is getting a gritty reboot. The new version of the show will once again follow the exploits of some obnoxious Manhattan private schoolers, but this time there’ll be more stuff about social media. Plus it’s airing on HBO Max in the US, so there’s potentially swearing and nudity too. •   Date and UK broadcaster TBC
Hear me out: why Only God Forgives isn't a bad movie:	I n the lead-up to the release of Only God Forgives, director  Nicolas Winding Refn  gave an interview where he referred to himself as “a pornographer”, compelled to making images that arouse him without necessarily processing what they mean or what effect they might have on an audience. A few months before, Only God Forgives had premiered to the worst reception of any film in competition at Cannes (preceding a string of negative write-ups upon release), the opposite of the rapture that had greeted Refn’s Drive two years earlier, when he earned a standing ovation, a best director prize and the runway for his biggest commercial success by far. What had changed so much from one film to another? The answer is everything and nothing. Like any pornographer, there’s a part of Refn that’s simply perverse: Only God Forgives again places a largely stoic  Ryan Gosling  in a nocturnal underworld of depravity and ultra-violence, but strips away all of the genre thrills that made Drive such a pleasure – the opening getaway sequence, with its bursts of speed and hide-and-go-seek gamesmanship with the police; a pawnshop robbery gone horribly awry; Albert Brooks’ delicious cast-against-type performance as a vicious gangster. In their place, Refn imposes an atmosphere of somnambulant dread and inevitably, a neon nightmare that unfurls in slow motion. Only God Forgives exists in a kind of cinematic no man’s land, too arch for the genre fans and too grotesque for the arthouse set. And yet it’s fully in keeping with Refn’s evolution as a film-maker, which started with the kicked-up pulp of his Pusher trilogy and has grown in formal rigor ever since, pivoting on a Norse adventure film, 2009’s Valhalla Rising, that starts as a Crusades bloodbath and grows more and more abstract as it goes along. For all of Refn’s evident skill at staging punchy action sequences, he’s become increasingly interested in deconstructing and manipulating our expectations of what genre movies should be. That’s maddening. It’s also, in the right frame of mind, mesmerizing. Opening the film in bright reds and deep blacks, Refn is making noir in color, replacing the single-source black-and-white of American classics with an equally eye-catching study in contrasts. Few neo-noirs have made such a strong visual impression, because they don’t limit their visual palette as much as Refn does here – every frame is carved with precise color and light, like the fussed-over panels of a graphic novel. Combined with the humming synths of Cliff Martinez – who had composed the score for Drive, too, as well as many Steven Soderbergh movies – the film accomplishes more through mood than action, capturing the dilemma of an antihero who exists in a paralyzing state of moral limbo. As Julian, a boxing-club manager and drug dealer, Gosling plays a man who’s part and apart from the Bangkok underworld, someone who offers and indulges in vice, but discovers that he has his limits. His older brother Billy has no such qualms: he’s shown prowling a brothel for a 14-year-old before raping and murdering a prostitute two years older. Their mother Crystal is equally deranged. Played by  Kristin Scott Thomas  in a performance that upends her image as radically as Brooks in Drive, Crystal arrives in Bangkok seeking revenge when Billy himself is killed by the victim’s father. That puts them into conflict with Chang (Vithaya Pansringarm), a sword-wielding police lieutenant with an extrajudicial approach to the law enforcement. There’s a lot that’s funny, intentionally and unintentionally, about Only God Forgives, starting with the revelation of Julian’s status as the cuckold in his brother’s oedipal relationship with their mother. Played straight, the film would be cardboard juvenilia, a thinly plotted story of retribution marked by exoticism and ultra-violence. But Refn keeps the focus on Gosling as a kind of smarmy Hamlet, forced into this perilous position of having to do his mother’s bidding while understanding the moral wrong of it. His indecisiveness bleeds into a comical fight scene with Chang where he doesn’t land a punch, which may be simple ineptitude, but also reveals a lack of conviction. Much of Refn’s self-seriousness here is a “Kick Me” sign, culminating in a shot where Julian’s longing for his mother’s absent warmth takes a grotesquely literal form. But Only God Forgives has a dreamlike vividness that’s neither easily conjured or easily shaken, in service of a character who’s been rendered a zombie by circumstance, stumbling through events he doesn’t have the standing or courage to stop. He embodies all that’s frustrating about the film – and all that’s audacious about it, too. Only God Forgives is available to watch on Amazon Prime in the US and the BFI Player in the UK
Jerusalem, Beckett and Bridget Christie: theatre, comedy and dance to book in 2021:	Harriet Walter, Mandy Colleran, Naomi Wirthner and Mat Fraser feature in six online plays written by a new generation of D/deaf and disabled artists. Filmed on Zoom, they follow the success of a  quirky original series  by Graeae Theatre Company that was streamed during lockdown.  •   graeae.org , 19 January-23 February Lolita Chakrabarti’s play about masculinity and ambition stars Adrian Lester and Danny Sapani as two men who meet at a funeral, and whose lives as fathers, sons and brothers are illuminated through music and song. Blanche McIntyre returns to the Almeida, following her directorial success with  The Writer .  •   Almeida theatre,  London, 29 January-27 February Staged in the round in the Olivier theatre, this is Larry Kramer’s largely autobiographical play about the Aids epidemic in 1980s New York, which has not been professionally performed in London since its European premiere in 1986. It stars  Ben Daniels  as Ned Weeks, the firebrand gay founder of an Aids advocacy group, with cast members including Danny Lee Wynter, Daniel Monks and Stanley Townsend.  •   National Theatre , London, February   Samuel Beckett’s play about a stoical woman almost entirely buried in a mound of earth may not sound like upbeat theatre but this 60th-anniversary production promises to be nothing less than sensational; it stars Lisa Dwan, a celebrated Beckett actor, and is directed by Trevor Nunn, who brought us a winning trio of the Irish playwright’s short plays last year, one of which, featuring Dwan’s haunting voice, stole the show.  •   Riverside Studios , London, 16 February-28 March Adura Onashile’s story revolves around a young 18th-century Glaswegian protagonist who takes us on a 500-year journey deep into the city’s slave-trading past. This drama is delivered as an immersive augmented reality experience on an app that aims to use music and visual effects in striking ways to explore the “myth of the collective amnesia of slavery and racialised wealth”.  •   National Theatre of Scotland , Glasgow, 26 February-12 March A satirical new play by the award-winning screenwriter Steven Moffat (Doctor Who and Sherlock). Its comedy of manners takes swipes at the value that the British middle-classes place on “niceness” and promises much barbed humour. Moffat’s longtime collaborator Mark Gatiss directs; the cast includes Reece Shearsmith, Amanda Abbington and Frances Barber.  •   Chichester Festival theatre , dates to be confirmed CP Taylor’s searing political drama, originally commissioned by the RSC in 1981, dramatises a friendship between a Jewish psychiatrist and a gentile professor in prewar Germany and shows how, over the years, Nazi ideology seduces a “good” man. Dominic Cooke has reimagined the play for our times in this revival that stars David Tennant and promises to be powerfully resonant.  •   Harold Pinter theatre , London, 21 April-17 July Noël Coward’s vitriolic study of the rich and reckless starred Coward himself, alongside Laurence Olivier, in its original staging. The story of divorcees Elyot and Amanda who find themselves on honeymoon with new partners in the same hotel, is the inaugural show for the  Nigel Havers Theatre Company . Directed by Christopher Luscombe, Patricia Hodge plays Amanda alongside  Havers as Elyot , whom Coward played in 1930.  •   Theatre Royal Bath  (followed by UK tour), 23 September-2 October This new musical tells the story of  Faye Treadwell , the trailblazing African American music manager who helped to turn the Drifters into a global sensation. Beverley Knight, after great acclaim for her performances in the musicals Sylvia, Cats and Memphis, plays Treadwell and the score is filled with one hit after another. Prepare to hum along.  •   Newcastle Theatre Royal and then Garrick Theatre , London, 9 October-26 March 2022 Jez Butterworth’s play set the theatre world alight when it premiered in 2009. Regarded as a modern masterpiece, it is set to be revived at a West End venue with  Mark Rylance  reprising the role of Rooster Byron and Ian Rickson once again its director. We do not yet know exactly when or where but its producer, Sonia Friedman, is committed to staging it in 2021. It will indisputably be a highlight of the year, whenever it lands.  •  Stage/date to be confirmed Dramatising Marley’s life story set in its bigger political context, this is backed by his daughter, Cedella Marley, and has unlimited access to his catalogue of music. There is a dream team behind it too: Lee Hall as writer, Arinzé Kene playing reggae music’s biggest icon and Clint Dyer – fresh from the National Theatre success of his two Death of England   plays – as director. •   Lyric Theatre , London, 28 May to 19 December Whoopi Goldberg and Jennifer Saunders will take this show on the road in a UK tour following a London run, which features Goldberg in the role she made her own in the original film – as a singer hiding under cover of a nun’s habit in a convent – while in another stroke of inspired casting, Saunders will star as Mother Superior in selected performances for the tour, while Lesley Joseph will play the part in some venues. •   Mayflower Theatre , Southampton, followed by UK and Ireland tour, from 7 September Six days, six different shows, from debut Holmes & Watson via Edinburgh comedy award nominee The Reunion to 2018’s joyful  Commitment . The multi-role playing double act (Max Olesker and Ivan Gonzalez) celebrate the 10-year anniversary of  one of comedy’s sparkiest partnerships  by reviving each and every one of their shapeshifting, quickfire two-man comic plays.  •   Pleasance , London, 19-24 January Lucky Leicester comedy festival, whose slot in the annual calendar saw it narrowly precede the beginning and (fingers crossed!) follow the end of Covid theatre closures. This year’s edition of the UK’s second-biggest comedy knees-up sees some adjustments to Covid realities, and more digital shows than before. But there are plenty of live gigs too, from Rosie Jones, Phil Wang, Stewart Lee and others.  •   Various venues, Leicester, and online , 3-21 February   In 2020, comedy went digital, politics went even more crazy than before – and  Michael Spicer went stratospheric . The Room Next Door, his series of online videos in which he plays an exasperated adviser prompting politicians via an earpiece, hoovered up views, securing him airtime on James Corden’s Late Late Show and BBC Two’s The Mash Report. Now he takes the concept on tour.  •   Oxford Playhouse , 6 February, then touring   There’s no stopping the ascent of Mo Gilligan,  viral video star turned TV darling , now announced as the new judge on ITV’s The Masked Singer. But comedy is his first love, as anyone who saw his excellent recent documentary  Black, British and Funny  will know. His planned 2020 tour, There’s Mo to Life, showcasing his easeful brand of everyday character comedy, finally makes it into theatres from September.  •   Reading Hexagon, 15 September, then touring Who Am I?, asks the title of Bridget Christie’s new touring show, postponed in 2020, now touring in autumn 2021. To comedy-lovers, she is among the last decade’s most  blissfully funny, ridiculous and radical standups . But you can expect Christie herself to make more of a meal of the answer, in a show which, she promises, she’ll rewrite entirely before hitting the road  •   Octagon theatre, Yeovil, 16 September, then touring . A dance-theatre piece giving voice to the vulnerable, lonely and isolated sounds like the product of Covid times, but Rhiannon Faith’s Drowntown has been much longer in the works. Faith’s extensive research took her to deprived coastal towns including Jaywick and Great Yarmouth and her cast of six draw on autobiographical testimony to tell hard-hitting stories of community, identity, social exclusion and suicide.  •   UK spring tour , dates and venues to be confirmed Sergei Polunin is known for being a brilliant ballet dancer who doesn’t always seem to make great choices. But the decision to team up with choreographer/director Johan Kobborg and his partner, the incredible ballerina Alina Cojocaru, seems a wise one indeed. Kobborg has created his own Romeo & Juliet, set to the masterful Prokofiev score, with Polunin dancing Romeo opposite Cojocaru’s Juliet.  •   Royal Albert Hall , London, 6 May The absolute tonic to 2020, Cole Porter’s Anything Goes is ready to transport you into a fantasy of days gone by where a troupe of tap-dancing sailors can make your problems disappear. Megan Mullally (AKA Karen from Will & Grace) and Robert Lindsay star, under the direction of Kathleen Marshall who won a Tony award for her choreography of this show on Broadway. •   Barbican , London, 8 May-22 August Following 2014’s Dust and his acclaimed reimagining of Giselle, choreographer Akram Khan creates a third work for ENB, inspired by Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. Creature draws on Shelley but also Georg Büchner’s play Woyzeck, to explore ideas of ambition, exploitation, outsiderdom and belonging. Khan collaborates again with Oscar-winning designer Tim Yip (Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon) and lighting designer Michael Hulls.  •   Sadler’s Wells , London, 23 September-2 October Postponed from 2020, a new tale of the wizard Merlin, harnessing his magic for the power of good. Heartbreak, humour and epic adventures are promised in this major family-friendly ballet from Olivier award-winning choreographer Drew McOnie (Jesus Christ Superstar, Strictly Ballroom, In the Heights). Northern Ballet is known for its strong storytelling mixed with classical dance, and McOnie always brings originality to the stage. Book for December 2021.  •   Southampton Mayflower, 2-4 December. Then touring
Refreshingly modern dinosaurs and a cyberpunk cat: our games picks for 2021:	Last year’s ensemble Avengers game was a bit of a disappointment, so DC fans will be hoping for better from this action game set in the Batman universe. As Nightwing, Batgirl, Robin and Red Hood, you push back against the ever-encroaching criminal forces of Gotham. It looks moody and ultra-stylish.  •  Release date: TBC A stylish art-deco shooter about a time-travelling assassin caught in a time loop. Stuck in an endlessly repeating island party, he must take out eight of its guests – but the really interesting part is that another assassin, controlled by another player, is trying to stop him doing exactly that. It could easily be the plot of an avant-garde action film.  •  Release date: 21 May I think we can all agree that there are nowhere near enough video games that let you play as a cat. In Stray, from arthouse publisher Annapurna, you are a wandering cat trying to escape a city of robots. Cyberpunk metropolises are hardly uncommon in games, but we’ve never been able to explore one from this viewpoint before, nimble and unseen.  •  Release date: TBC This was supposed to be an Xbox Series X launch game in 2020, but we’re hoping that the delay will give developer 343 Industries the chance to polish up the oddly bland-looking, by-the-numbers shooter demo we saw last year. At its best, Halo is pure space opera: all action and soaring scores, daring escapes in roaring vehicles and preposterous firefights against the alien hordes. Fingers crossed for that.  •  Release date: TBC The game that promises to fulfil every millennial’s dormant dreams of going to Hogwarts. This is set in the late 1800s during the pre-Fantastic Beasts era rather than the better-known Potter timeline, and will set you off on an adventure involving monsters and magic both inside and outside the walls of the castle.  •  Release date: TBC Like the idea of fighting robot dinosaurs on a far-future Earth reclaimed by nature? One of the PlayStation 5’s flagship games, Horizon Forbidden West sends brilliant red-headed protagonist Aloy on a search for the secrets about what happened to what used to be California. Going by what we’ve seen so far, no game has ever been so gorgeous. •  Release date: TBC This blocky role-playing and exploration game made by a team of Minecraft modders was instantly welcomed as the “new Minecraft” when it was first shown in 2018. That trailer has been viewed more than 57m times now, so the game has a lot of hype to live up to. More visually refined and adventure-oriented than Minecraft, it could be the next huge thing for the teen and preteen crowd (and their parents). •  Release date: TBC Some of us have been waiting more than 15 years for this sequel. It’s a game about a weird little kid who can journey through people’s minds, busting out telekinesis and levitation to find his way around their trippy, endearingly strange inner worlds. It promises interesting battles with inner demons and a wicked, black-tinged sense of humour.  •  Release date: TBC Anthropomorphic dinosaurs feel their way through their final year of high school in this unusual-looking game, which digs deep into teen emotions, budding romance and coming-of-age themes. Graduation approaches; will you tell that person how you really feel about them? Will the band stay together? Don’t be fooled by the dinosaurs, this looks refreshingly modern.  •  Release date: TBC Remember Journey (2012), the tear-jerking arthouse adventure game about finding your way up a mountain? Picture that, but reimagined by Studio Ghibli, and you’re getting close to what Sable is. The setting is sand and sprawling desert, the beautiful animation looks as if it belongs in an Oscar nominee, the vibes are chill and mysterious. You’ll spot other nomads on your travels, and can team up to solve a puzzle, or create a momentary connection.  •  Release date: TBC
It’s a Sin: ‘It's not about death – it’s about vibrant, beautiful lives’:	R ussell T Davies’s drama It’s a Sin, charting the early years of the Aids epidemic in the UK, arrives on our screens with a pep in its step that may at first seem at odds with the subject. It is difficult, after all, to think cheerfully about an epidemic that has taken thousands of lives in Britain alone, and a virus that an estimated 100,000 people in the country still live with. Its title is particularly apt: the 1987 Pet Shop Boys track it’s borrowed from summons both the decadent pleasures of the era and that all-pervading sense of shame: the shame of the illness itself, so vicious and mysterious at first, and the fact that it often came from gay sex, perceived for so long as shameful, too. And yet – it  is  a Russell T Davies show. This is the man who gave us  Queer As Folk ,  Cucumber  and an enjoyably queered  Doctor Who . As we follow a ragtag bunch of young friends in London in the early 80s, spearheaded by the effervescent Ritchie (played by  Years & Years singer Olly Alexander ), there are shags, gags and parties galore, plus the undeniable camp of Tracy-Ann Oberman as Ritchie’s agent and a glorious Keeley Hawes as his mum. Ritchie’s clan includes sweet Welsh lad Colin (Callum Scott Howells), the fiercely defiant Roscoe (Omari Douglas), the more sensitive Ash (Nathaniel Curtis) and Lydia West’s Jill, unofficial mum to the group. We see them negotiate the usual stuff young adults have to face – sex, studies, jobs and litres of booze – against the slowly darkening backdrop of the HIV/Aids crisis. Some live, some die, but all resolve to have a hoot. If It’s a Sin is about the horror of so many lights being snuffed out, it is still utterly flaming. It is that mixture of innocent joy and growing dread that is the show’s calling card, according to the cast, first interviewed early last year. “It’s not mainly about death,” promises Scott Howells, sitting alongside Alexander and West in a former school on the outskirts of Manchester, which has been turned, for the production, into the friends’ den-cum-flat “The Pink Palace”, all 80s pop star posters and uncompromising wallpaper. “It’s about life: their vibrant, colourful, beautiful lives.” “People hear: ‘It charts the progress of the Aids crisis,’ and they think: ‘God, this is gonna be real heavy,’” agrees Alexander, 30, making a welcome return to acting following his appearance in the final series of Skins. “And there  are  some heavy moments, but it’s more about the joy of these characters.” That’s especially because, West adds, these youngsters had no idea what was happening. In an era characterised by disbelief and misinformation, they can’t help but be blithe. “You’re not playing the tragedy, you’re just living it,” she says. There is a rich artistic canon documenting HIV/Aids, from  Angels in America  to  Pose  to the West End hit  The Inheritance . But Davies, 57, feels that It’s a Sin fills a new space. Watching 2017’s vibrant French Aids activism film  120 BPM  confirmed he was right to take a new route. The characters in It’s a Sin, he says, “have moments … but they are not a flat full of activists. They’re ordinary people, and I’m interested in that because their stories aren’t often told.” In fact, he sighs, so few people actually go on those marches that make history. “The rest of us just sit there worrying.” Although Davies drew on his experiences – at 18 he moved to a big city, Manchester, in 1981 – he himself has not contracted the virus. “I can’t believe my luck, because I had a good old time,” he says in his mile-a-minute Welsh chatter. “We all had those nights where there was too much hot blood and alcohol, and it gets you carried away. We all wish we were safe all the time, and so few people are. I was lucky.” Davies did  lose plenty of friends  to the disease, and it is clear he is partly writing the show for them. But grief of another sort hovers over the show: he  lost his husband Andrew Smith to cancer  in 2018 after a long illness. “It’s there enormously,” he says. “There’s no way you can sit there writing all day without that coming out. I think if I was sitting here writing Fireman Sam, something sad would have happened to his cat.” One of the deaths in the show echoes Andrew’s almost stage by stage, but that is also, he says, just the writer in him scavenging for material. “You can’t help but use it.” If It’s a Sin is a period piece, its very creation now looks like another type of period piece, considering that filming was done before the pandemic hit. When I visited the set in January 2020, there was only one virus on our minds. Talking with Davies and Alexander months later, they shrink from glib comparisons. “I definitely had many complicated feelings,” says Alexander. “All the sensational headlines, all the rumours about where coronavirus came from and who was to blame … The response in the 80s, when this disease first appeared, was just so  lacking  – and there are loads of reasons for that. But it took decades to get on top of it.” Both agree that things have radically improved in terms of HIV acceptance; Alexander has educated himself hugely over the last decade, after shirking the topic, as many do, in his teens. But they emphasise that there is still an awful long way to go. “We can get as embarrassed about sex now as we did then,” says Davies. “If coronavirus was a sexually transmitted disease, it would be much more hidden, still.” Is It’s a Sin political? It does intersect with Westminster when Roscoe embarks on an affair with a Tory MP (Stephen Fry), and Margaret Thatcher makes a tiny cameo (“She gets her comeuppance!” cries Davies, delightedly). Yet he didn’t want to make a “corridors of power” drama; he doesn’t believe in simply vilifying Thatcher’s government for its broadly inadequate response. It’s a nuanced situation this domestic drama couldn’t make room for. “It was a big decision I made early on,” he says. You could, he points out, write a drama where you are with the then-health secretary Norman Fowler as he discusses the 1986 “Monolith” TV advert, a stark public announcement that advised viewers: “Don’t die of ignorance.” You could also, he says, show Princess Diana holding an Aids patient’s hand at a time when fears about contagion were rife. “That’s a gorgeous moment and more pivotal, more epic, than we can even realise today,” he says. “But the whole thing would have started to look like Zelig, if our characters had been at all these key moments in history.” One area where the show is defiantly political, though, is in its casting. It’s a Sin is not only racially diverse, but it also satisfies the current demand for gay actors to be cast in gay roles. Davies is still marked by someone coming up to him on a dancefloor in Manchester after 1999’s Queer As Folk came out, and asking why he didn’t cast gay people in the leads. “I said: ‘I didn’t know you existed, I’m sorry,’ and he said back: ‘Did you  look ?’” So now, Davies says, he looks. He estimates that It’s a Sin cast 40 to 50 gay actors, even in straight roles, something else he is unapologetic about (“You’re just correcting an imbalance that goes back thousands of years ”).  That said, he admits this is a very 2020 stance. “It was different five years ago – and I might change my mind in five years.” Speaking of 2020, did Davies have to watch his mouth for a more woke audience? “I know what you mean,” he says. One of the chief characteristics of queer culture is saying the unsayable – vicious transgression soused in irony. But this can date, or just seem cruel. “You could have written a bunch of gay boys in the 80s sitting round a table taking the piss out of lesbians,” says Davies. “But in the 80s we were thicker about everything.” Being wildly un-PC would have “overwhelmed the drama”, he thinks. “It’s all we’d sit and talk about now.” Still, no one could mistake It’s a Sin for a sanitised version of the culture it portrays. It doesn’t shy away from the less palatable sides of the story; for one thing, one character admits they have very probably infected others with HIV, shagging away in denial. This was something very important, and rare, to feature, says Davies. “Those people who had HIV and who continued to sleep with people are always portrayed as villains – and they weren’t. They were just boys. Just horny, stupid boys who couldn’t believe what was happening to them.” I also congratulate him on a scene in the first episode where Ritchie, still a virgin, is schooled on the importance of hygiene before sex. Davies honks with laughter, but gets serious again. He never puts those things in “just for a laugh”, he promises. “That’s a really important scene,” he says, “the one where Ritchie washes his arse. Because it says: this is where we are; this drama is on the level of body fluids and fucking and good behaviour in bed – because, actually, this is where the virus happens.” Fair play, I say: your next honorary Bafta is sorted. Another honk. “A gold-plated douche!” It’s a Sin starts 22 January on Channel 4
Epic fantasy to anarchic animation: the TV trends to look out for in 2021:	For the second year in a row there is a Game of Thrones-shaped chasm in the calendar: prequel  House of the Dragon  won’t launch until 2022. That presents an opening for deep-pocketed rivals. Netflix’s own medieval-tinged gorefest  The Witcher  is back for a second season, joined on the platform by sorcery saga  Shadow and Bone  (April). And Amazon Prime Video is set to launch two formidable fantasy franchises: The Wheel of Time adapts Robert Jordan’s hefty series of novels, with Rosamund Pike starring, while we might finally see its long-awaited  The Lord of the Rings adaptation , set to be the most expensive TV show of all time at a cool $1bn. Between Covid disruption and some shows just taking their sweet time, 2021 has a high share of returnees. On the drama front, expect another  Euphoria  special (January, Sky Atlantic), Kelly Macdonald guest-starring in  Line of Duty  (spring, BBC One), a Chris Rock-fronted  Fargo  (Channel 4), further outings for  Sex Education ,  Stranger Things  (both Netflix),  American Gods  (11 January, Amazon Prime Video), and  The Morning Show  (Apple TV+). Cheer can be found in comedies  This Time With Alan Partridge  (BBC One),  Inside No 9 ,  Motherland  (both BBC Two),  Pls Like ,  Back to Life  (both BBC Three),  Pen15  ,  Insecure  (both Sky Comedy), another outing for  Taskmaster  (Channel 4) and Donald Glover’s ace  Atlanta  (BBC Two). Mitchell and Webb’s  Back  (21 January, Channel 4) is also, well, back. Telly loves a wrong ’un. This year is no different, as TV’s first family of foulness, the Roys, return for a third outing of  Succession  (Sky Atlantic). Glenn Howerton is back as terrible teacher Dr Carson in AP Bio (18 January, Sky Comedy); his other, even more sociopathic sitcom  It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia  (Netflix) has been renewed for four more seasons. Elsewhere, Shonda Rhimes’s drama Inventing Anna (Netflix) sees Julia Garner play fake heiress Anna Delvey, while it’s hoped that, despite delays, noted sleazeball Saul Goodman will be back for a final season of  Better Call Saul  (Netflix) this year. You won’t be able to move for mirth in 2021: Frank of Ireland (Channel 4) pairs up brothers Brian and Domhnall Gleeson for a daft, Dublin-set comedy, while New Zealander standup Rose Matafeo has a one-night stand with an A-lister in Starstruck (BBC Three). Greg Davies mops up crime scenes in new sitcom The Cleaner (BBC One), while Jane Horrocks is an ambulance driver in Bloods (Sky One). There is a full series for Comedy Blap Lady Parts (Channel 4), about a female Muslim punk band, and Gbemisola Ikumelo expands on her Bafta-winning short Brain in Gear (BBC Three). For something more sketchy, there’s inventive duo Lazy Susan and absurdists  Ellie and Natasia  (both BBC Three). The golden age of US TV drama stretches into another year. Moonlight director Barry Jenkins adapts Colson Whitehead’s slavery novel The Underground Railroad (Amazon Prime Video) and HBO’s Mare of Easttown (Sky Atlantic) has Kate Winslet investigating a small-town murder in Pennsylvania. For something less earthbound there’s Asimov adaptation Foundation (Apple TV+), and Star Wars spin-off The Book of Boba Fett (December, Disney+). And Ryan Murphy is, as ever, cooking up a number of shows: expect Halston (Netflix), a Ewan McGregor-fronted biopic about the fashion designer, and American Crime Story: Impeachment (BBC Two), which tackles the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal. After conquering cinema, Marvel’s universe expands further with a clutch of superpowered shows on Disney+. First up is the trippy WandaVision (15 January), which sees Avengers duo Scarlet Witch and Vision trapped in a 50s sitcom. That will be followed by four more series:  The Falcon and the Winter Soldier  (19 March),  Loki  (May), Ms Marvel and Hawkeye (both late 2021). Competition comes from DC, whose Arrowverse stable of shows welcomes Superman and Lois (UK broadcaster TBC) and the first black Batwoman (E4). British drama had a banner year in 2020. Can 2021 match it? Early signs are encouraging. Russell T Davies confronts the Aids crisis in 80s-set drama  It’s a Sin  (22 January, Channel 4). The North Water (BBC Two) teams up Colin Farrell with 45 Years director Andrew Haigh for a drama about 19th-century whalers, while Landscapers (Sky Atlantic) sees Olivia Colman in a blackly comic shocker. Stephen Merchant plays the serial killer Stephen Port in factual drama Four Lives (BBC One), while the Sarah Solemani-scripted Ridley Road (BBC One) is inspired by Jewish anti-fascism groups in 60s east London. Domina (Sky Atlantic) follows power plays in ancient Rome through the wife of Augustus Caesar, and Queen & Slim star  Jodie Turner Smith  turns heads in a provocative drama about Anne Boleyn’s final days (Channel 5). Non-scripted TV played a vital supporting role in 2020, with The Great British Bake Off (autumn, Channel 4) and Strictly Come Dancing (autumn, BBC One) credited with keeping spirits up. Both will provide more comfort in 2021, as should the return of RuPaul’s Drag Race UK (14 January, BBC Three), and we might see a delayed sixth season of  Queer Eye  (Netflix). After a year away working on its base tan,  Love Island  (summer, ITV2) is expected to return. Expect a deluge of documentaries, too: The Fall of the House of Maxwell (BBC Two) traces the elite family’s downwards spiral from Robert to Ghislaine; New Labour (BBC Two) gets a five-part treatment by the team behind the Beeb’s Thatcher series; and Tiger (likely Sky Documentaries) traces a golfing legend’s rise, fall and resurgence. Pixar Popcorn (22 January, Disney+) is a collection of shorts based round some of the studio’s most beloved characters, followed by the Monsters Inc spin-off Monsters at Work (early 2021).  Star Trek: Lower Decks  (22 January, Amazon Prime Video) is an adult comic spin-off focusing on “one of Starfleet’s least important ships” created by Mike McMahan, the chief writer on  Rick and Morty  (All 4), which should be back for its fifth season at some point, too. Then there is Marvel’s alternative superhero history What If …? (Disney+) and the gory-looking Invincible (Amazon Prime Video). And, after its Netflix cancellation, the gloriously anarchic bird-com Tuca & Bertie heads to Adult Swim in the US, with a UK broadcaster still to be announced. Deal or no deal, classy series continue to flow in from the continent. Naples mob epic Gomorrah (Sky Atlantic) is back for a fifth outing; its creator Roberto Saviano has another of his novels adapted in  Zero, Zero, Zero  (January, Sky Atlantic), a transcontinental drug trade drama starring Andrea Riseborough. Germany is well represented: the final season of Deutschland 89 (February, Channel 4) tackles the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the creepy miniseries Hausen (spring, Sky Atlantic) puts a modern spin on haunted-house horrors. Finally, the team behind The Bridge and The Killing go jet-setting with Bullets (29 January, All 4), a terrorist thriller that hops between Georgia, Belgium and Finland.
HMRC paid my tax rebate into someone else's bank account:	Can you help me to get back a £453 tax rebate that  HMRC  has paid into someone else’s bank account? The matter is partially my fault, in that I gave the tax office the wrong bank details – using an account number from one Santander account, with the sort code from another we also hold. When the rebate didn’t arrive, I queried it. After several months of investigating with both the bank and HMRC it emerged that the money had been paid into somebody else’s account . Santander knows exactly who it went to, but won’t follow this up, citing data protection. Staff have told me that had HMRC given my name, as well as the sort code and account number, the payment would have been rejected – but it doesn’t do this for some reason. All of my attempts to get HMRC to recall the money have come to nothing. I can’t believe I’m the only person to misquote an account number, but I’m getting nowhere and seem to be expected to just lose the money. CG,  by email If it’s any consolation you are not the first person to do this, but, hopefully, this sort of complaint should soon be a thing of the past. Last year, Guardian Money featured the extraordinary case of Peter Teich whose £193,000 inheritance was paid into the wrong bank account in almost identical circumstances. Since both that case, and when your payment was made to the wrong account last December, UK banks have introduced “confirmation of payee” which links the account name to the number and sort code. A payment will only go through if the details all match up. This is designed to stop cases like these from happening, as well as prevent fraud. While HMRC clearly had been very unhelpful to you over the past few months, it did at least move quickly to put things right once the Guardian got involved. It accepts that staff should have resolved the issue more quickly, and apologised. “We have now corrected the problem and made the refund and are taking steps to ensure this does not happen again,” it says. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our  terms and conditions
The wheels have come off my Esure bike theft claim:	Last year we bought our home contents insurance policy through the comparison firm ComparetheMarket. We spent a long time inputting all of our details and after finding the policy we were happy with, paid the money to the chosen insurer, Esure. Recently, our garage was broken into and our bikes were stolen. We called up Esure expecting to make a claim and it informed us that they were not covered as they had not been specified on the policy. It seems between retrieving the quote and buying the policy somehow the bike (and all our valuables worth £1,000) disappeared. While we should have better checked the documents, we feel somewhat let down by ComparetheMarket. The company has told us that the details were on the quote sent to Esure, but that it’s our responsibility to check on receiving the documents. Each firm is blaming the other, leaving us with a big loss. KH,  Bristol What is it about Bristol and bike thefts? I’m told that it is a major problem in the city. This is also not the first time I have heard of this happening, and I have first hand experience of comparison sites struggling to pass on the details when a customer wants to add bikes to a policy. The lesson is to always check an insurance document when it arrives. However, it was reasonable to expect the Meerkat to have passed on the details you inputted. After all, it would have pocketed a substantial commission for, in effect, selling you the policy. After a great deal of toing and froing – frankly rather too much given that your claim was for £550 – the two companies have finally agreed to pay up. Esure has also agreed to refund you the admin fee it later charged to add the valuable items to the policy which should have been there in the first place. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our  terms and conditions
Redrow twice tried to grab some of the front garden from our new home:	Last January we bought a semi-detached new-build. Last month the developer, Redrow, twice attempted to appropriate part of our front garden to widen the communal drive. It did this without any prior notice or explanation and only stopped when we threatened to call the police. We became prisoners in our own home as we awaited written confirmation that it wouldn’t make a third attempt.  Redrow  now adds insult to injury by suggesting its communication on the matter could have been “clearer”. Not only does this imply that some prior communication was attempted, but that, as we are in our 70s, we are too senile to understand plain English. An apology would be enough. It’s their attempts to deny the undeniable that are so enraging. GG, Wilton, Wiltshire Your map shows that the developer tried to shear off a flower bed bordering your front lawn. It says: “We have apologised after one of our third-party workers incorrectly sought to alter a half-metre patch of land to assist with his neighbour’s driveway access. Works were not commenced and no land taken or altered.” This is at odds with the explanation given to you. And the fact the works were stopped because you prevented them. Moreover, you say you have never received any apology. Your garden is still intact; it’s Redrow’s reputation which has been despoiled by this shabby case. If you need help email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our  terms and conditions
A 'Morrisons' van hit my car – but it turned out to be Ocado:	In early November I left my house to find that the front wing of my car had been smashed. Thankfully, a neighbour had left a note on my windscreen. Apparently, a  Morrisons  delivery van had crashed into my car the previous evening and driven off without stopping. I contacted Morrisons’ customer services later that day, which forwarded my details and photos of the damage to  its insurance team. Since then I have heard nothing. I have forwarded a quote for the repair (for over £1,400) and contacted customer services a number of times (typically left on hold for 20 minutes plus). Replies to emails say “someone will come back” but nobody ever does. I don’t have time, and don’t feel I should be, chasing this when it was not my fault. RS,  London W7 The first thing that worried us was how you would be able to prove that it was definitely a Morrisons van. Your witness didn’t take a photo, but was happy to have their details put into the police report you compiled. Morrisons told us it had fully investigated the complaint and concluded that it did not operate the van. It confirmed to you separately that the van had Morrisons livery on it, but was a delivery outsourced to  Ocado , so a matter for it to deal with. It expedited your submission to the relevant operator’s insurance team and marked it for their urgent attention. Morrisons said: “Due to the high volume of incoming queries, this complaint took longer than it normally would to get resolved and we’re really sorry that it got held up. We always strive to get things right, but on this occasion we got it wrong. The operator’s insurance team is working to get this resolved.” Morrisons has since offered you £200-worth of vouchers, which you accepted. Meanwhile, your insurance company has agreed to pay for the damage as a no-fault claim, so your premium won’t go up. Bizarrely, an insurance company acting on behalf of Morrisons (not Ocado) contacted you to ask for details, so you have sent the police report, and also forwarded their email to your insurer. You won’t be out of pocket, but you shouldn’t have been put through the hoops like this over damage that was not your fault. After seven and a half years sharing the hot seat with Miles Brignall, I am stepping down from the Consumer Champions column as I leave the Guardian. I would like to thank you for sending in your problems. In doing so, you have helped us expose issues of national importance. Over the years I have been thanked with the odd box of chocolates or bunch of flowers, but in these challenging times I suggest that readers who appreciate our work and our column – and the power of independent journalism –  make a contribution  to the Guardian. Goodbye, good luck and keep those letters coming in.  RS We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our  terms and conditions
I got 11 parking fines after a mix-up over Zipcar rules:	I started using the London-based car-sharing scheme Zipcar at the beginning of lockdown in March as a way to commute safely, and, initially, rated it highly to friends. Its Flex plan lets you pick up and drop off cars in  allocated zones at the end of the trip. I noticed I was being charged for trips that were 12-14 hours long as the application’s “end trip” button didn’t register when I attempted to use it, unbeknown to me. After I got in touch, Zipcar was able to adjust the trips fairly easily. Fast forward to November and I started receiving parking violation notices from three months previously – tickets related to the trips that did not end correctly. Eleven were sent, each amounting to £130 plus the £15 service charge (for each ticket), totalling more than £1,600. I tried to get this resolved by adjusting the trips as I had before, but was pushed around to various departments. Finally, I got an email telling me that on its website it states where we are allowed to park in various areas of London . It sent me the section of the contract and explained this was final. DC,  London SW8 Zipcar says its Flex service aims to provide a cheap and convenient way for consumers – charged by the minute – to use cars in the capital. It insisted that different parking rules in London boroughs are made clear to users both through the app and its help centre – with links to the various council websites – and that it does not state that members can park anywhere they like. However, we think the information online is a little confusing. When selecting “Flex cars” in the app, users are told that the zone where they can collect or drop off a car is highlighted in blue, with any restricted parking areas outlined in red. But it admits that not all restricted areas are outlined in red, so the system does rely on scrupulous checking. Zipcar looked at your account and insisted you were at fault for the violations which triggered the fines. You were fined eight times for driving in a bus lane, and 13 times for parking in a loading bay/street while restrictions were in force. It said it had spoken to you several times and tried to explain that you were violating traffic and parking rules, but that you had disregarded the warnings and continued to run up further fines. Zipcar said: “All Zipcar members must abide by the rules of the road, as they would in their own vehicle. We make it clear on our website, and in our terms of use, that members are required to obey traffic and parking rules as they will be liable for any violations they incur during or as a result of their trip. In this customer’s case, the charges were correctly attributed, as this member has repeatedly broken the rules.” The total you owe has now risen to £1,740. Since our intervention, Zipcar has agreed a payment plan to allow you to spread out the payments. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our  terms and conditions
Why can't my son get the benefit money that he is entitled to?:	My son fell ill in September and was put into an induced coma . He was in hospital for two weeks and, as he was unable to work or start his planned masters degree, he applied for universal credit. A fortnight later, he asked if the payment could be backdated to the day of his hospital admission (7  September) when he first became eligible . His admission was exactly a month before he made his original application for the benefit to start on the 8  October. Legislation allows it to be backdated by a month subject to certain conditions, including illness. This was initially agreed. The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) then said  it could only backdate for a month from when the request to backdate was made, not from when he originally applied. This means he has been underpaid 12 days of credit, amounting to £142. We asked for a mandatory reconsideration and were told to expect a response within 10 days; it’s now a month, and we have still not heard anything. I fear that DWP could be misreading the legislation and possibly denying the poorest claimants money when they need it most. I asked DWP, via a freedom of information request,  how many people this may affect but was told that obtaining the information would cost more than the £600 spending limit it has for researching and handling a single request. AC, Coolham, West Sussex Your son’s records show that a DWP agent promised that the claim would be backdated to 7 September, a month before he officially applied, then apologised the next day for providing incorrect advice and amended the date to 20 September. The rules are clear. Claimants must apply on the first day of the period for which they are claiming, ie as soon as they become eligible. If their applications are delayed by exceptional circumstances, their claim can be backdated by a maximum of one month. The DWP acknowledged this and paid up for the 12 days owed. Curiously, the letter informing you of this only admitted that your appeal had been “partially upheld”. The department refused to discuss how many others may have been affected. When I asked if checks had been undertaken to ascertain whether other staff were providing the same incorrect information, and how many applications would have been affected, it refused to comment. Nor would it confirm whether the case load of the adviser in question had been investigated to ensure that no other claimant was short-changed, saying I had no business questioning the performance of individuals. According to  government statistics , the DWP overestimates 1.1% of claims while underestimating 0.7%. However, your son’s case was a misunderstanding of the rules, rather than a typo, and I’d like to hear from anyone in that 0.7% who has been penalised for the same reason. If you need help email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our  terms and conditions
The joy of small things: daily lockdown walks with a camera:	D uring the last lockdown one of the things that soothed me most was going on a daily walk with my camera, seeking out beauty in nature, the small things. I live in Edinburgh, and would walk down to my local beach, and back along some of the old railway lines that criss cross the city and are now cycle paths, punctuated by woodland areas and dominated by huge trees. I would get distracted by cherry blossom trees, watching as tight buds bloomed into fresh, lime-green leaves, the constant song of birds bringing hope and colour to an otherwise scary and frustrating time. This new lockdown has come at arguably the most depressing time of the year, the excitement of Christmas gone, the trees bare, the days short, dark and cold. So I am trying to concentrate once again on the small things, on losing myself in the beauty of nature, even for a short time every day. The first day of this new lockdown I decided I would again go out every day again, armed with my camera. It was a grey morning with an icy, easterly wind, choppy waves at Wardie Bay beach, not very inspiring, but the sand was covered in frost, the seaweed and pebbles had a beautiful sparkly outline and for a moment the sun peeped out from behind the clouds and a sliver of pink sky emerged along the horizon. It started sleeting hard at the end of my walk and the rest of the day was decidedly dreich as they say in these parts, but that moment was worth it. Winter holds such wonder and by going more slowly, taking time to savour what I see, I find much to be grateful for. The intricate patterns of bark, the low sun giving us an almost all day golden hour, the sparkling icy pavements. Taking time to stop and absorb our surroundings is a luxury we don’t normally have, but if ever there were a time, it is now. Life is so busy that taking this time to walk sometimes feels like an indulgence, but for me it is a lifeline. I often walk alone, trying to vary the times of day I go out. I love early mornings the most, witnessing the sun breaking the horizon , the sea birds soaring in the pink sky, the crisp frost on the sand, no other footprints to be seen. Sometimes I take my children, armed with an old camera of mine. This has become a treasured time together: I love seeing what they find beautiful, literally seeing the world through their eyes as they sit for ages watching the waves to find the perfect one that catches the light, and the joy when they get a photo they love. It is a wonderful way to document this time, to treasure the connection we have with nature and with each other. So I encourage you to go out, take a phone, a camera, or just use your eyes. But look up, look down, stop, go slowly, watch the light play on the water, see how the sun haloes around a tree. Take your time and savour this: think of it as a way to calm and soothe your soul. Biophilia is the term for the innate human tendency to interact and connect with nature. It is known to induce calm and good feelings, and we all need more of those right now. •  Anna Deacon is co-author of  For the Love of Trees  and  Taking the Plunge  ( Black and White Publishing, £20 each) •   Share photos of things you’ve noticed on your lockdown walks by posting them on Instagram with the hashtags #guardiantravelsnaps and #thejoyofsmallthings
Hamburg's giant cranes create a beach scene like no other:	I’d only been to Hamburg once before: in the depths of winter, when hunkering down in a dingy St Pauli bar was the main aim of the trip. But Hamburg in summer is a different story. On a sweltering day in August, I hired a bike and went west, out of the city centre, along the River Elbe. I had been told there were urban beaches along the river and I was keen to take a look. It seemed like all of Hamburg was on the beach that day. But what made it extraordinary was the backdrop Away from the city’s hustle, I stopped to admire a cheerful-looking red lighthouse at the water’s edge. A terrace of cafes and restaurants looked over the river, with waiters rushing to and fro with large trays of beer and snacks for their many customers. Over the other side I could see a long stretch of sand, teeming with sunseekers. A narrow path led behind the restaurants, parallel to the beach. On my right were dainty, picture-perfect wooden houses, with roses around the door and parasols peeking jauntily from windows. Gardens belonging to the houses were on the other side of the path to my left, with families playing on the grass and elderly couples sipping cool drinks in the shade. Beyond the gardens was a beach scene like no other. A strip of sand, maybe 50 metres wide, was packed with people sunbathing, building sandcastles, playing beach games and generally doing what people do on beaches. It seemed like all of Hamburg was on the beach that day. But what made it extraordinary was the backdrop. Immense container ships cruised past, causing waves to crash on the shore for excited young children to jump over. And on the far side of the river stood colossal industrial cranes, like giant metal beasts, surveying the sun-drenched spectacle. I walked a little further, past the Ahoi Strandkiosk, and found a spare metre of sand to myself. A group of friends were enthusiastically playing volleyball in the water in front of me. I took a crafty shot, thinking they might not appreciate having their photo taken. But it soon became apparent that no one on this gorgeous summer’s day gave a hoot about some woman taking photos on a crowded beach. I snapped away at everything and everyone. This scene is a favourite because of the moment of carefree happiness captured between friends, against the backdrop of the city’s harbour giants – those majestic metal cranes. •  Celia Topping is a photographer and journalist based in Berlin and London
Reboot camp: 15 virtual wellbeing retreats for 2021:	Take a carbon-free trip to India and create a retreat with live video consultations and private classes led by the experts at this destination spa. Various wellbeing packages are available. The Ananda Starter includes an in-depth ayurvedic consultation with a doctor to review your mental, physical and emotional health and assess your body type (dosha) and current imbalances; a set of signature dosha-based recipes; an individual yoga consultation and assessment; and a private class (choose from hatha yoga or meditation) with tailored advice and adjustments.  •   About £140 ,  anandaspa.com From 13-28 January, then available as a recording to dip in and out of, this yoga and meditation retreat will be live via Zoom from Yobaba Lounge’s yoga studio at a chateau in the south of France. Owner Gertrud Keazor will share her gently effective approach to yoga, which she calls embodied meditation, in live sessions every other day, with supportive written content, extra micro-practices, and three live group calls during the retreat for sharing, asking questions and feeling encouraged. There are lessons in breathing, mindfulness and visualisation techniques, and tools to help participants take better care of themselves in daily life.  •   €150 ,  yobabalounge.com Starting 15 January for a week, with later dates available, this virtual healthy-eating retreat from Spain via Zoom and Facebook will ease you in to following a plant-based diet and cleanse you, ready for the year ahead. You’ll get a menu plan, recipe pack and shopping list in advance, with the choice of a standard plan or a lower-calorie plan for those who want to lose weight. After two or four days of juices or smoothies, plus soups, you will learn to cook delicious plant-based meals and snacks in your own home. A daily live online meeting with La Crisalida’s co-owner and nutritionist Lisa Brant, daily inspirational emails and access to a closed Facebook group will guide and support you.  •   €27,  lacrisalidaretreats.com Running monthly from 15 January, 12 February, 12 March and 16 April for between three and 28 days, these retreats offer a guided deep detox alongside live classes, educational talks, coaching workshops and fitness sessions – the latter are also recorded, so you can dip in and out of them. You’ll receive a home detox box at the start, with nutritional supplements, dry skin body brush, ayurvedic tongue cleanser and colon cleansing kit, and there is support and guidance via online Q&A sessions with nutritional therapists, counsellors, a hypnotherapist and a fitness trainer. Raw juice deliveries are on offer at an extra cost.  •   From  £499 ,  platinum-healing.com This virtual weekend – 16 and 17 January, and available as a recording for six months after – combines yoga, journaling, life coaching and mindfulness with Tuscan recipes and cooking demos, and interviews with inspirational people. The course is filmed in and around the villa near Montefollonico, south-east of Siena, where Tuscan Getaways usually take place. Meditate under the olive trees, do yoga in the hills, learn to bake bread on an organic farm, and hear Frances Mayes, author of Under the Tuscan Sun, talking about making her home in Cortona, about what it’s like to follow your dreams. It is all presented by owner and retreat leader Debbie Travis.  •   US$175 ,  tuscangetaway.com For three nights (21-24 January), this mindfulness meditation retreat will enable you to enjoy guided meditations, with optional weekly check-ins for two weeks after the end of the retreat. As well as live dharma talks and guided nature-connection practices with Sharpham’s teachers – who usually run Buddhist-focused retreats at the Barn on Sharpham’s estate in Devon – there are downloadable mindful movement routines and practices such as qigong and yoga, scheduled individual time and Q&A sessions.  •   Suggested donation £145,  sharphamtrust.org This private, tailored retreat (22–24 January, with other dates available on request) is for those about to make bold moves or decisions. It pivots on three private, live online coaching sessions of an hour each with lifestyle coach, author and speaker Kate Emmerson – one to strategise, the second to support, the third to help reflect on and integrate insights. Lighthearted and full of vigour, Emmerson helps you identify your next step. She will devise a schedule of bespoke exercises, processes, rituals and questions to ponder, and is on hand throughout the weekend for additional support.  •   £ 495  for the weekend,  kate-emmerson.com Running 22–24 January and 5-7 February, these three-day virtual yoga and pilates retreats include five live sessions to help you relax and recharge, a menu of vegetarian meals you can make yourself at home following video cooking tutorials, and a retreat workbook with tools and tips to help create space and set your intentions for the year ahead. You’ll also get lifetime access to Azulfit’s on-demand yoga, meditation and pilates videos to keep up the good work at home with the same teachers who take the live sessions – all recorded on Azulfit’s outdoor yoga deck on Fuerteventura, to give you a dose of virtual sunshine.  •   $147 (about £108) ,  azulfit.com Psychotherapist and biodynamic psychologist Fiona Arrigo leads this online holistic retreat for women. Taking place from 12-14 February, it is a nourishing group programme of live sessions to help empower women to find inner strength and guidance in difficult times. From 6pm–9pm on Friday, and then 10am–5pm on both Saturday and Sunday, the interactive programme will include meditation, breath work, movement, nurturing group sessions and time to reflect, with the aim of working out how to live an empowered rather than an exhausted life.  •   £238 ,  aplacetoheal.co.uk Proceeds from these by-donation, pre-recorded virtual retreats go to Reclaim Yourself’s free retreat for exhausted NHS frontline Covid workers. Designed to help find some stillness and navigate the year ahead, they comprise a day of “rest and refuge”, with positive affirmations, a restorative yoga class, meditations, a podcast list and a sound healing, and a second day of “clarity”, to help you reflect and set intentions for the year ahead, with yoga classes led by yoginis Emma Henry and Jean Hall, vision boarding and a guided facial. You’ll get a weekend menu with recipes and shopping lists from healthy-eating outfit Bettina’s Kitchen.  •   Minimum donation  £25 ,  reclaimyourself.co.uk These half- and whole-day at-home virtual retreat packages are designed to be booked whenever you want, and themed by the feeling you want to achieve: calm, empowered or strong. Pick a day to suit your needs and go for a short taster experience or a full-on immersion. Schedules include a mix of wake-up and bedtime routines, healthy breakfast, lunch and dinner recipes, workshops on your chosen theme, audio meditations, poems to read, yoga nidras, live yoga classes with Adventure Yogi teachers in different styles, and pre-recorded evening yin yoga classes.  •   From £9.99 to £34.99 ,  adventureyogi.com Available from this month (January) to spend a whole weekend on, or dip in and out of at your leisure until June 2021, this retreat experience mixes sessions of meditation, sound healing, personal training, hatha yoga, yoga nidra, plant-based recipes, fireside nutritional talks and a podcast for a guided walking exercise in nature – all pre-recorded at Tilton House in East Sussex, where the team usually holds its actual retreats. Hostess Polly Moore introduces the retreat and offers a simple grounding meditation to get you started, and there’s a closed Facebook group so you can ask the experts questions and connect in real time.  •   £130 ,  departmentofwellbeing.co.uk Mini-retreats are being offered on Mondays (10am-12pm and 1-3pm) and Saturday full-day retreats (10am-4pm) for anyone who wants to devote time and energy to their writing, be it nonfiction or fiction, professional or for pleasure. Run through a Facebook group, the retreats offer the same motivation and guidance from Charlie Haynes that she offers on her actual one-day writing retreats in London and residential retreats near Newton Abbot in Devon. Haynes has been running retreats since 2008 and is skilled at helping procrastinators understand and overcome their blocks. For anyone with any writing project, large or small.  •   By  donation ,  urbanwritersretreat.co.uk For anyone looking for significant life change, these two- to five-day private retreats via Zoom enable you to tap into the expertise usually offered at this retreat in France run by Desri Goodwin, an experienced strategic intervention coach, and her partner, Robin, a master neurolinguistic programming practitioner, hypnotherapist and energy healer. They use various emotional therapy techniques to tap into your unconscious, help you change your perspective on past events, free you of negativity and resolve the issues that limit your potential. The tailored retreats feature over four hours of one-to-one time each day, plus an energy healing session.  •   £950  for two days,   chateaudemouillac.com Running from two to seven days, these fully supported private home retreats pivot on live online sessions of energy work, counselling and meditation with energy healer Lynn Jackson, and are for people who need help with stress, anxiety, relationship issues, life re-direction and more. A pre-retreat consultation establishes your needs and helps get you ready with the tools and space required. You’re advised to digitally detox and avoid all stimulants, and Jackson will offer guidance on nutrition, additional online classes, books to read, music to dance to and nurturing activities from forest bathing to bath soaks.  •   From  £247 ,  including three 60-minute online sessions  over two days or more,  bespoke-retreats.co.uk Guardian readers can get a 10% discount on this online retreat with Château de Mouillac, plus a complimentary follow-up call/session (value £150 and lasting approximately an hour) a week after the retreat, subject to availability. Quote “Guardian Reader Offer” when booking Caroline Sylger Jones  is the founder of  Queen of Retreats
I’ve retired and my sex drive has fallen. I’m letting my wife down:	The dilemma  My wife and I have had a good marriage, share  interests and have  wonderful children. I am 18 years older than her and recently retired from a successful career. We both had a high sexual drive, but for some years have been sleeping apart because I snore. Our sex life never really recovered and – to make matters worse – my  desire has gone off a cliff . We have tried, but I usually can’t get a sustainable erection – even if I take Viagra. She wants an active sex life, which makes me feel I am letting her down as, for many years, we had sex  daily . I  think I am diminished in her eyes now that I don’t work . I knew she was proud of my achievements running a substantial business . We are financially comfortable, but she often seems dissatisfied . I sometimes think she would like things to be like they were, as our children  go on to make their own lives and we have less contact with  other family  and friends because of Covid.  I am not sure what to do. I would like for us to look forward to a long, happy retirement, but this sexual mis match seems like a substantial obstacle. Mariella replies  An obstacle? Or simply a divergence before your paths join again. It can’t have been easy to open up on a subject that many men experience but few feel bold enough to admit. In middle age the diminishing spark of desire is just one of many indignities that descend on men and women, making you wonder if longevity is the gift it’s made out to be or an unwelcome extension fraught with difficulty and frustration. We live longer, our bodies atrophy, our lives change course and the people we’ve managed to rub along with for decades become all the more precious. I’m not saying any of that to increase your load. Learning to carry weight on our shoulders is a life skill like any other, and it stands us in good stead when our bodies age, our hopes and dreams are inevitably tempered and the world starts to feel as if it’s filled with less potential. It’s the point where we need to dig deep to find reserves of strength, courage and wisdom because those are the qualities that won’t just sustain us through brief turbulence but will help us to fly into maturity with equanimity, confidence and a renewed sense of purpose. An end to separate bedrooms is a good place for you to start I’m worried because I feel you’ve lost sight of your spark and the lust for life that’s going to fuel your future. Instead of celebrating a successful union that’s held together through who knows what stresses, you’re doubting your relationship’s ability to survive a dip in desire that is eminently fixable. Most onerously you’ve started equating your value to your wife as inseparable from your role as successful hunter-gatherer, forgetting that the former is what has brought you to this point. That you can now kick off your work shoes and enjoy downtime with your lifelong partner is a great success story. If you imagine that others see you diminished it can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Viagra is definitely not the only answer; you may be surprised to discover how much control your brain has over that part of your body. In maturity you’re discovering that which should be drilled into us all from the start: sex and desire are inextricably connected to what’s happening in our heads and we have the ability to control one by using the other – a skill-set that usually works best when employed from the top down! I know that there are treatments available should you wish, but why not start by separating your self-worth from your successful career? It’s a badge of honour that you’ve succeeded in life so far but that’s not who you are, it’s just what you’ve made. As a credential to carry you through to whatever life next throws at you, business success has currency but it’s not the sum of your parts. And because you’ve retired doesn’t mean you need to embrace the life of a sloth. Now is your chance to step into the world and find interests and activities that you’ve not had time for in the past. I can’t think of a better time to get more intimately acquainted with what makes you tick. Seek out a therapist to talk you through the predictable struggle you’re experiencing in switching from one life path to another. The return of your libido will probably follow and if not,  Relate runs courses  for older people seeking help with sexual issues – . Try to think more broadly when it comes to what might be coming between you and your wife. An end to separate bedrooms would be a good practical place to start, or at least visitation rights. Snoring is not a minority activity after all. I entirely empathise with your wife’s pursuit of a good night’s sleep, but there are less drastic solutions than separate rooms and, as human beings, far greater tortures many have to endure. I’ve found a pair of silicone earplugs a good remedy. Wanting your marriage to survive and setting your heart on ensuring it does are two different scenarios. I suggest you opt for the latter. If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to  mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk . Follow her on Twitter  @mariellaf1
Covid: arrivals to UK will need to show a negative test before entry:	International travellers will need to show a negative Covid-19 test before being allowed into the UK, the government has announced, in a significant toughening of border controls to try to stem the  spread of new coronavirus variants . The new rules will take effect next week and apply to returning UK nationals as well as foreign citizens. Passengers will need to produce a test result taken less than 72 hours before boarding planes, boats or trains to the UK, and could be fined £500 in border spot checks without a negative result. Arrivals will still need to quarantine for 10 days, even with a negative test, unless they are coming from one of the limited number of countries deemed low risk on the government’s travel corridor list. The move comes many months after border restrictions were put in place in other countries, which have managed to bring local transmission to an end, and amid mounting  pressure for tighter controls  with fears over the South African Covid variant. The rules will officially only apply to  England  but ministers were said to be working closely with the devolved administrations on similar measures for Wales and Northern Ireland. The Scottish government confirmed it would adopt the same plan, while adding it would not affect current rules that make non-essential travel to and from Scotland illegal. The rules will not apply to visitors from Ireland, which is also expected to put a similar scheme in place this week. It comes as other countries  including France close their borders  to British travellers due to the highly transmissible new variant of Covid-19 first identified in the UK. Pre-departure testing is seen as safer than testing on arrival to reduce the chance of infection during travel – although the aviation industry has argued the risk of transmission in flight is minimal. Announcing the move, the transport secretary,  Grant Shapps , said: “We already have significant measures in place to prevent imported cases of Covid-19, but with new strains of the virus developing internationally we must take further precautions. “Taken together with the existing mandatory self-isolation period for passengers returning from high-risk countries, pre-departure tests will provide a further line of defence – helping us control the virus as we roll out the vaccine at pace over the coming weeks.” Legislation will be brought in early next week, the Department for Transport said, setting out the test standards and required proof of a negative test. Hauliers, flight crew and children under 11 will be exempt. Passengers will still be able to reduce their isolation period by paying for a further test five days after arrival, under the  Test to Release scheme . Heathrow airport’s chief executive, John Holland-Kaye, said: “Having  called for the introduction of pre-departure testing  since last April, we support this development which ensures passengers can continue to travel safely. The government must now prioritise the creation of a common international standard for testing that would introduce a global process to protect confidence in future travel.” Earlier, the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, urged Shapps to implement more robust measures owing to the capital’s exposure through international airports, Eurostar rail arrivals and freight ports. Contrasting UK policy with other countries’ protective restrictions, he said that pre-departure testing should be combined with a test on arrival and stricter, better enforced quarantine rules. The government has also extended the blanket ban on entry from South  Africa  to include a swathe of southern African countries. From 4am Saturday, entry will be denied to most people who have travelled from or through any southern African country in the last 10 days – including Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe, and holiday destinations Seychelles and Mauritius. British and Irish nationals can return but must self-isolate with their households for 10 days.
My teenage son shows no interest in school:	My 15-year-old son is refusing to take responsibility for anything and, although he’s capable, he does not show any interest in his education. I am worried about him and his future. Sometimes, I feel bad and tell him that he’s trying his best, but soon I start feeling concerned again. At other times, I feel angry with him for the way he is behaving. I try to encourage him by amplifying every little good thing he does, particularly in school, and have tried speaking to him like an adult. I am also worried that his younger siblings, who are doing well, will follow in his footsteps. Do you have any tips on how I can inspire him to change? •  When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who wrote to Private Lives asking for help and may well view your comments here. Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed. •  Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site. •  If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns. •  All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email  private.lives@theguardian.com  (please don’t send attachments). Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see  gu.com/letters-terms .
Sign up for Word of Mouth: the best of Guardian Food every week:	Each week we’ll keep you up-to-date with all the food coverage from the Guardian and the Observer. We’ll send you the latest recipes from Yotam Ottolenghi, Nigel Slater, Meera Sodha and all our star cooks, stand-out food features and seasonal eating inspiration, plus restaurant reviews from Grace Dent and Jay Rayner. Sign up below to start receiving the best of our culinary journalism in one mouth-watering weekly email. Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football or travel, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Design Review: get the newsletter for the way we live now:	‘Design’ is a word used to describe architecture and products, ideas and visual arts. Design makes your sofa comfortable, but it can also save the planet if you’re developing innovative building materials. In this age, every aspect of design is considered by the switched-on reader, so the  Design  Review newsletter focuses on thinking and process as much as products to buy. The way we think about lifestyle is changing. As our focus turns to sustainability and away from the short fix of fashion and trends, we have updated our lifestyle journalism to reflect this. Following on from the Observer’s quarterly  Design magazine , our monthly newsletter to bring you more of these features and stories. *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters  may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Have you seen the price of sperm? It's time to democratise fertility treatment:	O ne big advantage of homosexuality? Built-in birth control. One big disadvantage of homosexuality? Built-in birth control. You can’t just casually start trying for a child when you’re in a same-sex couple, you’ve got to meticulously plan parenthood. Instead of getting off the pill, you start taking them. You also start buying sperm. (Look up the price of sperm if you want a shock: it’s more bonkers than bitcoin.) And you start booking doctors’ visits. And getting blood tests. And ultrasounds. And trigger shots. And you go to the hospital and magic medicalised baby-making happens. And then you wait two weeks. And then you get your period and you have to do it all again. My partner and I spent much of 2020 engaged in variants of the above. Finally, after four IUI (intrauterine insemination) procedures and about $20,000 in bills, she got pregnant. (Hurrah!) I won’t get into the technicalities of IUI but it’s less invasive and expensive than IVF (in vitro fertilisation); the flipside is that it’s not as effective. We may have shelled out a small fortune but, in the end, we were lucky: getting pregnant could have taken a lot longer and cost a lot more. Our health insurance didn’t cover IVF: if we’d had to go that route then I’m not sure how long we would have been able to keep trying. Meanwhile, some of our straight friends going through  IVF  had insurance that covered everything. Which, while great for them, felt somewhat arbitrary and unfair. To be clear: I don’t think having kids is a human right. I don’t think every lesbian couple should be issued one free baby courtesy of the state. But I also don’t think fertility treatments should be something only the lucky or the loaded have access to. Which, in England and the US at least, is how the system currently works. In England, getting fertility treatments on the NHS is a  postcode lottery . (Scotland offers the “gold standard” of three NHS-funded cycles of IVF; Wales offers two cycles. In England it varies between three and none at all.) In the US, fertility coverage depends on your health insurance. Which, in turn, depends on the size of your employer and the laws around infertility insurance coverage in your state. Not to mention your sexuality: you have to jump through a lot more hoops to get covered when you’re a same-sex couple. But perhaps things are slowly changing: I was thrilled to see that  England’s first not-for-profit IVF clinic  is opening in London this year. It will address the inequalities in IVF provision by offering at-cost treatment; it also won’t offer all the expensive (and often ineffective) add-ons that private clinics do. I mean, did you know that EmbryoGlue is a thing? Or that you can pay extra for “assisted hatching”? The industry is so ridiculous I’m surprised you can’t order satellite TV to relax your embryo as it awaits implantation. Also ridiculous is the amount of judgment that can still be attached to fertility. “Why did you wait so long to start trying?” “Perhaps you should have focused on finding a partner instead of your career.” “Why don’t you ‘just’ adopt?”   (There is nothing simple about adopting.) “Are you sure you should be having kids when you’re not married to a man?”   Seriously, if I had a penny for every unsolicited opinion I’ve heard about my ovaries, I could buy the world a round of IVF. We need to widen access to fertility treatments, but we also desperately need to widen the conversation around fertility. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnist
Now that I am 86, have I lost the ability to orgasm for ever?:	I am an 86-year old man who has enjoyed a good sex life. But last week I suddenly found I could not achieve an orgasm, no matter how much my wife tried to help or how many porn videos  I watched. Am I just going through a temporary orgasm stoppage or have I lost  my ability to  ejaculate  for ever ?   Is it possible my body will not enjoy another orgasmic moment ? Can you help me? I’m desperate. Age itself is not a cause of anorgasmia or an inability to become aroused or ejaculate. So it is important that you try to reduce your understandable anxiety about this and do some detective work to figure out what has changed since you were last able to climax. Have you changed medications? Have you been taking new over-the-counter medications? Has your stress increased? Have you suffered a bereavement or loss? Have you recently become more anxious or depressed? Any of these factors can influence your ability to climax. If you think it might be a medication issue, ask your doctor to find an alternative. It’s just a matter of discovering the root cause. I know all of us are going through a very difficult time, so it would help to find some at-home methods of relaxation and stress-reduction. Try to exercise in moderation if your doctor allows it. You might also seek a general medical checkup and perhaps request some hormonal supplements. Consider seeking online therapeutic help if you think you would benefit. Age itself is not the problem. You deserve to be able to continue to have pleasure. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to  private.lives@theguardian.com  (please don’t send attachments). Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see  gu.com/letters-terms . Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.
Silence your inner critic: a guide to self-compassion in the toughest times:	Tobyn Bell still remembers the precise moment when his self-compassion practice paid off. He had just arrived home from work and was turning over in his mind the mistakes he had made that day, what he could or should have done – the kind of self-critical thoughts he had struggled with for years. Then, unexpectedly, another voice piped up in response, calm and steadying, addressing Bell by a fond nickname from his childhood. While training to be a mental health nurse, Bell had learned tactics to counter and give context to his inner critic. In that otherwise mundane moment, when his internal monologue leapt to meet cruelty with kindness, they were revealed to have been effective. “Because I’d really practised this self-compassionate voice, it just showed up and answered,” Bell says. “It felt really moving. I’d never thought that could be possible.” Many of us may see self-compassion as akin to mindfulness or gratitude: a worthy goal that is hard to turn into a habitual practice. But, as Bell’s example shows, it is possible to change our inner monologue, with benefits for not only our individual health and happiness, but perhaps that of society. Self-compassion is really recognising what it is to be human: what our basic needs are By fostering compassion for ourselves, experts say, we are more readily able to feel it for other people, meaning our kinder, calmer, more empathic approach can radiate outwards. With more months of lockdown looming, with all the uncertainty and unhappiness that is likely to bring, changing your inner monologue is one small – and, crucially, free – step towards looking after your mental health. Self-compassion is not self-care, in the superficial chocolates-and-bubble-bath sense – nor is it simply being kind. Paul Gilbert, a clinical psychologist and the founder of the  Compassionate Mind Foundation , says compassion is best understood as turning towards suffering, whether it is in yourself or others, and taking action to alleviate it. Instead of finding fleeting ways to feel better, self-compassion is a readiness to engage with pain at its source. The aim is to be able to treat yourself as a doctor would, Gilbert suggests: not only taking your suffering seriously, but helping to relieve it. “It’s this ability, when we are suffering, to stand back and say: ‘What is this about, why do I feel this? And what would be the most helpful thing for me now?’” Negative self-talk is not evidence of something “wrong” with us that needs to be fixed; it is a feature of being human. Our propensity to cause ourselves anguish is an evolved function of what Gilbert terms our “tricky” brain. Our complex cognitive system – able to imagine, anticipate and conceive of an objective “self” – is equally inclined to dwell on negative thoughts such as “If only I’d …” and “I should have …” This triggers the same fight-or-flight, physiological response as an external threat. “Self-compassion is always a trade-off with self-criticism,” says Gilbert. For some people, the balance is so skewed that their inner critic governs who – and how – they are in the world. Not only is this a miserable existence, but it often underpins problematic relationships with drugs, alcohol, food or work, in the attempt to find some relief, as well as mental health problems including depression. Many of us have become adept at avoiding uncomfortable or unpleasant emotions – whether it is because we are distracted by our busy lives, or simply unable to cope with what we might find. The first step towards self-compassion is gaining awareness of our inner world: what triggers feelings of anger, disgust or shame; how we instinctively react to them; the content (and tone) of our internal monologue; and any blocks or resistances we encounter. Deborah Lee, a consultant clinical psychologist and the head of trauma services at Berkshire Healthcare, describes it as creating a new “knowledge landscape” against which the pain can be recast. “In order for you to even see that you’ve got a self-critic, you’ve got to become a wise observer.” This process may be confronting – especially, says Lee, for people with trauma, who may have absorbed their abuser’s words into their internal monologue. “Developing self-compassion is developing insight so that you can  see  yourself, rather than  be  yourself, as such. It’s an ability to feel safe as opposed to traumatised – to develop the flexibility in your mind to develop a compassionate lens.” In his practice, Gilbert shows patients how to ground themselves during their “guided discovery” with breath, muscle relaxation or mindfulness exercises. (The Calm and Headspace apps have guided meditations for compassion; there are also pdf and audio resources on the  Compassionate Mind Foundation’s website .) Gilbert recommends soothing rhythm breathing, which is shown to alleviate stress and anxiety through its effect on the autonomic nervous system. With your shoulders, back and chest open, slow and deepen the breath to about five breaths a minute. The key is to maintain the smoothness of breath: five (or four, or six – just be consistent) seconds in, the same again out. Bell, now a psychotherapist working within the NHS in Manchester, says it is helpful to understand self-criticism as a dialogue between two aspects of the self. “There’s one part of you that’s really attacking, angry and hostile, and there’s another part of you that’s receiving it and feeling upset and hurt.” By seeing it as a relationship, you can step out of it and “relate to the conflict in a different way,” he says. In therapy, clients might differentiate between these aspects of the self by sitting in different chairs to give voice to them, or  by personifying them  with form or features. Bell suggests imagining your inner dialogue as that of two strangers on the street, and describing their relationship: “Often people say: ‘Well, it’s abusive,’” he says. “As soon as you can see it as external from you, you can see it more clearly.” It may even shed light on your inner critic’s origins by bringing to mind your dynamic with a parent, teacher or peer. Nina Savelle-Rocklin, a Los Angeles-based psychoanalyst and the author of  The Binge Cure: 7 Steps to Outsmart Emotional Eating , says many of us  learned to deny or smother our pain  in childhood, leaving us with no idea of how to soothe ourselves in later life. She devised the “Vary” acronym to inform her clients’ responses: “Validate, acknowledge, reassure yourself.” The first step is especially important, Savelle-Rocklin says. “We tell ourselves when we are in emotional pain or distress: ‘It’s not that bad,’ ‘It’s going to be OK,’ ‘Look on the bright side’ … but we need to recognise within ourselves when we’re hurting.” Savelle-Rocklin says: “If you wouldn’t say it to a friend, don’t say it to yourself.” Not using the attacking second-person voice – or judgmental words such as “normal”, “ridiculous” and “should” – in dialogue with yourself can also help. It is not just what your inner monologue says – how it says it matters, too. Savelle-Rocklin recalls a client attempting to comfort herself in a defeated tone: “‘It’s going to be OK, it’s not that bad’ – she sounded as if she was reciting statistics.” Speaking to yourself with warmth and kindness can “feel like a verbal hug” by triggering the physiological memory of feeling safe, says Savelle-Rocklin. Maintaining  an open, upright posture  and friendly facial expression can similarly influence your mind, even if it doesn’t reflect how you feel, says Gilbert. It is unrealistic to expect to silence your inner critic – but you can, as Bell did, train up another voice to counter it. Building a new monologue is “more positive and hopeful than thinking: ‘I’ve got to battle the critic’”, he says. He suggests starting by imagining a friend or family member who cares about you answering on your behalf. Negative self-talk can also be reframed as a well-meaning coach or protector, or simply an indicator of mental state. Bell has come to see his critical voice as a “red flag” that he is feeling vulnerable and in need of some care. “The function of it has changed … You can then use it to your benefit.” Compassion has as much to do with our relationships to other people as with ourselves, says Gilbert. Fostering connection and ways we can care for others reorganises our tricky brains to draw meaning from these relationships, instead of the self. When we feel supported by others, and safe, we feel better able to extend that to others. The aim is to create a “compassionate mindset” where we not only feel compassion for ourselves and others, but are open to receiving it too, says Gilbert. “Self-compassion is really recognising what it is to be human: what our basic needs are, which is a sense of connectedness, and what moves us away from that.” The difficulty in fostering self-compassion is that much of modern life is geared towards competition – from  our economic system , modelled around the assumption of scarcity, to our entertainment, where reality television contestants fight to avoid elimination. All of this triggers our threat system, bringing out the worst in our primitive brains. A tenet of “compassion-focused therapy”, which Gilbert developed, is recognising that self-criticism is an entirely reasonable response to “swimming in a river that we shouldn’t be swimming in”, he says. “What tends to lie under self-criticism is this fear of not being good enough, being dismissed or devalued, seen as undesirable – but we live in a society that is constantly, from the day we are born, judging, evaluating, rating and ranking us … Nobody teaches us how to deal with suffering,” he says. Lee says learning to be compassionate takes daily discipline, just like physical fitness. “If you want to feel the benefits … you have to put the work in.” But, she adds, the hardest part is granting yourself the permission to do it and accepting that you deserve to be at peace with yourself. Making that commitment marks the start of a “lifelong journey”, says Lee. She tells her patients that the longest relationship they will ever have is with themselves – “so would you like to take your self-critic with you, or your compassionate friend?” •  In the UK, the charity  Mind  is available on 0300 123 3393 and  Childline  on 0800 1111. In the US,  Mental Health America  is available on 800-273-8255. In Australia, support is available at  Beyond Blue  on 1300 22 4636,  Lifeline  on 13 11 14, and at  MensLine  on 1300 789 978
Readers' hangover cures: 10 ways to beat the post-booze blues – from Radiohead to rollmop vinegar:	Mix chopped beefsteak tomatoes, balsamic vinegar, celery salt, pepper, some red pesto, Worcestershire sauce, a little sugar, rapeseed oil, a splodge of tomato ketchup and a pinch of chilli flakes, then microwave for about three minutes. Add vodka to taste if you’re not driving anywhere afterwards. Pour the whole lot over buttered sourdough toast, add a sprig of basil and more black pepper. Wolf it down and go back to bed. Nearly always works for me.  Kevin Brown, land manager,  Essex Drink rehydration salts and stretch, then go for a swim/sauna/massage, if possible – an acceptable replacement during Covid times is an Epsom salt bath, a foam roller and a walk. Lunch should involve eggs, maybe  bibimbap  or  shakshuka . After lunch, watch a gentle film from your youth (such as Home Alone or The Big Lebowski) from a comfy sofa while wearing soft socks, eating salted popcorn and drinking orange squash. Wear a hydrating face mask all day and hug or be hugged, if you can; sometimes a pillow will do. Remember, it will end.  Emma Colohan,  London Before hitting the sack, drink at least two pints of warm water. Each pint must have one teaspoon of salt and two dessertspoons of sugar mixed in. Your stomach will be fit to burst – particularly if you’ve scoffed a pizza or burger – but perseverance is key. Afterwards, and still before bed, drink one Alka-Seltzer XS per the instructions. The following morning, have a tuna mayo sandwich for breakfast, washed down with another Alka-Seltzer XS. If you have time, go back to sleep before you’re haunted by memories of the night before.  Steve,  designer , Manchester I no longer drink, but my failsafe hangover cure used to be tea with honey, dry toast and a long bath – as hot as you can bear. Then, play Radiohead’s 2001 album Amnesiac quietly, while firmly pinching the pressure point between your thumb and your index finger. It’s important to note that this doesn’t work with anything else from Radiohead’s discography.  Christabel Stevens, writer, Angus Years ago, I worked in a jobcentre and, at the end of a hard week, half of the office would pile into the pub opposite to let off some steam. The next day, I’d crawl out early, down to the local shopping strip, and get some grapefruit (for the vitamin C), as well as either a platter of tiny lamb chops or, preferably, a bag of sprats or sardines. I would grill the latter hot and fast and eat with a petit pain to soak things up. By 10am, I’d feel like a king and be ready to tackle the weekend.  Anonymous,  civil servant , London Over the years, I’ve tried everything from milk thistle and turmeric shots to coconut water and large doses of vitamin C, but you just can’t beat fried egg on toast and a pint of water before bed. In the morning, have a glass of full-fat Coke, a couple of ibuprofen and some ready salted crisps. Works every time.  Jo Deighton, business consultant,  West Sussex I find the thing that works best is denial. Your hangover is like a bully – it thrives on your attention, so if you ignore it completely it will eventually stop bothering you. Wake up at a normal time, take a shower (try cold water), have a coffee and a healthy breakfast, leave the house and do something virtuous outdoors. Never, not once, not to yourself or to anyone else, admit how utterly horrible you feel inside. If you’re lucky, your hangover will leave you alone before the day is done – and, if not, at least you can feel smug about how much you got done despite it.  Matt Cavers, cider maker and copywriter, British  Columbia , Canada  I drink what’s left in the rollmops jar: a good sip of vinegar marinated with herring, pepper and onions usually does the trick. I’m not ashamed to admit that, once I’m done with the rollmops, I keep the jars and the precious liquid in the fridge ready for the next emergency. Alternatively, try the vinegar from marinated jalapeños.  Hervé Captain, radio DJ and journalist, France  My recipe for udon noodles in chicken curry soup has every element I can think of that remedies hangovers: soup for hydration, tomatoes for lycopene and vitamin C, ginger and hot peppers to help me sweat out the booze, and chicken thighs browned in oil or ghee for some grease to line my stomach. To start, I fry ginger, garlic and cumin in a generous amount of oil, toss in some chicken thighs until browned, then add some coriander, powdered chilli peppers and a large spoonful of turmeric. When the spices start releasing their aroma, I toss in some diced tomatoes and keep frying until the juices are reduced, then add some dashi stock, sake, soy sauce and sugar to nudge the soup closer to Japanese style curry udon. I stew the whole thing while I cook my udon, then combine the soup and noodles in a basin-sized bowl.  Sho Ogawa, head brewer, British  Columbia , Canada  My family is originally from Sligo on the north-west coast of Ireland and, after a night out drinking Guinness with my brothers, the only thing that would shift my hangover would be getting in the north Atlantic. It was like magic. Five or 10 minutes and the hangover was miraculously banished. Fantastic.  Joe Callanan,  counsellor  and DJ, Netherlands  So easy to make the day before: take 14 ripe tomatoes, five or six cloves of garlic, two green bell peppers, one red bell pepper, one peeled cucumber, 3 tablespoons of white vinegar, 7 tablespoons ofolive oil, 3 teaspoons ofsalt and as much water as you need for the correct consistency, then bung it all in the blender (you may need to sieve it afterwards). Next, chill as much as possible – and that’s it! It’s the only thing I can face when hungover, and it never fails to bring me back to life.  Name supplied, teacher, Bangkok
From Korean spiced hotpot to baked squash: Chantelle Nicholson's recipes for winter warmers:	Prep  10 min Cook  1 hr 30 min Serves  2 as a main, 4 as a side I used to love stuffed pumpkin as a kid, and as a teen. Back home in New Zealand, our “standard” pumpkin was called a buttercup, but sadly they are not grown here, and the most similar one I have found in England is kabocha squash. I discovered onion squash last year, and they work very well stuffed – they are sweet and compact, and the skin is really delicious when cooked, too. 1 onion squash ½ small bunch thyme , leaves picked 60g butter 2 onions , peeled and finely sliced Sea salt and  black pepper 150g kale , finely chopped 50g-75g  cheddar , grated 75g fresh breadcrumbs 25g pumpkin seeds , roughly chopped 1 egg , lightly beaten Cut the top off the squash (save it for later) and scoop out the seeds and strands. Put these in a medium saucepan, cover with water, then add the thyme stalks and bring to a boil. Cook for 20 minutes, then strain and return the pumpkin stock to the pan. Bring to a boil and cook for 10 minutes more, until you have around 100ml liquid left. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/410F/gas 6½. Melt the butter in a large frying pan over a medium heat, add the onions, season well with salt and saute, stirring regularly, for 20-25 minutes, until a deep golden brown.  Put the kale in a large bowl and rub the leaves with your fingertips for three minutes – this basically tenderises them. Add the fried onions and all the remaining ingredients to the kale bowl and toss to combine. Put the squash in a lightly greased roasting pan or dish, pack the cavity with the kale mix and pour the squash stock over the top. Pop the lid of the pumpkin back on top, then bake for 25-30 minutes, until the squash is cooked through. Serve hot as a main course with some winter greens (sprout tops, cavolo nero) or as a side for roast chicken or fried fish. A great way to use up old bread, and a comforting supper that can be made well in advance and reheated later, be that pan frying it in lashings of butter or warming it through in the oven. Prep  10 min Soak  20 min Cook  1 hr Serves  4 3 eggs 600ml milk 2 tbsp miso paste  8 slices sourdough , crusts on 50g butter 1 medium celeriac , peeled and roughly diced Sea salt  and black pepper 200g cavolo nero , finely chopped 100g cooked chestnuts ½ nutmeg Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5. Meanwhile, whisk the eggs with half the milk and the miso paste, then set aside. Arrange the sourdough slices in a single layer in a roasting tray and pour the egg mixture on top. Leave to soak for 10 minutes, then turn over the slices and leave to soak for 10 minutes more. While the bread is soaking, melt the butter in a large saucepan on a medium heat. Once hot, add the celeriac, season generously, then cook, stirring regularly, until deep golden brown all over and cooked through. Add the remaining 300ml milk to the pan, leave to simmer for five more minutes, then blend smooth. Put half the soaked bread in the base of a deep casserole dish. Top with half the cavolo nero, followed by half the celeriac puree. Top with the remaining bread, pour any excess egg mixture on top of the bread, then top again with the remaining cavolo nero and celeriac puree. Grate the chestnuts all over the top, then finely grate over the nutmeg and bake for 20 minutes. Leave to rest for 10 minutes, then serve (or chill and save for reheating later). When my new zero-waste restaurant,  All’s Well in Hackney, east London , had to become a shop and takeaway during November’s lockdown, we put this toastie on the menu. It’s pretty simple, but super-tasty. Pickling is a great way to make use of kale stalks, which would normally otherwise be thrown out. If you don’t have kale stems, you can apply the same pickling technique to just about any other vegetable, or use gherkins instead. Prep  10 min Pickle  20 min Cook  20 min Makes  4 8 slices  sourdough , crusts on 4 fillets smoked mackerel , skin removed, flesh roughly chopped 4 tbsp capers 50g watercress 100g  cheddar , grated Black pepper 60g salted butter For the pickled kale stems 50ml white-wine vinegar 2 tbsp caster  sugar 4 kale stems , sliced Start with the pickled kale stems. Put the vinegar and sugar in a small saucepan, bring to a boil, then remove from the heat and add 50ml cold water. Add the kale stems and leave to steep for at least 20 minutes. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. To assemble the toasties, line up four slices of bread on a chopping board. Lay a quarter of the smoked mackerel on each slice, then top the fish with a tablespoon of capers and a quarter of the pickled kale stems. Divide the watercress between the four slices, then cover with the grated cheese and a good grind of black pepper. Top with the remaining slices of sourdough and press down well. Heat half the butter in a large, nonstick frying pan over a moderate heat. Once it has melted, lay in two of the toasties, leave to brown gently, then carefully flip over and brown the other side. Transfer to a baking tray, then repeat with the remaining butter and toasties. Put the baking tray in the oven for six to eight minutes, until the cheese is bubbling, and serve hot. Lamb  breast is not a commonly used cut these days, but it has a superb flavour. Gochujang, for those not familiar with it, is a Korean red chilli paste that is savoury, sweet and spicy. It creates a delicious base for this hotpot and something a little different from the traditional seasoning. Prep  20 min Cook  4 hr 20 min Serves  4-6 3 tbsp plain flour Salt  1 tsp ground white pepper 700g boned lamb breast , cut into 1cm chunks 2 onions , peeled and quartered 2 garlic cloves , peeled and roughly chopped 80g gochujang paste 1½ litres chicken or vegetable stock 2 tsp treacle 2 parsnips , peeled and cut into 2cm chunks ½ swede , peeled and cut into 2cm chunks 2 medium waxy potatoes  (charlotte, new, pink fir), peeled and cut into 2cm chunks 4 spring onions , trimmed and finely sliced 1 handful coriander , finely chopped 4 tbsp crispy shallots or onions  (readymade ones from an Asian food store are fine), to garnish Heat the oven to 150C (130C fan)/300F/gas 2. Meanwhile, season the flour with salt and the white pepper, then coat the lamb pieces in the flour mixture, put them in a casserole dish, and scatter over the onion and garlic. Blend the gochujang, stock and treacle until smooth, then put in a saucepan and bring up to a simmer. Pour the mixture over the lamb in the casserole, cover the pot and bake for two hours. Remove the casserole from the oven, and stir in the parsnips, swede and potatoes. If there is not enough liquid left in the pan to cover the contents, add a little water, then pop the lid back on and bake for another two hours. At this point, the lamb should be very tender – if not, give it another half-hour or so in the oven. Leave the hotpot to rest for 20 minutes, then serve topped with the spring onions, coriander and crispy shallots. •  Chantelle Nicholson is chef/owner of  All’s Well , London E8, and  Tredwells , London WC2. Her book,  Planted: A Chef’s Show-Stopping Vegan Recipes , is published by Octopus at £25.
Ravneet Gill's recipe for yoghurt and honey bavarois with oat biscuits:	T hink of this as a cross between a panna cotta and a mousse. There aren’t many ingredients, so the use of a really lovely local honey and good-quality yoghurt will make a big difference. If you’re lucky enough to know a beekeeper, even better! I’m constantly in awe of chef  Katja Tausig , who not only forages mushrooms and cooks incredible food, but also spends her free time beekeeping and documenting it on her Instagram. It’s gripping stuff. Prep  1 hr Chill  4 hr+ Cook  10 min Serves  3 -4   230g double cream 25g honey 20g caster sugar 1 ½ gelatine leaves,  soaked in cold water 130g  Greek yoghurt 1  orange,  peeled and segmented, to serve (optional) For the oaty biscuits 50g unsalted butter 70g golden syrup ½ tsp bicarbonate of soda 65g jumbo oats 40g flaked almonds 35g plain flour ¼ tsp flaky salt Warm 150g cream with the honey and sugar, and stir to dissolve; when it’s steaming, remove from the heat. Squeeze the water out of the gelatine and, using a whisk, stir into the warmed cream to melt. Take off the heat and leave to cool for 10 minutes.  Meanwhile, whip the remaining cream to soft peaks. Put the yoghurt in a large bowl and pour in the cream mixture, stirring with a whisk to combine. Use the whisk to fold in the whipped cream, so there are no lumps. Pour into glasses, ramekins or dariole moulds, and transfer to the fridge to set for at least four hours. Now make the biscuits. Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. In a saucepan, heat the butter and golden syrup until bubbling. Add the bicarb, whisk until frothy, then take off the heat. Mix the remaining biscuits ingredients in a small bowl, then stir into the hot syrup mix until evenly coated. Line large oven tray with baking paper. Liberally grease six or seven 7cm metal rings and put these on the tray. Spoon in a large tablespoon of the biscuit dough into each ring, pressing it in to make it even. Bake for 10 minutes, then remove from the oven and, while they’re still hot, lift off the metal rings. Leave to cool fully before eating. Serve the bavarois with the oat biscuits and blood orange segments.
Oranges and lemons: Lucy Deedes' recipes for marmalade:	Prep  40 min Soak/rest  48 hr Cook  2½ hr Makes  5- 6 x 450g jars 1 lemon , plus the juice of 2 more   2 white grapefruit  (about 600g) 3 Seville oranges  (about 420g) 1 lime 1 bay leaf About 2.7 litres water About 1.1kg granulated or preserving sugar Weigh all the fruit and note the total weight. Wash the fruit, then quarter the lemon, grapefruit and lime, and cut into fine slices. Seville oranges are too full of pips to treat in the same way, so halve and juice them instead, putting the juice in a pan and any pips and membranes in a muslin bag. Cut the halved, juiced Seville shells in half again and, if the white pith is very thick, shave some away and add to the muslin bag. Don’t cut it all off – pith is vital to achieve a set and give that unique bitter taste. Add any cut away pith to the muslin bag. Put all the fruit shreds into the pan with the juice and add the muslin bag of offcuts and bay leaf. Weigh out 2.3 times water to the original weight of the whole fruit, add to the pan and leave to soak overnight. The next day, bring the pan to a boil, then turn down the heat and leave to simmer for about two hours, until the peel is soft. Remove from the heat and leave for another 24 hours, if possible. Remove and discard the bay leaf and muslin bag   and measure the volume of pulp remaining. For every 100ml pulp, add 50g sugar to the pan along with the lemon juice, and stir over a low heat until the sugar dissolves. Turn up to full heat and boil fast until it reaches setting point, at 105C, or use the “wrinkle test” – that is, put a saucer in the fridge to chill, put a spoonful of marmalade on it, leave for a minute and see if it wrinkles when you push your finger through it; if not, carry on cooking the marmalade and test again until it reaches setting point. Remove from the heat, leave to settle for 15-20 minutes, then pot into warm, sterilised jars, seal and leave to cool before storing. Prep  30 min Cook  45 min Serves  10 2 oranges 200g butter,  at room temperature 200g golden caster sugar 3 large eggs , beaten 200g self-raising flour 40g ground almonds 1 tsp fresh rosemary,  chopped 1 large tbsp marmalade,  shreds roughly chopped For the drizzle 4 tbsp caster sugar 2 tbsp water Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Grease a 20cm cake tin and line it with baking paper. Cut one orange into thin rounds and lay these neatly in a single layer over the base of the prepared tin. Cream the butter and sugar in a food mixer. Mix in the beaten egg a third at a time, and stir in a spoonful of the flour if it threatens to curdle. Sift in the flour and ground almonds, mix until smooth, then grate in the zest of the remaining orange and add a squeeze of its juice (keep the rest of the juice for the drizzle). Stir in the rosemary and marmalade. Spoon the mixture into the tin, being careful not to dislodge the orange slices on the base, then bake for 30-45 minutes, until a skewer inserted into the middle comes out clean. Remove from the oven and leave the cake to cool in its tin for 15 minutes. Meanwhile, make the drizzle. In a small pan, warm the remaining orange juice, sugar and water over a medium heat, and stir until the liquid turns into a syrup. Turn the cake out on to a plate, prick holes all over the top with a skewer and pour over the syrup. Leave for a few minutes for the syrup to sink in, then serve warm as a pudding, with cream or ice-cream. Once cold, eat as cake. Prep  20 min, plus chilling Cook  45 min Serves  10 For the pastry 250g plain flour,  plus extra for dusting 140g cold butter,  diced 80g caster sugar 1 egg yolk,  beaten For the filling 3 heaped tbsp marmalade 85g butter 250g dark chocolate  (70% cocoa solids), broken into small pieces 1 tsp orange extract 400ml double cream To decorate (optional) 1 tbsp candied Seville orange peel,  chopped (or 1 tbsp hazelnuts, almonds or walnuts ,  chopped) To make the pastry, mix the flour and butter in a food processor until they resemble breadcrumbs, then add the sugar and egg yolk, and whizz briefly until the mix balls up into a dough. Wrap the dough loosely and chill for at least 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 and put a baking sheet on the top shelf to heat up. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface to 3-4mm thick (about the thickness of a pound coin), then use this to line a 24cm fluted, loose-bottomed tart tin, pushing the pastry into the corners. Prick the base all over with a fork and leave any pastry overhang to trim off later. Line the inside of the pastry case with baking paper, fill with baking beans or rice, then chill for 10 minutes. Put the tart tin on the heated baking sheet and blind bake for 15 minutes. Lift out the paper and beans and bake for five minutes more, until pale brown, then remove and leave to cool. Separate the marmalade peel from the syrup, chop it finely, then scatter all over the base of the cooled pastry case. Melt the butter in a small pan over a gentle heat, then add the chocolate, marmalade syrup and orange extract, and stir until melted and smooth. Heat the cream in a separate pan until almost boiling (do not let it boil or it will split), then pour into the chocolate mixture and keep stirring until smooth. Trim off any overhang from the pastry case, then pour in the filling and leave to cool and set completely. If you like, decorate with pieces of chopped candied orange or chopped nuts. Cut with a warm knife and serve with single cream. •  Extracted from  The Little Book of Marmalade , by Lucy Deedes (HQ, £9.99).
Yotam Ottolenghi's recipes for warming winter soups:	M ore January recipes for soups? Yes, but some cliches are cliches for a reason. Soups really are what our bodies and our wallets need right now, being gentle on both. Here are three I’ll be cooking this month: a quick, green one; a heartier, yellow-orange number; and a deep red one for those days when a pan can be left to sit happily on the stove for three hours. Red, orange, green: let’s go! How to make a healthy spinach soup even greener? Add seaweed, of course. Any dried seaweed works here: dulse, wakame or torn-up nori sheets. Prep  15 min Cook  35 min Serves  4 For the croutons 110ml olive oil  1 lemon  – zest finely grated, to get 1 tsp, and juiced, to get 1 tbsp 4 garlic cloves , peeled and crushed  1 loaf sourdough  (500g), crusts removed and torn into bite-sized pieces (300g) Flaked sea salt For the soup 100ml olive oil 2-3 onions , peeled and thinly sliced (300g net weight) 10g piece fresh ginger , peeled and julienned 5 garlic cloves , peeled and thinly sliced 1 hot dried chilli , roughly chopped 2 tbsp tomato paste 1 tsp ground turmeric 1 tbsp cumin seeds 1 litre hot water Salt and pepper 50g coriander leaves , roughly chopped 15g dill , roughly chopped 400g baby spinach 15g dried dulse  (or any other dried seaweed – wakame, torn nori sheets etc) 2 lemons  – 1 juiced, to get 2 tbsp, the other cut into wedges, to serve Heat the oven to 240C (220C fan)/475F/gas 9. First, make the croutons. In a large bowl, mix the olive oil, lemon zest, lemon juice and garlic, then toss the pieces of sourdough through the mix to coat. Spread out the bread on a large oven tray lined with greaseproof paper, and bake for about 12 minutes, until golden brown – some of the edges may be darker than others, which is fine. Remove from the oven, sprinkle with flaked salt and set aside. Now for the soup. Put the oil, onions, ginger and garlic in a large saucepan for which you have a lid, and set it over a medium-high heat. Fry, stirring frequently, for 10 minutes, until the onions have softened. Add the chilli, tomato paste, turmeric and cumin, and fry for three minutes more, scraping the bottom of the pan to stop the tomato paste from sticking and burning. Add the water, two and a half teaspoons of salt and a good grind of pepper, cover and leave to simmer for 10 minutes. Add the coriander, dill, spinach and dulse, cook, stirring, for three minutes more, until all the greens have wilted, then take off the heat and stir in the lemon juice. Serve hot with the croutons and lemon wedges. Across parts of Asia,  pitha  refers to a dough. In Mauritius, where this recipe is from (thanks to our new test kitchen colleague, Chaya), the h is dropped to make it  pita . Traditionally, this noodle dough is freshly made while the dal is cooking. For new year’s ease, dried lasagne sheets (or any dried pasta in need of using up) work really well as a substitute. Prep  20 min Cook  1 hr 20 min Serves  6 200g chana dal 200g yellow split peas 100ml olive oil 2 onions , peeled and finely chopped (300g net weight) 6 garlic cloves , peeled and thinly sliced 5g fresh thyme , stalks and all 4 stems curry leaves , picked, to give 40 leaves (5g) in total 2 hot dried chillies   1½ tsp black mustard seeds 1½ tbsp cumin seeds 1½ tsp ground turmeric Salt and black pepper 200g lasagne sheets , roughly broken into bite-sized pieces For the grilled tomato salsa 6 ripe vine tomatoes  (900g) 100g banana shallots , peeled and thinly sliced 3 garlic cloves , peeled and crushed 2 hot red chillies , cut into thin rounds 3 tbsp lemon juice Salt and black pepper 50ml olive oil 30g coriander , roughly chopped Wash the chana dal and the split peas under cold running water until the water runs clear. Transfer to a large bowl, cover with plenty of hot water and leave to soak for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, put the oil   in a very large, high-sided saucepan and place on a medium-high heat. Add the onion, garlic, thyme, curry leaves and dried chillies, and fry gently, stirring frequently, for 14 minutes, until lightly golden. Add the mustard, cumin and turmeric, fry for another minute, then drain the dal and split peas and add to the pan with two and a half litres of boiling water and a tablespoon of salt. If your pan isn’t big enough to hold all the water at once, hold some back and add it later, once some of the water has been absorbed. Turn the heat to high – the soup should be rapidly simmering – and leave to cook for an hour, stirring occasionally and skimming any scum off the top with a slotted spoon. Meanwhile, make the salsa. Heat a griddle on a high heat, add the tomatoes, and char, turning regularly, for 20 minutes, until the skins are blackened and blistered all over. Set aside to cool. Put the shallots in a medium bowl with the garlic, chillies, lemon juice and two and a half teaspoons of salt, then mix together with your fingers, crushing the shallots lightly in your hand.  Peel off and discard the tomato skins, then roughly chop the flesh. Add to the shallot bowl with the oil, a good grind of pepper and the coriander, mix well, then transfer to a serving bowl. Using a potato masher, lightly crush the dal, taking care not to mash it completely. Add 500ml boiling water to the pan, then add the lasagne and cook, stirring often so the lasagne sheets doesn’t stick to each other, for 16 minutes, stirring frequently to prevent the lasagne sheets from sticking together. Ladle into bowls, spoon over some of the salsa and serve the rest alongside. This is somewhere between goulash and borscht, with the addition of the spicy, smoky overtones of chipotle chilli and the sour-sweetness of pomegranate. The meat needs three hours in the pan, so get it going in good time. Prep  20 min Cook  3 hr 15 min Serves  4 500g boned beef shin, lamb shank or pork  ‘osso buco ’ , sinew removed and cut into 4cm pieces  500ml 100% pomegranate juice 500ml chicken or beef stock 500ml water 4 beetroots , peeled and cut into 4cm chunks (700g) 100g creme fraiche or soured cream , to serve For the chilli paste 2 tsp chipotle flakes  1 tsp ground cumin ¾ tsp chilli flakes 100g tomato paste 5 garlic cloves , peeled and roughly chopped ½ onion , roughly chopped 60g pancetta cubes 75ml olive oil 2½ tsp salt For the herby croutons 25g chives , finely chopped 15g dill , finely chopped 120ml olive oil ½ tsp salt 150g sourdough bread , toasted, crusts removed and cut into 3cm pieces Put all the paste ingredients in the small bowl of a food processor, blitz to a smooth paste, then scrape into a large, cast-iron pot for which you have a lid. Add the meat, set the pot on a high heat and fry for seven minutes, stirring every now and then; turn down the heat to medium if the meat or paste begin to catch and burn. Pour in the pomegranate juice, stock and water, add the beetroot, then bring to a boil. Turn the heat to medium-low, cover the pot and leave to cook for three hours, until the meat is completely tender. Meanwhile, make the croutons. In a medium bowl, mix the herbs with the oil and a half-teaspoon of salt, then add the toasted bread and mix until it’s completely coated in the green oil. Divide the soup between four bowls, top each serving with a generous spoonful of the creme fraiche, finish with the herb croutons and their oil, and serve.
Meera Sodha's vegan recipe for apple pudding cake:	S ome time ago, when my daughter was nearly two, we took a walk and the sky sprung a leak. We should have known better (ie checked a weather app). We were on the knife-edge of a meltdown with a tired and soggy toddler when we spotted a table at  E5 Bakehouse  in Hackney, east London, and shared a slice of the most beautiful apple cake. It had enough apple in it to be potentially good for you, a crunchy demerara top and soft, puddingy insides. Such was its power that we forgot how sodden we were and, looking back, that day was a sort of heaven. Today’s recipe is my approximation of that wonderful cake. Prep  15 min Cook  1 hr 10 min Serves  8-10 For the apples 2 granny smith apples , peeled, cored and cut into 2cm cubes (175g prepared weight) 1½ tsp ground cinnamon 40g soft brown sugar For the cake batter 200g self-raising flour 1½ tsp baking powder ½ tsp salt 160g soft brown sugar 120ml olive oil 1 tsp vanilla extract 100ml non-dairy milk  (I used oat) 1 tbsp apple cider vinegar For the top of the cake 2 granny smith apples , cored and sliced 1 tbsp soft brown sugar Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6, and line a 20cm springform round cake tin with greaseproof paper. In a medium bowl, mix the apple cubes with the cinnamon and brown sugar, and set aside. Measure all the dry ingredients for the batter into a large bowl, stir to combine, then pour in the wet ingredients and beat until you have a smooth batter. Tip in the cubed apples and their sugary, cinnamony juices, stir to combine, then scrape the batter into the lined tin. Fan the sliced apples in a circle to cover the top of the cake, sprinkle over the remaining soft brown sugar, then bake on the middle shelf of the oven for 50-60 minutes, until the cake has risen, the apples on top are golden and a skewer inserted into the centre comes out clean. Serve warm or cold.
Indian fashion designer Satya Paul dies aged 79:	Satya Paul, the Indian fashion designer who invented the modern sari, has died at the age of 79. His son, Puneet Nanda, said in a  Facebook  post that the designer had suffered a stroke in early December from which he had not recovered. Paul revolutionised the idea of the sari for Indian women, moving it beyond a utilitarian ethos. He used experimental touches like geometric patterns, and unexpected fabrics such as  muga  and  tussar  silks, chiffon and crepe, to revitalise the silhouette. Paul also pioneered the “trouser sari” – a touchstone of modern sartorial independence for Indian women and a sharp U-turn away from the traditional  Banarasi sari . “I always thought of him as an artist,”  designer Kaushik Velendra  told the Guardian. “He worked with his colours like a painter.” Paul was born in 1942 in Layyah, in what is now Pakistan, before his family moved to India. “My family was uprooted from Pakistan and landed in India with nothing in hand,” he told  DNA India  magazine. He began his career in retail, before moving into the niche market of Indian heirlooms which he exported to Europe and the US. With no formal design training, he launched his first sari boutique, L’Affaire, in 1980. “I had to self-teach myself about design and quality, as I was not content only with trading,” he told DNA  India . In 1986 he started his eponymous label. Worn by Indian celebrities such as Aishwarya Rai, Mandira Bedi, Karisma Kapoor, Kareena Kapoor and Vidya Balan, it became one of the best known fashion brands in the country. “Design is like a river for me,” he told DNA India. “It is continuously on.” The label diversified into other products including ties – which became as well-known as its saris – and dresses, handbags, scarves and kaftans.   At its heart the Satya Paul brand was about “making people feel better about themselves by wearing his clothes. It’s the best way he represented what India stands for,” said Velendra. Paul and his son Nanda, whom he partnered with, exited the company in 2010. Designer Osman Yousefzada  told the Guardian: “Growing up in Birmingham in the 90s, there was [a] sari emporium on Stratford Road which was a mecca of saris. It sold Satya Paul and the well-heeled immigrants would go and try on his beautiful fabrics in their new, grey homeland. His use of colour and fabrics has always inspired me.” Posting on  Instagram ,  designer Masaba Gupta  highlighted the importance of Paul’s legacy, writing that the designer was “a true example of an actual (homegrown) brand: put in corporate hands at the right time and one with a signature that will stand the test of time. Fashion schools – please introduce young Indian design aspirants to this brand in schools and various other homegrown brands. We can be inspired by the story of Chanel … but we must learn what happened on our soil first.” Velendra said Paul had changed fashion in India by putting his stamp on to everything he designed, no matter how big or small. “[Paul’s] personal involvement in everything has created a benchmark that a lot of other designers have followed,” he said. “Even if it was commercial, even if it was extravagant, it was personal. In that context, he created an example of how we should all work. That’s something that will never be forgotten.”
Why pink is the 'statement-making' hair color trend of the pandemic:	P ink has become the celebrity hair color of the coronavirus pandemic. Last weekend,  Chrissy Teigen  unveiled a pink-purple do, while Jennifer Lopez’s stylist showed the actor and singer sporting a  similar shade  just before Christmas. Variants of the color have dominated 2020’s biggest pop culture moments, and that looks set to carry on in 2021. Justin Bieber went pink for his  Yummy  video in January, while Lady Gaga went pink in February for her  Stupid Love  video. And others such as  Dua Lipa ,  Madonna  and comedian  Whitney Cummings  dyed their hair rose, fuchsia and bubblegum. The color scans well on social media platforms such as Instagram and TikTok, it’s low maintenance as a dye, and has a subversive historical element from punk and grunge. “In the past year, we’ve sold one pink hair product every 30 seconds,” said Alex Brownsell, co-founder and creative director of hair company Bleach, “which is a 50% increase from the previous year.” There’s no doubt pink translates well on social. “As beauty influencers and consumers, we tend to lean towards things that are eye-catching and statement-making,” said hair stylist DaRico Jackson. “Not only does pink pop on your page, but it matches up on all sides.” Despite the apparent extremity of choosing the shade as a hair color, it is not an allegiance that needs to last forever. “It’s a low-commitment color that fades or washes out when you get bored of it,” said Rachael Gibson, editor of the Hair Historian on Instagram. Pink hair in pop culture might still bring to mind Kurt Cobain or Return of Saturn-era Gwen Stefani, but people were discovering the tone long before the advent of any sort of alternative culture. “An early example of pink hair as a trend would be in the 18th century, when hair powders for wigs came in fashion shades of pink and other pastels,” said Gibson. “These powders, which were often scented with lavender or other flower essences, were used by  men  and women.” An element of more recent nostalgia – which was part of 2020’s  biggest fashion trends  – also plays a part in the shade’s current ubiquity, with pink hair referencing punk. “[In the 70s] using a purposefully unnatural color like pink made a statement, and flew in the face of conventional beauty. For the average person coloring your hair was still fairly hush-hush in the 70s,” said Gibson. “Pairing a visually aggressive style like spiked hair with a traditionally feminine color like pink plays with stereotypes in a pleasingly confusing way.” Defying stereotypes was also Michaela Coel as Arabella in 2020’s most talked about show, I May Destroy You. Her pink wig was a key piece of costuming for the character: defining her in the “before” period of the show. “Pink has so long been associated with beauty and femininity, qualities long denied Black women,” said the author Ronda Racha Penrice, “so perhaps it’s also a subversive act in which Black women are asserting and affirming their beauty and femininity.” Citing the influence of pink hair wearers Nicki Minaj and Lil Kim on one of 2020’s biggest pop stars, Doja Cat, Penrice added: “My guess is that the multi-coloured hair comes from Carnival and represents celebration and jubilee.” And that need for contrast in the face of the pandemic could be why the color is It right now. “Pink is a very joyful, positive color, which is frankly what we all need,” said Gibson.
Men play with gender norms in lockdown with return of man bun:	Months of lockdown have been hard for many reasons, including the lack of regular access to a hairdresser. Perhaps inevitably – and to the horror of some – it has given rise to the return of the  man bun . The divisive hairstyle has been making a surprising resurgence, with the fitness coach Joe Wicks, the rapper Post Malone and Jude Law all sporting the updo. Paul McCartney ended 2020 with a surprise No 1 album and, perhaps more surprisingly still, a new hairstyle. The former Beatle was spotted holidaying in St Barts with a segment of his hair tied on top of his head. “I think we are going to see way more guys with long hair in 2021,” said Garrett Munce, the grooming editor on Men’s Health. “Some because they realised [during lockdown] they actually like having long hair, and some just for practical reasons. Coming out of 2020, where most of us spent the better part of the year in quarantine, haircuts became less frequent.” The man bun is not new – Jared Leto, Cristiano Ronaldo, Orlando Bloom, David Beckham and Matt Damon have all dabbled in the do. The style was popular in the 2010s when it became associated with the second wave of the “hipster”, as the social archetype shifted from “white hipster” to “green hipster” as characterised by the author Mark Greif said in  NY Mag . “He characterises the white hipster as wearing a trucker cap and a white vest,” said Alex Rayner, who has written extensively about the  subculture . The “green hipster”, in contrast, was “a person with long hair and a fixed-wheel bike. It’s a softer image and I feel the man bun is analogous with that.” Munce said he associates the man bun “with the whole lumberjack style thing – beard, flannel shirt, stiff cuffed jeans, work boots and tattoos. It was a reaction to [the] slick, coiffed, overly thought-out style that young people wanted to avoid.” It was no coincidence that the man bun later became synonymous with the Silicon Valley tech bro – “the type of guy that vapes, while riding an electric scooter to his job in tech”, said Charlie Teasdale, Esquire’s styling director – and was visually parodied in the television series Black Mirror and Family Guy. Now the haircut hints at its historical origins and also a sidestepping of gender norms. “It serves as a kind of homage to a traditional, rough-and-tumble view of masculinity,” said Teasdale, “whereas others wear their buns with more of a nod to gender fluidity.”
The nobody-nose job: how the pandemic led to a rise in plastic surgery:	W hen Kaafiya Abdulle gave birth to her son in April 2017, she chose to breastfeed. A year later, she switched to baby formula, hyper-vigilant of the effects nursing had on her breasts. Unhappy with the sagging and shrinking that had occurred, she began to research breast lifts – a procedure she desperately wanted but never had the courage to pursue. Until the pandemic, that is. Social pressure to have emerged from the pandemic as a better version of oneself appears to have resulted in stigma for those who haven’t used the time for self-improvement. With amped-up betterment messaging on social media about  getting in shape ,  staying productive  and  starting a side hustle , people like Abdulle have turned to drastic measures to keep up. “There’s been this popular [messaging] that you’ve had all these months at home, and if you don’t look better than you did before … then you haven’t really accomplished something,” she says. “ That’s when I started to think maybe I should get my boob job,” says Abdulle, who just underwent   breast augmentation in Helsinki, where she resides. Plus, there are other silver linings to the pandemic.   “Everything is pretty much closed,” Abdulle says. “I have time to heal right now because I’m doing my schoolwork from home.” For those  reminding us  of how Shakespeare wrote King Lear in quarantine, many are finding another side-effect from all the immense time we are spending at home: increased self-scrutiny. People have more time on their hands. They’re spending more time in front of the mirror or on themselves “People have more time on their hands. They’re spending more time in front of the mirror or on themselves, so they’re becoming more critical,” says  Dr Jacob Sedgh , a double board-certified facial plastic surgeon based in southern California. With people venturing out less, he adds: “[People] aren’t spending as much money on travel or clothing, and instead are spending more money on fitness and looking good.” Sedgh has seen an influx of new patients who have never undergone a cosmetic procedure before. Surgical and nonsurgical procedures are highly sought-after – with rhinoplasty (also known as a nose job), facelifts, fillers and Botox as the most popular – but Sedgh has mostly noticed a rise in surgical procedures. He puts that down   to the newly allowed downtime. After surgery, people can experience swelling, bruising and look pretty different from their end result. But those working from home have a chance to bunker down in the shadows while they recover without anyone noticing. Katie Colson, a 32-year-old senior account manager in Austin, Texas, had lip injections for the first time this August after considering them for over a year. She didn’t have fears about contracting Covid because everyone in the clinic was wearing a mask at the time of her consultation and during administration. “I thought if I can go have my teeth cleaned, I can get lip injections,” she says. “The thought of getting them done while working from home was appealing in case I bruised badly or they turned out weird or misshapen.” Dr Steve Pearlman, a dual board-certified facial plastic surgeon in New York City, has also   seen an increase in celebrity clients who aren’t filming, performing or attending events during this time. After being closed for three months due to New York state Covid restrictions, an influx of his patients seeking surgical rhinoplasty revision, rhinoplasty facelifts and lip lifts (in that order) has kept his practice booming. For his average client, choosing to hide their face has become normalized with video chatting and conference calls, offering a new venue for the surgical healing stage. “Someone who’s working remotely can now have surgery and be on Zoom three days, post-rhinoplasty or post-facelift, and just say, ‘I’m not putting my camera on today, my hair is in curlers,’ when actually they have a cast on their nose or wrap around their face,” he says. But   while video chatting has its benefits, it has also silently contributed to self-consciousness, due to the increased time both men and women are spending looking at their faces.   This has been borne out by research – a recent study published in the journal  Facial Plastic Surgery & Aesthetic Medicine  notes this surge in patients seeking surgery due to overexposure to themselves on Zoom. “Normally we do not look at ourselves that much or for that long,” Pearlman says.  Plus, video-calling exaggerates facial asymmetry – because   the image provided by a camera is backwards. “Cellphone cameras have a fisheye effect, making everything in the image exaggerated. So it makes the nose look bigger, or a crooked nose look more crooked. Selfies not only make it look worse because you’re seeing photographs instead of a mirror image, but they distort the real image of yourself,” says Pearlman. Pearlman says male surgery requests have stayed the same, unlike women, and believes there is a reason for that: “Men aren’t staring in the mirror as much at home, and when they’re on Zoom, they aren’t really concentrating on what they look like. Women are more worried about what they look like to everybody else.” When doing a consultation, Pearlman, like many other plastic surgeons, uses a professional camera that is more accurate and can ease this sense of facial dysmorphia – but with the constant reminds many of us have day-to-day –  Instagram  filters, selfies and Zoom calling – it’s unlikely to make a dent. The facial dysmorphia brought on by our very current, unique set of circumstances is therefore a dangerous precedent on which to base a lifelong decision. Still, people are falling victim to it. Abdulle, who has confided in her friend group about her breast augmentation plans, says even they are having similar thoughts. “Most of my friends have said, ‘Oh, I want to get this done during the pandemic.’ … I feel like we never used to sit down and have these conversations, but now it’s coming up almost every time we talk,” she says.
Blind date: ‘I showed him my wedding dress’:	What were you hoping for? “The one”. Failing that, a pleasant break from the awful news. First impressions? Friendly and calm. Nice flowery shirt, sparkly Christmas tree, lovely eyes. What did you talk about? Our professions. Family. Dating. How we’ve been spending lockdown, which box sets we’ve watched. Does one ever “grow up”? We thought not. Any awkward moments? When I asked his thoughts on men preferring younger women, but got distracted, so didn’t get his answer (I’d had a bit of wine). Oh, and when I showed him my wedding dress! Good table manners? I didn’t notice any bad ones. How long did you stay on the call? Almost three hours. Best thing about Roy? How much he loves his children. He was very open, with a good sense of humour. He laughed a bit too heartily when I said I was 39 (it was a joke). Would you introduce him to your friends? Some of them, eventually. Describe Roy in three words Quite attractive (blurry screen), funny and a good conversationalist. What do you think he made of you? Interesting, funny and not 39.  Any connection issues? Roy took a while to “check in”. And… did you swap numbers? Yes.  How did the call end? We agreed it would be good to meet up. Roy said as friends. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? To meet in the flesh. I thought Roy was an attractive man, and I don’t mean just looks. But it’s difficult to tell on a screen whether there’s any spark. Marks out of 10? A solid eight. Would you meet in real life? Yes, I would like to. What were you hoping for? I had no expectations at all.  First impressions? She seemed really nice. What did you talk about? Teaching, therapy, friendship and marriage, dating, among many other things. Lynda even met one of my kidults, as my daughter brought through my order. Any awkward moments? Lynda had the foresight to have ordered first. I thought we were meant to order together, like in a restaurant, so I was looking through a menu and couldn’t see her, but she could see me on screen, probably frowning and panicking. My face doesn’t lie, apparently. Good table manners? Impeccable. How long did you stay on the call? Three hours. Best thing about Lynda? Honest, fun and open, easy to talk to. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yes, I think they would like her. Describe Lynda in three words Easy-going, open, lovely. What do you think she made of you? She said she was expecting a real laugh, so I hope I made her smile. Any connection issues? None. And… did you swap numbers? We did. I think we could chat quite a lot, and would enjoy it if she came to London, or me to East Sussex. How did the call end? Quite happily, I think. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? I would have ordered before the call. Marks out of 10? 7.5. Would you meet in real life? Yes. •  Fancy a blind date? Email  blind.date@theguardian.com .
Chicken in wine and torta figassa: Rachel Roddy's recipes for an Italian winter meal:	J anuary, from the Latin  Januarius ,     is named after Janus, the Roman god who presided over doors, beginnings and transitions. It’s also a cold month, though, so take precautions with this simple and gentle Tuscan-style chicken stew, with wine, and polenta cake, with grappa. Another variation on the chicken braised with herbs and wine theme; this one is from Tuscany, and a recipe in the wonderful   Le Ricette Regionali Italiane   with porcini and sage. Cooking times vary depending on the chicken, so keep an eye on it and squeeze — it is done when the flesh is tender rather than bouncy, and starting to come away from the bone. Again, the final reduction will depend on the chicken; you may find you have very few juices at the end of cooking, in which case, do not reduce. If, on the other hand, juices are abundant and thin, bubble gently until they thicken. Prep  20 min Soak  15 min Cook  1 hr 10 min  Serves  4 - 6 1 free-range chicken  (about 1.6kg), cut into 8 pieces Salt and pepper 20g dried porcini 20g butter 4 tbsp olive oil 250ml dry white wine 12 sage leaves,  half chopped, half whole 2 garlic cloves ,  peeled and halved Season the chicken with salt and pepper. Soak the dried porcini in 200ml warm water for 15 minutes, then drain, reserving the liquid. Heat the butter and oil in a casserole or deep frying pan with a lid, then fry the chicken, first on one side, then the other, until a deep golden brown. Pour over the wine and leave to sizzle for a few minutes, then add the sage, garlic, porcini and soaking liquid. See that everything bubbles gently, then cover the pan and leave simmering for 35-50 minutes, depending on your chicken – it should feel tender and be coming away from the bone. Lift the lid and allow to bubble more vigorously, so that the juices reduce to a dense sauce. Taste and adjust the seasoning and serve with bread, mash or soft polenta. Grappa is a liquor distilled from pomace (the solid remains of grapes) left over from winemaking. For this cake, grappa is used to soak dried figs, which are then baked into a dense polenta cake. It is not traditional, but it would be a missed opportunity not to serve this with custard or a spoonful of warm  zabaione . Prep  20 min Soak  2 hr Cook  25 min Serves  8-12 150g dried figs,  cut in quarters 200ml grappa 200g butter,  at room temperature 200g caster sugar 3 egg yolks 200g 00 flour 200g fine polenta Icing sugar,  to dust Soak the figs in the grappa for at least two hours. Lift them out with a slotted spoon, but don’t squeeze. In large bowl, beat together the butter and sugar, add the egg yolks and figs, and stir again. Fold in both flours then scrape into a lined 20-22cm cake tin. Bake at 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4 for 25 minutes, until firm and golden. Leave to cool before inverting from the tin on to a plate, and dusting with icing sugar.
How to dress yourself happy, one feelgood outfit at a time:	C lothes should make you happy. If yours don’t, then you are getting fashion all wrong. I don’t much go in for style diktats, but I’m not budging on this one. Making you feel good about yourself is up there with keeping you warm and dry, and providing  pockets  to put your stuff in. To use an on-trend expression: follow the science. It starts with colour. Studies suggest that yellow, pink and red have an uplifting, energising effect on our mood, while blue makes us feel calmer. (I should point out, here, that scientists do not universally agree, and that the data can be interpreted in various ways. But I’m guessing  you have clocked that  over the course of the past nine months.) What certainly feels true is that by wearing bright colours you project an energy and warmth into the world that gets reflected back. The sunshine of a yellow cardigan beams back at you, not only from the mirror, but from the faces of people who smile when they see you. The enforced isolation of the past year has made many of us feel we have become invisible beyond our domestic set-up. Wearing a bright red coat next time you go for a walk is one way to combat that. On days when life feels like heavy going – hello, January! – getting dressed in the morning affirms the fact that today is indeed a new day. This is why putting on clothes you left on the floor when you got into bed, although tempting on cold mornings, doesn’t get your day off to a winning-at-life kind of start. Make tea, turn the radio on and, while the news reminds you of the many things you can’t control, be thankful that you do get to choose to wear a sweater in your favourite colour, or the earrings your best friend gave you, that remind you of her. Feelgood clothes are partly about confidence, but they are just as much about comfort and contentment. We didn’t embrace tracksuit bottoms in lockdown because we are lazy slobs, we did it to adjust to our environment. Pacing the kitchen between Zoom meetings in a tailored jacket and pencil skirt suit would only aggravate the discomfort of that situation. In a year without parties or board meetings, we have reoriented how we dress towards comfort. We have discovered the luxury of relaxed silhouettes and good-quality fabrics, and don’t want to give it up. Not only cashmere – which was always as much a status symbol as a personal joy – but silk and organic cotton. A soft sweater instead of a scratchy one can be a comforting arm around your shoulder. Not as good as a hug, but every little helps. 1 Earrings, £15,  oliverbonas.com 2 Trousers, £17.99,  zara.com 3 Dress, £95,  aligne.co 4 Jumpsuit, £69.99,  mango.com 5 Sweatshirt, £19.99,  hm.com 6 Polo shirt knit, £160,  cefinn.com 7 Socks, £19,  kitristudio.com 8 Rain mac, £190,  stutterheim.com 9 Cap, £35,  parasolheadwear.com 10 Cardigan, £99,  whistles.com
Cosy up: the essential no-shop guide to winter lockdown dressing:	T he things that matter in fashion are the same things that matter in the rest of your life. And right now, those things are pretty straightforward. Getting through lockdown No 3 is about staying healthy and warm, enjoying the outdoors when you can, keeping chipper, looking after the people around you. It is not about party dresses or It bags or killer tailoring or must-have shoes. And with shops shut and economic anxiety rising, it is not about spending money either. I hereby present your four-step plan for pre-vaccine dressing. Comfort dressing is here to stay . Sartorial tolerance levels have been fundamentally recalibrated by the pandemic. To me, “comfortable” used to mean “shoes that I can walk in with the help of cushioned insoles and a couple of ibuprofen and maybe a gin later”. Now, my definition of comfortable is clothes in which I can curl up on the sofa for after-work Netflix with tea and chocolate without having to undo any buttons. Don’t get me wrong, I can’t wait to get reacquainted with the dress-up-to-have-fun bit of my wardrobe, but the smarter, stiffer kind of daywear I don’t miss at all. On the other side of all this, wearing Proper Work Clothes is going to feel as tiresome and antiquated as paying a bill by writing a cheque, stamping the envelope and walking to the postbox. The sweater dress is probably the easiest outfit for looking properly dressed while keeping maximum ease and cosiness. Think of it like the nap dress – those nightgown-like floaty dresses – you wore last summer, but with cheaper central heating bills. And in a midwinter lockdown, heating is the new hemline.  Optimism is my central belief system, but the past year has severely tested my faith. As the pandemic has unfolded, I have felt optimism being challenged, then discredited and sometimes almost debunked. As with homeopathy, or the Atkins diet, the latest science just doesn’t seem to support it. As a result, my once unfailing confidence in the ability of a sunshine yellow cardigan to turn my day around has faded a little this winter. But! All is not lost. The essence of optimism is not a dogged certainty that things will get better, but rather the belief that it is always worth trying, because they just might. This can start with what you wear. Instead of wearing any old thing because it doesn’t matter, wear the clothes that you love the most. If your most beloved jeans are ripped to shreds, wear them every day – no one can see them on Zoom. Wear the necklace that reminds you of the kind friend who gave it to you and the silk blouse that makes you feel a tiny bit glamorous. Wear the clothes that remind you that life will get bigger and better again – and let them help you believe. The bad news is that, no, you can’t stay in bed until March; the good news is that,  yes, you can wear a duvet . A duvet coat leans into the appeal of hiding under the covers. The latest iterations are a little longer and looser and less inflated than the puffer jacket – think long, loose waves, rather than bouncy castle ridges. Rick Owens’ ice-blue puffer cape was a Paris fashion week showstopper, but whatever one you have got on a peg somewhere already will work fine. A long puffer coat over a chunky sweater and trousers, worn with trainers, is about as close to an on-trend look for this season as it gets – since, as far as I am concerned, seasonality is mothballed, at least till after lockdown, and possibly for ever. Add a baseball cap and tuck your trousers into your sport socks and you are good to go: Tesco’s answer to Hailey Baldwin. We all have one particular jumper that we love over and above all others. Maybe it’s the one that’s chunky enough to keep you warm through a long day at a draughty kitchen-table office. Maybe it’s the one with the funnel neck you can pull up to cover most of your face when you really, really don’t want to watch another Downing Street broadcast even though you know you sort of have to (maybe that’s just me). Maybe it’s just really soft or a nice colour or maybe you got it for Christmas. Whatever your favourite sweater is, can we agree that it is absolutely fine to wear the very same said garment most days for the next seven weeks if we want to?   And if anyone has the temerity to comment, I suggest we explain that the seven-week sweater is in fact a knitted performance artwork reflecting on the groundhog nature of lockdown life. That’ll learn them.
Where to buy reusable face masks in Australia – and how to make your own:	O n 4 January 2021, wearing face masks or face coverings  became mandatory  in some indoor public spaces across greater Sydney. Wearing face masks in indoor public spaces was also  made mandatory again in Victoria  on 31 December. While face masks are in far greater supply than they were when Victoria first enacted mask laws in July 2020, finding a high-quality reusable face mask can still be a challenge, especially with many businesses closed over the holiday period. Fortunately, if you cannot buy a mask, making your own is relatively simple. In July,  The Social Studio , a Melbourne-based social enterprise and fashion training program, partnered with the Victorian government to make an instructional video and  pattern for creating your own mask . “Essentially there are three different types of fabric that need to be included,” Aleksandra Nedeljkovic, chief operating officer of  The Social Studio  told Guardian Australia in July 2020. “One is an outer layer which needs to be water repellant, then there’s an … interfacing layer that helps keep nasty particles out, then the inner layer is a breathable fabric, like 100% cotton. It’s those three combined that make a mask effective.” While three-layer masks are not mandated, both the Victorian and New South Wales guidelines stipulate that masks with at least three layers will be the most effective form of protection. Nedeljkovic says that, provided you can get the right fabric – “which shouldn’t be too tricky” – anyone can make their own mask. If finding cloth is difficult, you can even take a leaf out of The Social Studio’s manufacturing playbook and repurpose fabric from existing garments you no longer use, or even a reusable shopping bag (for the outer layer of the mask). If you bought an anti-pollution face mask before the Covid-19 pandemic, it may also be suitable to wear now, but the Victorian guidelines advise against wearing masks that feature holes or a valve, as “this can result in breathing out the virus if you have coronavirus”. It is also worth noting that a mask will only be effective if it covers your nose and mouth – wearing a mask with your nose peaking out over the top will not protect you, or anyone else. For those who would prefer to buy, rather than make their own mask, Guardian Australia has compiled a list of suppliers of reusable face masks, all with at least three layers, to suit a range of tastes and budgets. Please note that while stocks of all masks were available at the time of writing, some may have sold out or gone on back order subsequently. Clothing the Gap reversible four-layer face mask, $20 Featuring artwork by Gunditjmara woman Laura Thompson on one side and plain black on the other, this reversible mask from social enterprise Clothing the Gap comes in two sizes, with adjustable elastic ear loops and nose wire. Hey Reflect’o reusable face mask, $29 Adelaide-based Lisa Penney has added face masks to her Australian made and eco-friendly hi-vis arsenal – the masks come in a variety of colours and prints, all with a cheeky reflective Sars-CoV-2 print. Also available in four packs. The Social Outfit ‘B1-G1’ printed reusable mask, $33   Australian not-for-profit retailer and manufacturer The Social Outfit is no stranger to employing fashion as a cause for change. Its day-to-day operations provide work and training in the fashion industry for refugees and new migrant communities. Each mask sold contributes to a buy-one give-one model, supplying a mask to a person in need. The masks have adjustable nose wire and are made of remnant fabric, so the pattern you get will be a lucky dip-style surprise. Yarli Collective three-layer masks Yorta Yorta, Dja Dja Wurrung and Gamilaroi artist Maddy Connors has painted six designs to adorn the masks she creates for her printmaking and apparel business Yarli Collective. Tirion origami face masks, $18 Crafted by theatre costume maker Tirion Rodwell, these machine-washable, foldable face masks come in a variety of prints and colourways. The pleated structure of the masks makes them – from personal experience – the most comfortable style we’ve tried so far. Nobody Denim three-layer face masks, $25 Made in Melbourne, Nobody’s face masks are Ethical Clothing Australia-accredited, reversible and allow you to embrace a fondness for double denim, right on your face. Nobody Denim has also repurposed some of its manufacturing facilities to make scrubs for frontline workers. Sara Sidari linen face masks $32 For days when getting out of bed feels like a challenge, illustrator Sara Sidari’s three-layer printed face mask lets you take your sheets with you – the outer layer is 100% linen, with a cotton middle layer and soft jersey lining. They are screen printed and manufactured in Australia. The Ark three-pack summer printed masks, $40 Ethical clothing manufacturer The Ark’s three-packs of paisley and gingham printed masks bring a touch of  cottagecore  to personal protection. Merino Country three-layer mask $30 For wool fans, Merino Country makes a three-layer mask from Australian merino, with rubber straps that tie around the back of the head. It is made in Australia and available in several colourways. Natalie Begg washable silk face mask, with filter pocket, $39.95 Melbourne-based lingerie designer Natalie Begg has brought her soft touch to face masks, with a range of washable silk masks in three sizes and multiple colours. They come with a filter pocket and PM2.5 disposable filter, for days you want protection from pollution as well as the pandemic. Unhinged Labs beard face mask, $29.85 For hirsute fellows, this filter-compatible, 100% cotton mask from US-based manufacturer Unhinged Labs accommodates a lot of extra hair. Because it is coming from overseas, shipping will take a little longer, and filters are sold separately. Locally,  Fella Hamilton also make a beard-compatible face mask , but it is two-ply. Vic Health advises “wearing a mask with less layers will still give you some protection”. Redee drink-friendly mask and straw, $32.99 US US-brand Redee has designed a filter-compatible, two-ply mask that is meant to make it easier to drink through a straw, without removing or touching your mask. The mask fits snugly around the face, but has a covered flap to allow a straw through the bottom of the mask, while leaving your nose and mouth covered. With a filter inserted, this mask appears to meet Vic Health and NSW Health recommendations, but accidentally touching the straw to the front of the mask could be an issue with day-to-day use. Vic Health does advise against masks which rely on valve openings, several of which are currently available from retailers internationally, and are also marketed as “straw friendly”.
21 things to look forward to in 2021 – from meteor showers to the Olympics:	You probably found a few things to enjoy about last year: you rediscovered your bicycle, perhaps, or your family, or even both, and learned to love trees. And don’t forget the clapping. Plus some brilliant scientists figured out how to make a safe and effective vaccine for a brand new virus in record time. Overall, though, unless you’ve got some pals in government who gave you a contract to make PPE (even though you’re a PE teacher), or you’re  Jeff Bezos , then the whole shitshow needs to be drop-kicked into the past. Do one, 2020. … for mankind, one giant leap back towards normality. (OK: two sharp scratches, but let’s not get hung up on details.) Unless you’re an anti-vaxxer, there’s a damn good chance you’re going to get jabbed in 2021. You might have already had the vaccine, or the first dose at least. Unless he superglues himself to the Oval Office floor, or mobilises 70 million second amendment-toting nuts and stages an actual coup, then the Orange One really is outta the White House and  Joe Biden will be sworn in as the 46th president of the United States of America  on 20 January. Maybe it doesn’t have the yes-we-can frisson of 2012, and the overriding emotion is more relief than excitement, but hey, we’ll take that. The days are already getting longer. Perhaps you planted bulbs in the garden or a window box and they’re already tentatively poking through. That magnolia has buds, a promise of joy to come. Soon the parks and the countryside, still just legally visitable at time of writing, will burst back into life, and the birds will be getting busy, planning new families. Maybe you are too? If you’re in the southern hemisphere you can skip this one … actually, no, don’t. Spring will come again, just a little further down the line. The seasons carry on regardless, obliviously, reassuringly. And if you live in New Zealand, you can always feel smug about living in New Zealand.  Not for a while maybe, and again, this won’t be seen by everyone to be something to cheer, but hugging will become an option again. Perhaps it can be an opportunity to rethink the whole thing, establish some new rules. Such as: If you feel like hugging someone, and they want to be hugged, then hug on, Huggy Bear. But for those awkward, should-we-shouldn’t-we situations, let’s just say no. What to do instead though, in a greeting situation say? Air kiss? Too European – we’re out of there now. Handshake? The opposite – too Brexit, too  Rees-Mog g. Also germs. So let’s keep the elbow bump – a reluctant concession to physical contact, but with a little comedy to break the ice. Less risky. See? Another great thing to come out of 2020.  Bottom half ’n’all, noses, mouths, chins. So you can tell who someone is and if they’re smiling or scowling, instead of trying to guess from their eyes. I know, masks are going to be around for a while yet, and they do have their advantages (beating facial recognition software, and halitosis). But it’s going to be nice to see people again. And no more uncomfortable  maskne . The culture previews have done this properly, and specifically – shows and books and everything to look forward to this year. In general, though, it’s time not just for the body to be reawakened but the soul as well. There will be – have been – tragic cultural losses, and grieving. But the lights in many theatres will come back up again. Even if they don’t look exactly the same, there will be live music gigs, operas, festivals! And  blockbusters in the cinema again  – welcome back, Mr Bond. People, in a room, sharing a collective experience, these are the things that make it all bearable. Boom ba da da, tinkle tinkle tinkle tinkle, boom ba da da – That’s the theme, obviously. Such a great theme, such a great show.  Succession  gets its own mention, because the wait for the third series of Jesse Armstrong’s sparkling, startling drama has become unbearable. Remember how it left us? Kendall (Jeremy Strong) seemingly about to fall on his sword and take the blame for the cruise scandal, suddenly turning it and pointing it straight at his father. The sword, pointing the sword at Logan (Brian Cox). Not a real sword, no – a metaphorical one. The rap was real –  remember Kendall’s rap ? It’s impossible to forget Kendall’s rap. The date has not been confirmed but  HBO says it’s going to happen in 2021 . The world needs Succession like it needs the vaccine. It is a sort of vaccination – against boredom. Peter Jackson’s Beatles doc, put together from  56 hours of unseen footage , gets a special mention. Because it looks from  the sneak peek  like such a joy and a giggle. “Hopefully it will put a smile on your face,” says Jackson, introducing it. And it does: J, P, G and R larking about in the studio, with Yoko sitting there, looking Yoko-ish, peaceful. And it’s the Beatles, or “the Bottles” as John calls them, and Peter Jackson, in New Zealand, a little bit smugly. Plus the song could be a message to our own PM, about the EU: Get back, Bojo.  One for the Brits, this (and it is possible some might not think it something to look forward to). We are free of the federal shackles and the tyranny of Brussels at last. Free to reclaim our sovereignty, and our haddock (maybe, I haven’t got to that bit in the trade deal yet). And if we’re poorer, and our children won’t have the opportunities we had, and we’re less relevant, a forgotten little lorry park on the fringe of Europe, then look on the bright side: we can use powerful vacuum cleaners again,  while the EU is limited to 1,600 watts . Ha, suck on that, Monsieur Barnier. OK, you won, Nigel. But with victory the reason for your existence disappears, so shut it. He won’t, of course. He can relaunch his party  as Reform UK , and  moan about lockdowns . And  “patrol” the south coast , bothering boat arrivals. Can’t he be deported, under new rules? Farage doesn’t sound very English. Can’t we put him in one of those dinghies and push him off? He can help himself to some haddock while he’s out there. Not the face-in-an-armpit commuter train, or the tube, but the good crowd: a colony of human ants bigger and more powerful than the sum of its individual parts. People brought together, closer than 2 metres apart, by something shared, and looking at each without fear or suspicion. Those festival fields again, a marathon,  Parkrun,  all the sports crowds, whatever it is that makes you swarm. We’ve had tier 2 tasters –  2,000 at Anfield , sounding like many more if not a full Kop in full song, and so welcome after the hollowness of an empty stadium, punctuated by the sound of boot on ball or  Jürgen Klopp’s  bark. Or worse even than no crowd: a fake crowd, always late with its reactions, and it doesn’t know the best songs. No more fake crowds, please. It’s shaping up to be a busy and brilliant year in sport, with major postponements rescheduled: Euro 2020 (+1) in June, followed by the  Olympics  and the Paralympics in Tokyo, and Wimbledon squeezed in among them. One last win for Andy, or Roger, and Serena, obviously. That’s the summer sorted. You want more? 2021’s got more:  Women’s Euro 2021 ,  Africa Cup of Nations ,  Champions League ,  Europa League triumph for Mikel’s Gunners .  Six Nations ,  the Ashes , the  America’s Cup  if that’s your thing, and don’t forget the  Ping Pong World Cup in Houston, Texas . Come on, you’ve earned it. Going abroad may seem too much hassle, with international travel in tatters, and bureaucracy  ramped up by Brexit  and coronavirus, but we holidayed domestically in the 1950s, so we can jolly well do it again. Take Cornwall! It’s beautiful. Or the Lake District, Wales, Scotland (until it becomes abroad) … There are so many places to pursue energetic outdoor activities, or visit castles, or whatever it is that your thing is. We might not always have the weather, but by golly we’ve got the views, and the history and the beaches. And with the money saved on flights you can get a nice bottle of Côtes du Rhône and a big piece of French cheese. Or you could go even homegrown. With all the checks, and paperwork, and hold-ups, there’s a chance your favourite French cheese will turn into toe cheese by the time it reaches the supermarket shelf. There’s more to British cheese than cheddar, though. I’m no expert but I like rollright and winslade, mainly because they’re a bit like French reblochon and vacherin. Some English wine isn’t bad, either. … to us, happy birthday to us, happy birthday, dear the Guardian, happy birthday to us. “No former period, in the history of our Country, has been marked by the agitation of questions of a more important character than those which are now claiming the attention of the public,” began the announcement of a new newspaper in Manchester. That was 1821 , a couple of years after the Peterloo massacre; it could so easily have been referring to today. Never has it been  so important  to listen, to find out, to hold power to account. There may even be some low-key celebrations. Take your pick. It’s 2,500 years since the battle of Plataea, 1,000 years since the birth of Byzantine empress Eudokia Makrembolitissa, 300 years since  Robert Walpole  became the first British PM,  30 years since Tim Berners-Lee had his idea for a worldwide web , 10 years since the  Arab spring .  Bob Dylan ’s going to be 80 in May – the times they are a-changin’. It’s possible you too might have a birthday in 2021. Nostradamus predicted a comet will come close in 2021, might even collide with the Earth. “In the sky, one sees fire and a long trail of sparks,” the French astrologer wrote. To be fair, he has been wrong. More reliable astronomical sources highlight the  Eta Aquarids meteor shower , produced by dust particles left behind by comet Halley, as one to watch out for. This year, we are told, it will peak on the night of 5/6 May . There will also be a  total lunar eclipse  on 26 May, if you’re in the Pacific region, parts of Asia, Australia, or the west of North America. Nostradamus also warned of massive solar storms, and that “we shall see the water rising and the Earth falling under it”. Oh God – he was predicting climate catastrophe, wasn’t he? This is supposed to be things to look forward to. With the Orange One gone, we’ll at least have a better chance to do something about the climate. Glasgow is hosting the 26th United Nations Climate Change Conference in November, keeping parties on track towards the goals of the Paris climate agreement. They could do worse than follow Costa Rica, which will become the  first country to declare itself carbon neutral . It is also set to eradicate single-use plastics.  Pura vida  – pure life – as they say there. Just 354 days to go, at time of publication And Christmas 2021 might actually feel something like Christmas. You know, everyone there, Granny not on Zoom but in the room. And the right food, in the right place, not the 10kg turkey over there for those two, and the cake over there. Followed perhaps even by a big night out (remember?) on New Year’s Eve. Steady … OK, so 2021’s going to be an improvement on 2020; it couldn’t be worse. But the aftershocks will reverberate for a while. 2022, though, with daylight between us and 2020, and new hope: 22’s going to be even better.
Climb a tree, and wiggle those hips: exercises to boost your mood:	Who decided climbing trees was for kids? Not Mark Holton, co-director of the Cornell University Outdoor Education Centre in the US. “Part of the thrill of climbing trees is it reminds us of our relatively carefree youth,” he says. Like all good physical exercise, tree climbing forces you to focus on the moment and be mindful of your movements and the potential each has to put you in danger. Conquering this, then relaxing, is part of the appeal. The benefit of tree climbing lies in its closer connection with nature. A  study in Japan  found tree climbers showed greater vitality, and reduced tension and fatigue, than those who climbed in urban settings. Exercising in a natural framework offers an escape, says Jack Cooke, author of  The Tree Climber’s Guide . “Trees can render the climber invisible; perched high in an oak or cedar, you become cocooned. Linger long enough and you will find birds returning to the branches around you.” So where should the novice begin? Find a park or open green space, Holton says. “These have the most light, so trees grow sideways as well as up, with branches that reach lower to the ground and nice spreading canopies. Trees in the forest have more competition, so the lower branches get shaded out and die. You can still climb them, but it requires safety equipment and training.” Avoid trees that have rotting roots or deep holes, missing bark or fungus. “Good climbing trees are healthy; look for hardwoods such as oaks, maples and sycamore; avoid pines and spruces, which tend to be brittle and sappy.” Take it one arm and leg at a time. “Be sure your next handhold is alive and large enough to hold your weight,” Holton says. “And don’t climb so high that you are scared to descend.  The best moments occur when you have reached a place where you feel secure and can take a moment to look around and release a little of your tension and fear,” he says. “Look up at the sky and enjoy the wind in the leaves.” What’s the one exercise everyone should do – regardless of age, fitness level or flexibility – to increase their wellbeing? For Simon Alebiosu, personal trainer and former jiu-jitsu champion, the answer is simple: the hip circle (AKA hip-controlled articular rotations, or hip Cars). If you have healthy hips, you are more likely to have a healthy lower back, knees and spine. Problems in any of these areas can be debilitating, increasing the risk of injury and osteoarthritis. So how do you do it? Start by standing with your feet flat on the floor, holding on to a wall or stable chair for balance. Brace your core and tense all your   muscles to keep your body rigid. Lift one knee up to hip height, or as high as it will go without rounding your lower back. Open the raised leg out to the side, turning your foot outwards but without letting your hips rotate; they should remain facing forwards. Then turn the sole of your foot backwards, and lift the leg slowly up behind you. This is an internal hip rotation rather than a stretch, so go with whatever range of movement you have. Then gently lower to the starting position and repeat. Aim to do the hip Cars slowly, taking 30-60 seconds for each one, for basic hip maintenance. To work your hips harder, do this two or three times a day. You can also do the same movement in reverse – starting with your leg up behind you. Alebiosu says he sees even better results with variants on all fours, or lying on your side. Strength, he adds, isn’t about throwing down weights in gyms and hashtagging your muscle goals on Instagram; instead, it’s about the ability to get the most fun out of an everyday, active life. “Being strong means being able to coordinate complicated movements, at high speeds, under load; for example, lifting boxes if you are moving home, or running around in the park playing with your children. Being physically strong and flexible is paramount for good health, and it will make you feel more confident.” Yes, you do it every day, but are you getting the most out of it? Stand up straight Consider your posture: a  2015 study  took a group of walkers and adjusted their gait to either “happy” (standing straighter, swinging arms purposefully) or “depressed” (slouching forward, little arm movement). The ones made to walk in a more “happy” way recalled a higher proportion of “positive self-relevant material” in tests. Stride out solo While walking with friends may seem intuitively to be a better way to boost happiness, according to clinical psychologist Dr Anna Hutchinson, solo walking can be just as beneficial, particularly if you take a mindful approach. “Some people can get into a more meditative space when solo walking,” she says. Concentrate on the rhythm of your footfall and your body’s movement to tune out external distractions or listen to a “mindful walking meditation” such as those found on the  Headspace  or  Calm  apps. Go for green  About 20-30 minutes of walking in even the smallest amount of nature has been shown to reduce levels of the stress hormone cortisol, as well as being linked to beneficial changes in blood pressure and heart rate. Oh, and put away that phone.  Put some effort in   “Walking is the single most beneficial cardiovascular exercise anyone can do,” says coach and trainer Tom Craggs. “Counting steps or distance is one way to measure progress – but the terrain and conditions will make a big difference. So instead, focus on gradually building your ‘time on feet’. Wear a heartrate monitor if you like, but for most people, trusting a rate of perceived exertion on a scale of 0-10 is perfect. Most of your walks should be at 2-3/10 effort. As you build fitness, mix in some 5-7/10 efforts.”   Trekking poles  have been shown to help burn up to 20% more calories if used correctly, Craggs says, as they involve more upper body action. Free your mind   “Walking is a free and timeless way to take a break from fearful thoughts of the future or difficult feelings from the past,” Hutchinson says, “to focus on the here and now – to simply be.”
Don’t hit snooze – and other secrets of a happy daily routine:	Caffeine is a powerful stimulant: it speeds up thinking, boosts motivation and lifts mood. Within 10 minutes of your early-morning hit, caffeine sets to work on your brain by blocking adenosine, a naturally calming hormone. At this time of day, adenosine levels are naturally low, while the morning “wake-up” hormone, cortisol, is almost at maximum. A strong coffee or tea on top of that doesn’t make you more alert – it simply throws a few matches on to an already raging bonfire, promoting anxiety and jitteriness. You’re   better off waiting a few hours until cortisol has waned and adenosine started to rise – then you can reap the full benefit of caffeine’s boost. Better yet, get out into daylight to boost levels of wake-up hormones. Try stretching, yoga, or gentle exercise – these all increase your heart rate, and improve blood flow to the parts of your brain that are still “asleep”. The most effective alarms are noisy, triggering a primal fear response in an area deep in the brain called the amygdala. Your heart rate soars as cortisol and adrenaline stream through the body. Hitting the snooze button only makes matters worse. When the alarm shocks you awake after 10-15 minutes, you go through the same biological torment. Over time, this can lower your mood and affect your physical health: years of this contributes to the clogging of blood vessels, which can in turn increase the risk of heart problems. Got a really early start? Hack your body clock by setting the central heating to come on at least half an hour before you wake, to mimic the temperature change as the sun rises. Everyone has a different body clock timetable (chronotype) that controls when they naturally wake, eat, work, play and sleep. A small proportion of us (14%) are primed to fire on all cylinders as soon as the sun rises (“morning larks”). Nearly a quarter of us are energised around sundown (“night owls”). The rest fly somewhere down the middle. Larks generally do better than owls at school, live longer, and earn on average 5% more. But don’t force yourself to be an early riser: night owls’ shorter life expectancy may be due to the biological strain of trying to live by a strict nine-to-five work culture. Most of us should avoid doing anything important for the early part of the day, because in the first few minutes after waking, reaction times are 360% slower and our ability to make good decisions is 51% worse. For three-quarters of adults over 25, the brain hits primetime between 9am and noon; the body is primed for exercise between 2.30pm and 4pm; creativity peaks in the evening. With 80% of motorists admitting to getting angry behind the wheel, road rage is endemic – and dangerous. Being isolated in a sound-proofed metal shell alters our mindset and makes us prone to make rash judgments, and worse. Keep photos of loved ones visible – this activates the thinking parts of the brain, helping you retain a sense of empathy. Play relaxing music to counteract the effect of fight-or-flight responses. Chaos is uncomfortable, but sterile, impersonal spaces are worse; they stifle creativity, while increasing anxiety and the risk of aches, pains and concentration difficulties. You’ll be more at ease and productive around familiar items: photos, posters and trinkets. You also need somewhere to put your feet up. Prioritise having a relaxing “third space” – a comfortable area, with ample daylight and ideally some greenery – to unwind and reflect.. The Science Of Living, by Dr Stuart Farrimond (DK, £15.99), is out now. To order a copy for £13.91, visit  guardianbookshop.com .
My lockdown meltdown drove me to try therapy – did it help?:	C olour me kooky, but I have not enjoyed living through a pandemic. For me, it’s basically been a social experiment in what happens when you take an already neurotic person and strip them of all semblance of routine. The results have been roughly as chaotic as Big Brother’s fight night, had the housemates been given hallucinogens. Initially, I did what I always do in times of crisis and simply became an even bigger  Spice Girls  fan. Without restaurants, or bars, or clubs, my evenings were spent pillaging eBay of every available piece of officially licensed tat. Several times, I unpacked things I’d apparently ordered in a fugue state, only to realise I already owned duplicates. Nothing screams “cry for help” quite so loudly as four identical Baby Spice mugs. Alone with my thoughts for the first time in years, I discovered they were a hostile crowd, and became consumed by free-floating dread. Right on time, I learned that my job was at risk. When listening to  Spice Up Your Life  20 times a day stopped feeling like a sufficient coping strategy, a friend suggested I try cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). Developed in the 1960s by the American psychiatrist Aaron Beck, CBT offers a quick fix to psychological distress by aiming to correct unhelpful thought patterns, rather than unpack their underlying causes. It isn’t without its critics – psychologist Jonathan Shedler compares it to a drive-thru – but it felt an attractive proposition compared with 10 years on the couch complaining about my parents (I have siblings for that). After speaking to my GP, I was offered three sessions over six weeks on the NHS. In my first conversation with the therapist, we spoke about the interplay between thoughts, behaviours, emotions and physical sensations. Because the last two are hardest to challenge, we’d be focusing on the first two. For homework, I was told to keep a thought record, where I would log situations in which “hot” (emotionally charged) moods occurred, rate their intensity from 0-10, and note down any thoughts or images that ran through my mind.  I was told to keep a thought record, where I would log situations in which ‘hot’ (emotionally charged) moods occurred Two weeks later, we reconvened to pick through my most humiliating thoughts and look for evidence that supported or contradicted them. Once we’d assembled proof on both sides (this had to be facts, rather than opinions), we used it to create what she called a balanced thought. For example,  Victoria Beckham ’s hot thought might be, “I can’t sing.” The evidence for this could include her limited octave range, and the evidence against could include her 85m record sales. A balanced thought might be: “I feel as if I can’t sing because I have a limited vocal range, but I have sold 85m records and  Out Of Your Mind  is a banger for the ages.” Once I’d created my own balanced thought, I was told to refer to it at moments when I felt overwhelmed. Hang on, I thought: was that it? The magic solution to my problems was… to balance a negative thought with a slightly more positive one? It felt like the kind of advice that might appear in a fortune cookie, or be dispensed by a wellness influencer between lunges. But the next time I woke in the night, my mind racing with anxiety, I practised the exercise and found it calming. Concentrating on the process acted like a circuit breaker, stopping my negative thoughts before they could spiral into ever more catastrophic scenarios. Having something prescriptive to focus on also gave me a sense of control that had been largely missing during the hellscape of 2020. Miraculously, I managed to fall back to sleep. I’m not convinced that three hours of CBT holds the solution to my – or anyone’s – problems. But compared with the other therapeutic exercises I’ve explored (joylessly mainlining all 10 seasons of  The Real Housewives Of Beverly Hills , eating one full-size bar of Toblerone a day, lying in the bath for upwards of four hours and imagining how different my life would be if only I’d been born  Timothée Chalamet ), it has proved helpful enough that I would consider a longer course. Will it make a difference long term? You’ll have to come back to me. Better yet, check my eBay history.
Glee, outrage, relief: Twitter reacts to losing its most infamous user:	The  permanent suspension  of Donald Trump’s personal Twitter account sent shockwaves through the internet on Friday, promoting reactions both outraged and gleeful. The drama played out, of course, on Twitter. Critics of  Trump  have long called for his account to be disabled, while his allies have attempted to defend or excuse the president’s online mayhem. Mark Warner, a Democratic senator and frequent Silicon Valley critic, called it “an overdue step” but highlighted how the misinformation ecosystem is much larger than one man alone. An overdue step. But it’s important to remember, this is much bigger than one person. It’s about an entire ecosystem that allows misinformation and hate to spread and fester unchecked.  https://t.co/wPc0AFWcgu Trump’s former lawyer Michael Cohen said the president needs  Twitter  like “oxygen” and imagined he would be “be losing his marbles” over the ban. Know that  #Trump  relies on  @Twitter  to exist in the same way we require oxygen to breathe. He is losing his marbles right now!  https://t.co/RTS4iz59fu And Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state and Trump’s 2016 rival, offered a pithy summation. ✔️  https://t.co/lQmZvooFYW Others noted the ban could be awkward for the first lady Melania Trump’s campaign against cyberbullying. Hey  @FLOTUS   Great news. Twitter just banned your husband. Your anti cyber bullying campaign is working. #BeBest However, others, including Trump’s son Don Jr and Trump’s former UN ambassador Nikki Haley, were swift to decry the move as censorship. Silencing people, not to mention the President of the US, is what happens in China not our country.  #Unbelievable We are living Orwell’s 1984. Free-speech no longer exists in America. It died with big tech and what’s left is only there for a chosen few.  This is absolute insanity!  https://t.co/s2z8ymFsLX Donald Trump  has used Twitter to facilitate his rise to power, and to incite real-world violence with grave consequences. He has also, over the years, used it to scream into the void about a range of bizarre topics. After the president was permanently removed from the platform on Friday, users shared some memorable past posts: that time he was mad about the former congressman Barney Frank’s nipples; that time he tweeted about his high IQ; that time he wished a happy 9/11 to all his haters and losers; and that time he was oddly preoccupied with Kristen Stewart. in memoriam, my all-time fav tweet:  pic.twitter.com/4pWDCSxlj8 everyone post their favorite trump tweets i’ll start  pic.twitter.com/bvpvK1zciA Trump commemorated the 12th anniversary of 9/11 by extending “my best wishes” to “haters and losers.”  pic.twitter.com/sWPB7Ll6PF RIP  pic.twitter.com/kauVboaPYs And still others took delight in imagining how Trump must have reacted to the news, or simply revelled in the unprecedented sight of Trump’s account, long a running thread of anger, attacks and conspiratorial falsehoods, at long last going quiet. i would give up a non-essential organ in exchange for video of someone telling him i want to know how he finds out  pic.twitter.com/LkPtJ9ScTL I won’t rest until he is removed from that scene in Home Alone 2 Lmao Trump  pic.twitter.com/UWAqBFyuip Put this screen shot in the presidential library  pic.twitter.com/flFc5RfKGq
NHS could vaccinate UK against Covid in five days, says Oxford professor:	The  NHS  could vaccinate the entire population in five days but is being hampered by bureaucracy, a leading immunologist has claimed. Sir John Bell, regius chair of medicine at the University of Oxford, said stubborn NHS bureaucrats were standing in the way of a high-speed mass inoculation programme that could prevent many further deaths. “The NHS has the theoretical capacity to immunise everybody in five days if they want to, but I don’t get the sense they are really motivated,” Bell told the Times. “Did you see the list of things you have to do to volunteer to help the inoculation programme? To impose it on people who are just sticking a needle in an arm is bonkers.” A government website states that prospective volunteers need to live in England and be over the age of 18, use a smartphone, consider their own health condition in case they are clinically vulnerable, and be able to “go on duty as much as you possibly can”. The government should be reacting to Covid-19 as if to an enemy invading the country, Bell said, referencing  Israel’s highly successful mass inoculations. “People have rightly pointed to the Israelis, who have managed to immunise lots of people. You have to view it as if it were a war. The Israelis are good at getting on a war footing – everyone is waiting for the 2am call anyway. Here it is not clear whether it’s a national security issue, but it is. The economic impact is as bad as any war. You might say 100,000 dead is not as bad as a war but it’s still not where you want to be.” Bell said doctors and nurses should not be blamed for what he regarded as the slow rollout of the vaccine across the NHS. “I think the frontline medics certainly see it as an emergency – those guys are working harder than anyone I’ve ever seen. They are eyewateringly good, but you don’t get the [same] sense from the hierarchy in the NHS, the bureaucrats.” Dr Richard Vautrey, GP committee chair of the British Medical Association, echoed Bell’s concerns about bureaucratic hurdles preventing a faster rollout. “Doctors and their colleagues across the NHS want to get these vaccines into the arms of as many people as possible as quickly as they can. However, this crucially relies on supplies, which are nowhere near the levels they need to be yet,” he said. “Meanwhile, the NHS has for too long been plagued by bureaucracy, and we need a drastic slashing of red tape to ensure that everyone who can safely administer vaccines, and is willing to help with the effort, is allowed to do so. “The vaccination programme is the most powerful weapon we have in our armoury in the war against the pandemic, and NHS staff stand ready to deploy it. Give us the vaccines and flexibility and we will do it.” Ruth Rankine, primary care director at the NHS Confederation, said: “The NHS will do everything it can to immunise the population against coronavirus as quickly as possible and our members understand how important it is given how close frontline services are to becoming overwhelmed by the disease. “If we are to meet the prime minister’s target of delivering doses to 13.9 million people in England by mid-February, without delay we will need more sites to come on stream, more vaccinators, and a more certain supply chain, all of which are thankfully part of the national plan.” In the week ending 3 January, 308,541 people received an NHS vaccination for Covid-19 in England, according to NHS England data. This takes the total vaccinations given since vaccinations began on 8 December to 1,112,866. A spokesperson for NHS England said: “Prof Bell’s reported comments suggest he may not know that at the current time there are not actually that number of vaccines available to the NHS to deploy. It’s best to stick to the facts, and they are that vaccine supply will be progressively increasing over the coming weeks, allowing rapidly expanding vaccinations.” E
Australia take command of third Test against India at SCG:	Pat Cummins has given Australia the perfect opportunity to take the lead in the Border-Gavaskar Trophy after again knocking down India’s great wall. Cummins removed Cheteshwar Pujara for the fourth time in three Tests this summer on a horror Saturday for the tourists, taking 4-29 to leave India all out for 244. Australia then went to stumps on day three at 103-2 in their second innings, leading by 197, with Marnus Labuschagne not out on 47 and Steve Smith 29. The pair put on a crucial 68 for the third wicket after Will Pucovski (10) and David Warner (13) fell early. Smith drove through the covers gloriously after doing likewise in his first-innings 131, while Labuschagne pounced on anything short. It capped a disastrous day for India with Ravindra Jadeja (thumb) and Risabh Pant (elbow) both needing scans from blows suffered batting, while three other men were run out. But it was Cummins’ heroics that gave Australia the chance to break the 1-1 deadlock with one game to play. Pujara was India’s stonewall on their triumphant tour two summers ago, but this series he has continually been beaten down by Cummins. He scored the slowest half-century of his career on Saturday from 174 balls, but went two balls later when one from Cummins got big on him, brushed his glove, and carried through to Tim Paine. Australia’s attack leader now has the figures of 4-19 from 21 overs against Pujara this summer. It wasn’t the only blow the vice-captain landed. He started the day by forcing Ajinkya Rahane to chop on for 22, seaming one back at India’s skipper as he went to late cut. After removing Shubman Gill on day two, he also inflicted the pain to Pant’s elbow before Hazlewood had the beleaguered wicketkeeper edging shortly after on 36. Neither Pant nor Jadeja - who was hit on his left thumb by Starc - returned to the field. Cummins then did the job in the field to run out Ravichandran Ashwin during a collapse of 5-21. Ashwin first hesitated and then failed to put in a final effort through the crease in what should have been an easy single. Jasprit Bumrah also fell short of his ground to a brilliant direct hit from Marnus Labuschagne, who chased a ball from short leg, slid and threw down the stumps. But even that wasn’t as good as the effort from Hazlewood in the morning session. Mid-spell, the 196cm quick moved low to his right to intercept a drive, throwing in one motion as he fell to claim a direct hit and catch Hanuma Vihari well short. Meanwhile the day’s other flashpoint came when Australia were unsuccessful in having Pujara caught at bat-pad off Nathan Lyon. The decision, after footage was obscured and there was no definite spike on hot spot, infuriated Paine who asked umpire Paul Wilson for some “f***ing consistency”.
Effort to impeach Trump again gathers pace after 'attempted coup' at Capitol:	Donald Trump  looks set to become the first American president to be impeached for a second time as Democrats accused him of fomenting a “coup” at the US Capitol building that left five people dead. The historic effort gained momentum on Friday after it emerged that a police officer was among those killed when a pro-Trump mob stormed the seat of American democracy in Washington,   after the president encouraged supporters to “fight like hell” to overturn the result of November’s election. In a letter to members of the House,  Nancy Pelosi , the speaker, called Trump’s actions a “horrific assault on our democracy” and called on the president to resign or face impeachment proceedings again. “Today, following the president’s dangerous and seditious acts, Republicans in Congress need to follow that example and call on Trump to depart his office – immediately,” she wrote. “If the president does not leave office imminently and willingly, the Congress will proceed with our action.” The president belatedly denounced the insurrection in a video on Thursday, but followed up with a tweet on Friday that praised his supporters as “patriots” before announcing that he will not attend his successor Joe Biden’s inauguration on 20 January. Democrats in the House, where they hold a majority, said they intend to speed ahead with Trump’s impeachment next week. The Senate would then hold a trial and vote on his removal from office, with a two-thirds majority required for conviction. The Republican senator Ben Sasse said on Friday he would “definitely consider” any articles of impeachment from the House, telling CBS News Trump had “disregarded his oath of office” and that his incitement of violence was “wicked”. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska  told the Anchorage Daily News : “I want him to resign. I want him out. He has caused enough damage.” The first Republican senator to call for Trump to go, Murkowski also said: “If the Republican party has become nothing more than the party of Trump, I sincerely question whether this is the party for me.” Late on Friday afternoon, a White House statement said: “This is a time for healing and unity as one nation. A politically motivated impeachment against a president with 12 days remaining in his term will only serve to further divide our great country.” In a speech on Wednesday, Trump exhorted a crowd of thousands to descend on the Capitol to protest his election defeat. Rioters overwhelmed police and stormed the building, rampaging through its ornate halls, looting offices and posing for photos in the Senate chamber. Capitol police officer Brian Sicknick, 40,  died from injuries sustained in the invasion , the force said. A woman was fatally shot by the authorities and three people died from medical emergencies. Pipe bombs were found at the headquarters of the Democratic and Republican parties. Police made 68  arrests . In the immediate aftermath of the breach, which interrupted a session of Congress held to ratify Biden’s election win, Trump declined to issue condemnation, instead telling supporters he loved them and repeating his baseless assertion that he was being cheated of victory. Pelosi and the Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, called for immediate impeachment proceedings if Mike Pence, the vice-president, and the cabinet refuse to invoke the 25th amendment to the US constitution, which allows them to strip the president of his powers if he cannot discharge the duties of his office. “The president’s dangerous and seditious acts necessitate his immediate removal from office,” they said in a statement on Thursday evening, accusing Trump of inciting an “insurrection”. In her message to Democratic colleagues on Friday, Pelosi wrote that Republicans should emulate their predecessors who nearly 50 years ago persuaded President Richard Nixon to resign after the Watergate scandal. Pelosi also revealed that she had spoken to Gen Mark Milley, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, “to discuss available precautions for preventing an unstable president from initiating military hostilities or  accessing the launch codes and ordering a nuclear strike ”. She added: “The situation of this unhinged president could not be more dangerous, and we must do everything that we can to protect the American people from his unbalanced assault on our country and our democracy.” Katherine Clark, the assistant House speaker, told CNN Democrats were prepared to move forward with impeachment as early as next week. And James Clyburn, the No3 House Democrat, told the same network: “Everyone knows that this president is deranged. can confirm that we have had discussions about it and I would hope that the speaker would move forward if the vice-president refuses to do what he is required to do under the constitution.” The House impeached Trump in December 2019 for pressuring the Ukrainian president to investigate Biden, but the Senate acquitted him in February last year. Only two other presidents have been impeached. None has been impeached twice. There are signs the incident has shaken Trump’s grip on the Republican party as never before, with Congressman Adam Kinzinger among those calling for his removal. Several senior administration officials have resigned including two cabinet members: Elaine Chao, the transportation secretary, and Betsy DeVos, the education secretary. In a statement, Chao, who is married to the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell, said the violent attack on the Capitol “deeply troubled me in a way that I simply cannot set aside”. DeVos cast blame on the president for inciting the mob. “There is no mistaking the impact your rhetoric had on the situation, and it is the inflection point for me,” she wrote. Even Rupert Murdoch’s conservative Wall Street Journal has finally turned on Trump and called for his resignation, to avoid a second impeachment. “It would give Mr Trump agency, a la Richard Nixon, over his own fate,” it wrote in an editorial. But conviction in the Senate remains unlikely, with some warning that it would further enflame America’s divisions. Senator Lindsey Graham, a Trump loyalist, tweeted that it is time to heal and move on. “If Speaker Pelosi pushes impeachment in the last days of the Trump presidency it will do more harm than good,” he wrote. “I’m hopeful President-elect Biden sees the damage that would be done from such action.” In a video released on Thursday evening, Trump promised a smooth and orderly transition of power, though he stopped short of abandoning his claims of fraud. And on Friday he followed up with a tweet that showed little sign of repentance. “The 75,000,000 great American Patriots who voted for me, AMERICA FIRST, and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, will have a GIANT VOICE long into the future,” he posted. “They will not be disrespected or treated unfairly in any way, shape or form!!!” The president added a fitting coda to his norm-shattering presidency, writing: “To all of those who have asked, I will not be going to the inauguration on 20 January.” Pence is expected to attend an event that will feature heightened security and smaller crowds due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Topshop changed the fashion industry, but now it too has been left behind:	W hen I was growing up in Belfast in the mid-00s, the recently opened Victoria Square shopping centre offered a trifecta of coolness to teenage girls: Topshop, Urban Outfitters and Hollister. While each store had its own appeal, the barometer of desire swung most often towards Topshop. The  “Topshop Girl” was ahead of trends , easily cast as the Kate or Cara of her provincial town in a statement chunky necklace or boho gilet. Whether in Belfast’s Victoria Square, the Trafford Centre in Manchester or a concession in a regional department store, Topshop was, for many young women, a beacon of aspiration. If you lived outside a major city, a pilgrimage into town wasn’t complete without a visit to  Topshop . The brand’s flagship store on London’s Oxford Street was the teenage girl equivalent of Lourdes, with three sprawling floors of clothes, shoes and accessories, a cavernous basement housing the brand’s premium Boutique range, and a curated selection of vintage clothing. Any visit was a multi-sensory experience: the labyrinth of mirrored escalators were always packed with bewildered tourists as the sound of pummelling house music from a resident DJ permeated the building. But after a 27-year tenure on London’s main shopping drag, the company’s flagship has now been put up for sale. Topshop’s parent company, the Arcadia Group, has  gone into administration  and a buyer is being sought for the brand. Last year was tumultuous for high street staples as social distancing measures meant a reduction in the sales of clothing and an overall shift to  online retail . Though you won’t catch me shedding any tears for Arcadia owner Philip Green – his family are  set to pocket £50m  from the sale of Topshop – the demise of his retail empire is a tragic blow for the  13,000 employees  across the group whose jobs are at risk. The sale of Topshop is also a symptom of our changing relationship with fashion. Founded in 1964, Topshop’s zenith was arguably during the past two decades, when the chain brought the catwalk to the high street. Previously, mass-market clothing production ran months behind the pieces luxury designers showcased at catwalk shows, until Topshop and its peers – including Zara and Mango  –  began to match these trends,   almost   like-for-like. Fashion shows were once heavily guarded events to which high-street designers weren’t invited (some even paid for  blackmarket catwalk footage ). But the advent of social media and blogging made catwalk trends more accessible, and Topshop was well placed to meet them. The brand established itself as a high-street contender in the world of high fashion, and was one of the first chains   to launch its own runway shows, with celebrities and models dotting front rows. It pioneered   high-end collaborations with designers and celebrities such as Kate Moss, Christopher Kane and Preen – a business model that has since become an industry standard. The brand drip-fed trends to consumers who had previously relied on glossy magazines and the occasional blog for fashion forecasts. At Topshop’s peak, a pair of the brand’s popular Joni skinny jeans  sold every 10 seconds , and queues snaked around the block for its limited designer collections. But the trend cycle that Topshop once stoked continued to pick up speed, and more dexterous competitors started to meet the demand for increasingly faster fashion. Brands such as Boohoo, PrettyLittleThing and Missguided had rapid production rates and even more cut-price offerings – these retailers could sell “going out-out” dresses, once a Topshop staple, for under £5. While Topshop’s bland   website has remained much the same for years, new fast-fashion brands nimbly adapted to the age of influencers and social media; PrettyLittleThing launched a sell-out line with Love Island’s Molly Mae, for instance, while Boohoo is known for its meme-machine Instagram page. In many ways, Topshop has been the victim of its own success. The fashion playing field it once helped to level has evolved; the business model it once pioneered now seems old-fashioned alongside social media-savvy competitors that don’t even have brick and mortar stores (or the overheads that go with them). But it wasn’t just the voracious appetite for fast fashion that led to Topshop’s demise. As its key demographic grew older – with more disposable income and an eye on quality – they graduated to new offerings, such as the H&M group’s Cos, and & Other Stories. These brands emphasise higher-quality fabrics and boutique-style stores (though even they are beginning to face a reckoning, as shoppers cotton on to issues around  faux sustainability claims ). Indeed, consumers have become increasingly aware that fast fashion carries a huge cost for the environment and workers’ rights. One in three Generation Z and millennial consumers in the UK are now  on the fashion marketplace Depop ,  a hive for vintage and second-hand clothing. The slow fashion activists I know – and the hubs of like-minded teens who proliferate on Depop and TikTok – are interrogating the brokers of consumer culture and finding a sense of community in clothes that have more of a purpose than the comfort of trend-safe replica outfits. Young women’s shopping habits continue to change the world of fashion as we know it. Hopefully, some of that change is for the better. Somewhere in the sartorial hinterland between fast fashion shoppers and more critical consumers, Topshop lost its purpose. Whatever comes next for the brand, we may be bidding a tentative, bittersweet farewell to the three undisputed demigods of denim that Topshop made so popular: Joni, Jamie and Leigh. Anna Cafolla is a journalist specialising in women’s rights, Northern Ireland, youth culture and activism
Surreal, silly and seriously good fun: Irresistible rise of the Masked Singer:	I f someone had told you a year ago that you’d look forward to a badger singing  Feeling Good  on a Saturday night, you may not have believed them. But the last 12 months have done strange things to the world, and the second series of the ITV show  The Masked Singer , where badgers, sausages and dragons belt their hearts out on primetime, feels like the perfect television for our times. For those new to the show, the rules are simple. Celebrity contestants dress in extravagant costumes which give them a new fantasy character, such as Viking, Harlequin or Grandfather Clock. They give clues as to their identity in an introductory video, then perform a song live for the judges – the UK panel consists of Rita Ora, Davina McCall and  Jonathan Ross , joined this series by Bafta-winning comedian Mo Gilligan – who guess who they are. The studio audience vote for their favourites and then the judges pick one contestant to be unmasked from the three with the lowest vote. But these facts don’t do justice to the surreality of the show, the good humour – or the spectacle.  The Masked Singer  format comes from South Korea. The show  King of Mask  launched in 2015 and became a worldwide hit, with Thailand, Germany, Australia, France and America already enjoying their third or fourth series. The current UK series gathered 6.3 million viewers for last Saturday’s show – a 26.3% share of the audience. It was the biggest new entertainment show of 2020. Gladys Knight performed as a bee, Patti LaBelle as a flower and LeAnn Rimes won as the Sun in the US version. Actor Ryan Reynolds made a guest appearance as a  caped unicorn  and sang  Tomorrow  from  Annie  on the South Korean show in 2018. The first UK series brought us Teddy Sheringham as Tree, Katherine Jenkins as Octopus and former shadow home secretary Alan Johnson as Pharaoh. The first two stars eliminated from the current series are Sophie Ellis-Bextor and Mel B from The Spice Girls. The show has been a big hit on social media, too, with fans and celebrity fans tweeting guesses and clues. During the first season, Peter Crouch got into the Twitter conversation about whether he was performing as Tree. Last week, when magician Dynamo was tipped as Bushbaby, he took to Twitter to say: “Have you ever seen me and Bushbaby in the same room at the same time…?” Morten Harket from A-Ha, Angela Merkel and Justin Timberlake are just some of the rumours circulating about the new performers. Comedian Mo Gilligan is new to the panel of judges and has already been successful at guessing identities. He nailed Mel B instantly. Did he ever think he’d spend Saturday night guessing who was dressed as a sausage? “No, but I never thought I’d be on Saturday night TV,” he says. “I’m a product of watching Saturday night TV from the 90s like  Gladiators ,  Blind Date , so to now be a part of that is quite surreal.” While the celebrity reveals are a great finale, the show’s success comes from the surreal spectacle of the masked performances. The costumes are centre stage throughout, madcap fantasies with a troupe of backing dancers and a light show. Gilligan says the performances are even better seen live in the studio. “The big stage production with dancers, lighting, props, it’s really incredible. The costumes are mind-blowing because you forget that there is someone in there. You start seeing them as the Badger, the Sausage, the Dragon.” The American show’s costumes, designed by Marina Toybina, have won an Emmy. The Australian outfits are by Tim Chappel, who received an Oscar for costume design for the 1994 film  The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert . The British designs are equally ornate. They are the work of Plunge Creations, a Brighton-based company that has created props and costumes for such clients as magician Derren Brown, the Imperial War Museum and Disney. While the Korean originals are true to the Asian anime aesthetic, and the American outfits feel part Mardi Gras, part Vegas, the British costumes feel, well, very British. Some are elegant and beautiful, but some have a touch of panto or  Doctor Who  – or even  It’s a Knockout . Tim Simpson, managing director at Plunge, says the  Masked Singer  job is a “crazy, special” brief. The costumes for the first series took 47 craftspeople about 5,000 hours to create, including sculptors, seamstresses and metal workers. But the work was worth it. “The combination of costume, song and the backing dancers – you get to create a visual cacophony of insanity.” Simpson comes from a theatrical background and admits his family were initially dubious about the show but, like most viewers, were seduced by its silliness. “There was a moment when Unicorn performed Sharp Dressed Man by ZZ Top with backing dancers dressed as unicorns in suits. My sister and mother rang within minutes of each other to say, ‘this is fun! We get it’.” Simpson points out the show is actually part of a long theatrical tradition. “The history of masks goes back thousands of years. They’ve been used for terrifying your enemy, telling stories or just entertaining. There’s something exciting about them – they transform you.” He thinks many of the performers relish the disguise. “Your relationship with the audience, which you’ve grown up over years, the songs you sing, the way you look, it’s all gone. And you’re rebuilding your performance.” Simpson says most costumes are created without knowing who will wear them, though some members of the team have to know the celebrities’ identities to do final fittings. Simpson, like the rest of us, would rather not know so he can enjoy the guessing. “Our perception of ourselves is denoted by how people receive us. With a mask, you alter that fundamentally. People you’re singing to or talking to see someone different. You only find yourself again by becoming the character that they perceive. When Sausage bounds on to the  Masked Singer  set, and the audience goes ‘Hey! Sausage!’, it tells Sausage how to behave. When Bushbaby walks on – the audience tells them they’re gorgeous.” Another reason performers enjoy the show is because it’s fun. It’s hard to think of another reality format that is as positive and uplifting. “These celebrities come out and blow us away with their enthusiasm and energy and voices,” says McCall. “It’s such a positive programme but it takes a moment to get your head round it because it is completely bonkers.” Gilligan says one reason  The Masked Singer  is kind is because it’s an old-fashioned family show. “Celebrities do the show because their kids watch it and they want to have a bit of a laugh. It’s not a singing contest. I think that’s why we are supportive of the celebrities because they’re just having fun and the audience at home are watching it to have fun.” Simpson says this sense of enjoyment has been integral from the start of production. “These aren’t young performers who find themselves in a spotlight. These are experienced professionals who are doing this because they’ve heard it’s a good show and it’s a giggle. It’s just colourful entertainment and we need a bit of that at the moment.” Of course, the irony of the UK’s show’s success in a time when everyone is wearing a mask has not escaped Simpson. “I suggested a PPE character for the second show and got a firm no.” During the first lockdown in 2020, he used the company’s 3D printer to make face shields for NHS workers and, when the workshops reopened to make costumes for series two, it was the first post-lockdown work some of the team had. Like many in the creative industries, Plunge’s workforce has been hit hard by the pandemic. “This sort of work is reassuring, it shows entertainment can come back,” says Simpson. “I think that actually the creative industries will recover, but, by golly, it’s going to be a hard journey. But people have a fundamental need to be entertained, to be taken away from themselves.” If nothing else,  The Masked Singer  can definitely promise you a break from reality.
How a child psychiatrist and a pub manager’s efforts during Covid-19 put them on the new year honours list:	Sophie Goddard Among the household names featured on the new year honours list, you’ll find hundreds of key workers and community champions who stepped up during the pandemic and made a huge individual impact. Here, we meet two of them: a child and adolescent psychiatrist and a pub general manager who, thanks to their innovative thinking, enriched the lives of those in their community – and beyond. “During the pandemic, people Zoomed, Skyped and connected with families digitally, so why can’t we connect healthcare the same way,” asks consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist Prof Alka Surajprakash Ahuja, from Cardiff, who was awarded an MBE for her services to the NHS during Covid-19. Ahuja received the honour for her pivotal role in setting up the pioneering  NHS Wales Video Consulting Service , which digitally connects patients with clinicians. As clinical lead for  Technology Enabled Care Cymru , she was tasked last March with rapidly scaling up the service to enable people to access healthcare advice and services from their homes during the pandemic. The service would not only protect the public, but the NHS workforce too. “A lot of people were self-isolating or [Covid-19] positive but needed to continue providing primary and secondary care, as well as in care homes,” she says. Under normal circumstances, it would have taken at least two years to implement the technology. But the pandemic meant the situation was urgent. “It needed to happen within weeks,” says Ahuja. Within just six weeks, the programme had been rolled out to almost 90% of primary care, with Ahuja’s team developing and issuing best practice guidance and toolkits. “This meant people could continue to consult their GP and get the support they needed,” she says. As well as improving patient accessibility and choice, the introduction of video consultations has been shown to reduce travel time, costs and the carbon footprint of both clinicians and patients. Working remotely with a newly-assembled team, Ahuja was able to bring the programme to hospitals as well as GP surgeries. “This meant all the outpatient appointments could continue to happen [covering] intensive care, hospices, oncology wards, mental health units. But I never thought I’d be connecting patients on the Covid ward in intensive care with their families – sometimes to say the final goodbye. I think that’s the thing that really hit me,” she says. In 12 weeks, the programme was available across more than 50 services and 35 specialties in Wales. Almost 100,000 virtual consultations have now taken place, with 93% rating it as “excellent, really good or good”. The programme’s success means the focus was extended to care homes, too. “That was a place where we had the most vulnerable people who needed help, but professionals were very limited in terms of access. It allowed GPs to do virtual rounds, continuing to provide the support and care they needed.” Dentistry, optometry and pharmacy followed, with video appointments revolutionising the way a growing number of patients accessed healthcare. Ahuja’s research into video appointments also led her to investigate their value for schools. “We know schools are not going to be the same for a long, long time. But children and young people still need support for their mental and physical health, so that will hopefully enable remote delivery of care into school settings,” she says. The technology has proved life-changing. “One of our first patients was an elderly gentleman living on his own. He had an appointment with the oncologist – it was a newly diagnosed tumour that was probably cancerous. He was very anxious, which was understandable. What helped was his daughter in London and his son in Singapore could join the appointment virtually, which under normal circumstances wouldn’t be possible. It meant having family for the appointment was much more reassuring and helped contain his anxiety. When we spoke to him, he was in tears. He said: ‘My god, I just couldn’t believe it – it was like my daughter and son sitting next to me in the appointment.’” Despite the punishing workload, witnessing the results has made it worthwhile. “I think one thing that kept us going was that we all believed this was going to make a difference,” she says. “I still remember the day I left my clinical job – it was hard because I thought I’m not going to see my patients and it’s going to be next to impossible. My colleague said: ‘Don’t worry, you’re making history’ and I laughed. Now, I think what we have done has been amazing. Post-Covid, healthcare is not going to be the same – it’s going to change the landscape.” As general manager of the Portsmouth Arms in Basingstoke, Richard Curtis was awarded a BEM for services to charity and the community in Hampshire during the pandemic. At the time of the announcement, he had raised £52,500 for charity through the virtual pub quizzes he has  hosted on Facebook  since the outbreak of the pandemic. With a modest goal of £150, his first quiz – which began the day after pubs closed last March – quickly gained traction, turning into a nightly occurrence. “I never expected it to be anything other than my regulars who come to the pub, and to maybe attract a bit of a local audience,” he says. “We didn’t expect it to go worldwide.” Curtis, who estimates he’s now held around 300 online quizzes since March and is still going strong, has seen his efforts bring together people from around the globe in a bid to help alleviate loneliness and isolation. With the first quiz drawing around 120 participants, at its peak up to 1,500 people were joining online. “From March, it very quickly went from one quiz a week to 18,” he says. “We were doing a children’s one Monday to Friday, which I hosted with my children. I was then doing an adult one every night, and then on Saturday and Sunday I did a themed quiz at three o’clock, another at five, then an adults’ one at eight.” With each quiz filmed inside the pub (Curtis lives upstairs with his wife and three children) it offered “the feel of the pub” for those missing it. “I made a rule that if people couldn’t come to the pub, I wouldn’t be drinking, but that soon turned into people saying: ‘If we donate £200, will you have a beer?’” The biggest quiz – a world record attempt held across VE Day weekend that lasted an astonishing 35 hours – raised more than £21,000 for charity (the world record status is still pending). “The money we raised was beyond anybody’s belief. That weekend there was so much hope for what people could have done, and what they were actually allowed to do,” he says of the weekend, falling during the first national lockdown. The world record attempt was surprisingly gruelling, he says. “I just imagined I’d have to write loads of questions and stay awake. But sitting in that position for so long, my back was shot to pieces. And while staying awake for so long isn’t a problem, constantly talking for that amount of time is. Because I’d been talking for so long, my throat and tongue had swollen up so much that I couldn’t eat. I tried to eat a bacon sandwich at one point and choked, I just couldn’t swallow it.” While the recognition for his efforts has been overwhelming, Curtis says doing nothing wasn’t an option. “I started doing it because I still needed to feel like I had a purpose in the community, even with the pub shut – it was a really scary time,” he says. That same community, it appears, is fully behind him. “The day after the [record-attempting] quiz I saw a few people rustling around the car park. I wandered down in my pyjamas and before I knew it, there were 50 or so people – all socially distanced – clapping. The fact we’ve genuinely had an impact on people’s lives is amazing.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Fight Covid-19) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit  gov.uk/coronavirus . For more information on honours recipients, go to  gov.uk/honours .
Fears over Biden inauguration security mount after US Capitol attack:	Among the most shocking images to emerge from Wednesday’s attack on the US Capitol were members of the pro-Trump mob wielding baseball bats and bearing “Keep America Great” banners rampaging over the inaugural platform on the West Front of the building where four years ago  Donald Trump  took his oath of office. The sight of rioters running amok amid clouds of teargas on the very spot where their cherished leader swore to “preserve, protect and defend the constitution of the United States” was not just symbolically chilling. It underlined the massive security challenge now facing the US government as it hurtles towards the next inauguration – that of  Joe Biden  – just days away. As with any inauguration in modern times, Biden’s ascent to the presidency on 20 January has been declared a “national security special event”. That awards it the highest level of security preparation, with all the phenomenal firepower that federal agencies led by the Secret Service and FBI can muster. In the wake of the attack on the Capitol, that already elevated security level is now being ramped up significantly. The risk of the incoming president and vice-president, three former presidents, the nine members of the US supreme court, and most members of Congress – all of whom are expected to attend the inauguration – being exposed to a repeat attack by the Trump-incited mob is beyond contemplation. “There’s going to have to be major, major reviews of what happened and changes made in terms of beefing up security,” Amy Klobuchar, the Democratic senator who sits on the joint congressional committee overseeing inauguration ceremonies,  told CBS News . Within hours of Wednesday’s carnage, that beefing up was already in plain sight. A 7ft-tall “non-scalable” fence is being erected in a giant circle around the Capitol grounds where it will remain for at least 30 days. A state of emergency has been declared in Washington DC that will last until the day after the inauguration. More than 6,200 national guard personnel will be in the city by this weekend, according to the mayor, Muriel Bowser. Driving the scramble to increase security is the realization that what happened on Wednesday amounted to a security failure of immense proportions. The chief of the Capitol police and the Senate sergeant-at-arms both resigned in consequence. But the phrase “security failure” itself fails to come close to the threat contained in the storming of the Capitol. The most dangerous aspect of it was not in the mob itself, but in who stood behind it. Never before has sitting president incited his followers to attack the heart of American democracy. What Donald Trump did was a betrayal of public trust and a violation of his oath of office As Michael Chertoff, the former homeland security secretary under George W Bush, put it: “What Donald Trump did was a betrayal of public trust and a violation of his oath of office. There’s no question that what we saw this week was incited by the rhetoric that he has been using now for weeks and that inspired and mobilised extremist rightwingers and conspiracy theorists.” Chertoff likened the riot at the Capitol to 9/11. “On 9/11 we worried that one of the planes was going to hit the Capitol building. In this case, the Capitol building was hit. It was domestic terror, and absolutely shocking.” Chertoff was central in the preparations for Barack Obama’s first inauguration in January 2009. That event held its own enormous challenges, given Obama’s status as the first black president in a country with a long history of racial violence amplified by the  vast crowds  of almost 2 million people that assembled in Washington to cheer him on. But he said that the nature of the threat had changed significantly since then. The focus has shifted away from foreign terrorism planning big-scale attacks like 9/11 towards domestic incitement channeled through social media. “Getting people wound up through conspiracy theories or ideological extremism, and encouraging them to use whatever they have to hand to carry out a terrorist act. It creates a different kind of security challenge – you have to screen for a lot of different kinds of people and threats.” The change presents the Secret Service with a tough task, Chertoff said. “As we are now unfortunately aware, there are people who are prepared to engage in domestic terrorism. Unlike dealing with foreign terrorists who you can exclude from the country, in this case you don’t know whether your nextdoor neighbor might be a threat.” A boon has been handed to the current acting homeland security secretary, Chad Wolf, and the Secret Service as they seek to get a grip on this year’s inauguration from an unexpected quarter – the pandemic. Roy Blunt, the Republican senator who chairs the congressional committee preparing for the inaugural ceremonies, has estimated that the number of participants who will be allowed into secure perimeter areas at the inauguration will be dramatically reduced to below 3,000, down from the 200,000 or so who are normally included. With these greatly diminished numbers, the key will be to keep anyone who has not been fully vetted away from the newly ensconced president and vice-president. Given the scale of resources available to the most powerful government on Earth, that task should not be insurmountable. But Chertoff warns that the inauguration will be just the start of it. “There is going to be a persistent challenge over the next months, depending on how active Donald Trump is when he’s out of office, in terms of domestic terrorism inspired by him directly or by rightwing extremist and conspiracy groups. This is going to be the security challenge for the foreseeable future.”
US jobs numbers drop dramatically as Covid cases soar across the country:	The recovery in the US jobs market collapsed in December, the last full month of Donald Trump’s presidency, as coronavirus infections soared across the country. The US lost 140,000 jobs in December, down from a gain of 245,000 in November, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The loss ended seven months of jobs growth with the leisure and hospitality sector once again bearing the biggest losses. The unemployment rate stayed at 6.7%, close to twice as high as it was in February before Covid-19 hit the US. It is also three percentage points higher than the 4.5% rate Trump inherited from his predecessor Barack Obama. Some 372,000 jobs were lost in food services and drinking places, offsetting gains in other areas, as Covid-19 infections and deaths rose sharply across the country. “The decline in payroll employment reflects the recent increase in coronavirus (Covid-19) cases and efforts to contain the pandemic,” the BLS said. Four million Americans have been unemployed for 27 weeks or more – technically defined as long-term unemployed – accounting for 37% of those out of work. Unemployment rates for black (9.9%) and Latino (9.3%) workers remained sharply higher than for white Americans (6%). After months of wrangling Congress passed a $900bn stimulus package in December but the relief came too late for many. Joe Biden has pledged more aid for those hit by the pandemic’s economic fallout but areas like hospitality are likely to continue suffering until the virus is under control. Friday’s latest jobs report comes after months of worrying signs in the jobs market. On Thursday the labor department said another 787,000 people had filed first-time claims for jobless benefits in the week ending 2 January. The figure was slightly lower than the previous week but remained more than twice as high as pre-pandemic levels. On Wednesday ADP, the US’s largest payroll supplier, said the private sector had shed 123,000 jobs from November to December, the first decline since April 2020. Losses were primarily concentrated in retail, leisure and hospitality – all areas that suffered heavy losses in the first wave of the pandemic. On the same day minutes from the last Federal Reserve meeting showed policymakers expected the escalating number of coronavirus cases “would be particularly challenging for the labor market in coming months”. The crisis has left millions of Americans facing food shortages and homelessness as unemployment officers across the country have struggled to keep up with the huge numbers of claims. According to the Associated Press only three states, North Dakota, Rhode Island and Wyoming, have met the  federal standard  of getting benefit payments out to successful claimants within three weeks for 87% of applicants.
Why global markets appear impervious to bad news:	The global economy has just had its worst year of the modern age and 2021 has not got off to the best of starts either. Yet  stock markets  appear impervious to bad news, with the MSCI World Index of developed market shares 10% above its pre-crisis peak. There are a number of reasons why equity markets are so hot. Central bank action.  Led by the US Federal Reserve, central banks were quick to respond to the market turmoil that accompanied the first wave of the coronavirus pandemic in February and March last year. Interest rates were cut and money was pumped into the global economy through asset-purchase schemes known as  quantitative easing . Just as importantly, the Fed gave the impression that it would not allow share prices on Wall Street to fall too far. Vaccine optimism.  Stock markets tend to be influenced by the outlook in the future rather than the current state of the world, and are convinced that growth will pick up sharply once mass vaccine programmes allow governments to relax physical-distancing regulations. The assumption is that from the spring onwards activity will surge, leading to higher corporate earnings, which in turn would justify higher share prices. Bidenomics.  The Dow Jones Industrial Average is up by 60% since Donald Trump has been president but Wall Street has found a reason to be cheerful about the arrival of his successor, Joe Biden. The victory by the Democrats in the byelections for Georgia’s two Senate seats means it will be easier for Biden to get a  stimulus package  through Congress. For now, bullish investors are ignoring the fact that Biden also pledged to toughen up regulation, which they tend to think is negative for the market, and are instead focusing on the boost they hope Bidenomics will give to growth. What else is there ?  There are alternatives to investing in the stock market, such as cash and gold, but the low level of official interest rates and the depressing impact of QE on bond yields have made taking the risk of investing in equities more attractive. The Bank of England is currently weighing up the pros and cons of  negative interest rates , which further tip the balance in favour of holding riskier assets with a higher potential yield, such as equities. All of the above.  The current mindset of the market is that there is now light at the end of the Covid-19 tunnel. Normal life is going to resume but inflation is not going to pick up, so central banks and finance ministries will be under no pressure to withdraw stimulus any time soon. In the event that share prices do take a tumble, the Fed will ride to the rescue.
US job market weakens in December, fuelling hopes of more stimulus – as it happened:	Just after Wall Street opened, the main indices hit new all-time highs. The Nasdaq rose more than 100 points to 13,176 while the Dow Jones touched 31,140 and the S&P 500 climbed to 3,824. Over here, the FTSE 100 index is flat, Germany’s Dax is 0.71% higher, France’s CAC has gained 0.5% and Italy’s FTSE MiB is unchanged. Stock markets shrugged off news that the  US economy unexpectedly shed 140,000 jobs in December , the first decline since April, while the jobless rate remained at 6.7%. Investors are betting on more fiscal stimulus from the incoming president Joe Biden, as both chambers of US Congress are now controlled by Democrats. In the eurozone, the unemployment rate fell unexpectedly to 8.3% in November  but youth unemployment rose, to 18.4%.  German industrial production was strong , keeping alive hopes that Europe’s biggest economy avoided a double dip recession. Oil prices have climbed to 11-month highs and bitcoin has hit a new record high. Thank you for reading! Have a good weekend. We’ll be back on Monday. Stay safe - JK The S&P 500 and the tech-focused Nasdaq have hit fresh record highs. Trading has begun on Wall Street, and shares are up ! The global economy has just had its worst year of the modern age and 2021 has not got off to the best of starts either,  writes the Guardian’s economics editor Larry Elliott . Yet  stock markets  appear impervious to bad news, with the MSCI world index of developed market shares 10% above its pre-crisis peak. There are a number of reasons why equity markets are so hot. The US dollar erased gains made before the payrolls figures, and is now down 0.09% against a basket of major currencies. Ayush Ansal, chief investment officer at the UK hedge fund Crimson Black Capital, says: The dollar remained fairly resilient in the immediate aftermath of the print as such dire data will reinforce the prospect of the incoming administration reigniting the country with a major fiscal stimulus package. The fact the Democrats now control the Senate, too, gives policymakers in the new administration carte blanche to supercharge the economy and try and move the country on from the unprecedented events on Capitol Hill. Wall Street is now looking forward, to a time beyond Trump, but at the same time market watchers are acutely aware that this is still arguably the most tense time in American political history for decades. In financial markets, European bourses are holding on to their gains, while the FTSE 100 index in London is flat at 6,852. Despite the weakness in the job market, the  US economy  is unlikely to fall back into recession, as a $900bn stimulus programme has been agreed by Congress and the incoming president Joe Biden is expected to expand spending further to prop up the economy. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, said: The December jobs report marks the first drop in payrolls since April, and an end to the labour market progress that’s been underway since the recovery from the pandemic began back in May. Given the accelerated rise in coronavirus cases recently and the associated drop back in activity, this was not entirely unexpected. Yet it will not go unnoticed by policymakers. With a Blue sweep controlling Congress, further fiscal stimulus is the name of the game and today’s data will only assist that agenda. By contrast, the market reaction to today’s weak data is set to be muted. Investors are already looking through this temporary period of economic weakness and instead focusing on the brighter outlook where fiscal spending, monetary stimulus and mass distribution of the COVID-19 vaccines together ensure the US economy quickly returns to its pre-pandemic path. Here is our full story on the weak US jobs numbers. The recovery in the US jobs market collapsed in December, the last full month of Donald Trump’s presidency, as coronavirus infections soared across the country,  writes Dominic Rushe in New York . The US lost 140,000 jobs in December, down from a gain of 245,000 in November, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The loss ended seven months of jobs growth with the leisure and hospitality sector once again bearing the biggest losses. The unemployment rate stayed at 6.7%, close to twice as high as it was in February before Covid-19 hit the US. It is also three percentage points higher than the 4.5% rate Trump inherited from his predecessor Barack Obama. In the leisure and hospitality sector, 498,000 jobs were lost in December, taking losses in this sector to 3.9 million since February,  the US Labor Department said . Most of the latest loss (372,000) was at establishments serving food and drink. Other areas fared better: Factory jobs increased by 38,000 after an upwardly revised rise of 35,000 in November. Jobs in construction and retail increased by 51,000 and 120,500 respectively. It is the first decline in non-farm payrolls in eight months, and suggests the US jobs market recovery stalled in December. The fall was largely due to job losses at restaurants, bars, cafes and hotels. Adam Button, chief currency analyst at Forex Live, says : The headline was poor but the positive revisions over the last two months mitigated the damage. The earnings numbers are interesting but I’m inclined to think that’s due to lower wage workers losing their jobs. Average hourly earnings rose by 0.8%, while economists had expected a 0.2% gain. The  US economy  shed 140,000 jobs in December, according to the latest US non-farm payrolls data. Economists had expected an increase of 71,000. However, November’s increase was revised higher to 336,000 from 245,000, and October’s rise was revised to 654,00 from 610,000. The unemployment rate remained at 6.7%. U.S. payrolls shrink in December, by 140,000. Another piece of evidence that the  #economy  was losing momentum as 2020 closed. More stimulus needed.  pic.twitter.com/HUumWXc9uZ The US non-farm payrolls data comes out in a couple of minutes. The non-farm payroll (NFP) figure is a key economic indicator for the United States economy. It is also referred to as the monthly market mover. Find out why it has been given this nickname here:  https://t.co/yOUVEEqhc5   pic.twitter.com/d9ZGWpcPuP In other good news, the Covid-19 vaccine developed by BioNTech and Pfizer has been shown to work against a key mutation in the more contagious coronavirus variants discovered in the UK and South Africa.  A laboratory study by Pfizer and and the University of Texas, which has not been reviewed by peers yet, found that the vaccine can neutralise the virus with the so-called N501Y mutation of the spike protein. More  here . You can read more about the  Moderna vaccine approval  on our coronavirus live blog: The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said: We have already vaccinated nearly 1.5 million people across the UK and Moderna’s vaccine will allow us to accelerate our vaccination programme even further once doses become available from the spring. Futures tracking Wall Street’s main indices have climbed to new highs ahead of the US jobs data at 1:30pm GMT. The Dow Jones futures are up nearly 0.3%, the S&P 500 is 0.4% higher and the Nasdaq 0.5% ahead.  All three indices hit record highs yesterday and the S&P closed above 3,800 points for the first time amid expectations of a bigger stimulus package and infrastructure spending once Joe Biden takes office, triggering buying of financial, industrial and material stocks.
US fines Boeing $2.5bn following fraud charges tied to 737 Max crashes:	Boeing  has been fined $2.5bn by the US justice department after being charged with fraud and conspiracy in connection with two fatal crashes of its 737 Max airliner. Boeing’s employees chose “the path of profit over candor by concealing material information” from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the US’s top airline regulator, David Burns, the acting assistant attorney general of the justice department’s criminal division, wrote in a release. Burns said the company had also engaged “in an effort to cover up their deception”. The Max was grounded worldwide in March 2019 after crashes in Indonesia and Ethiopia that killed 346 people.  A March 2020 congressional  investigation concluded that Boeing promoted a “culture of concealment” and was “grossly inefficient” in its oversight of the Max’s development. At a heated congressional hearing in October 2019, Senator Richard Blumenthal accused Boeing of selling  “flying coffins”  as a result of its decision to conceal issues with the planes from pilots. “The tragic crashes of Lion Air flight 610 and Ethiopian Airlines flight 302 exposed fraudulent and deceptive conduct by employees of one of the world’s leading commercial airplane manufacturers,” said Burns. Boeing admitted that two of its technical pilots deceived regulators about the safety of the Max’s MCAS stall prevention software, implicated in both of the fatal crashes. In both cases, the planes crashed shortly after takeoff when their pilots were unable to regain control of the planes after they went into a nosedive. The settlement includes $2.2bn in compensation to the families of the people killed in the two Max crashes and a $243m fine. In a statement, Boeing once more blamed its former employees. The “agreement is based on the conduct of two former Boeing employees and their intentional failure to inform the FAA Aircraft Evaluation Group (AEG), the group within the FAA responsible for making pilot training determinations, about changes to the maneuvering characteristics augmentation system (MCAS)”, the company said. David Calhoun, Boeing’s president and chief executive officer, said: “I firmly believe that entering into this resolution is the right thing for us to do – a step that appropriately acknowledges how we fell short of our values and expectations. “This resolution is a serious reminder to all of us of how critical our obligation of transparency to regulators is, and the consequences that our company can face if any one of us falls short of those expectations.” Boeing has now addressed concerns about the Max and the plane  returned to service  in the US in December. Lawyers for the families lost in the Ethiopian Airlines crash dismissed the settlement and said they would continue their litigation against Boeing. “The allegations in the deferred prosecution agreement are just the tip of the iceberg of Boeing’s wrongdoing – a corporation that pays billions of dollars to avoid criminal liability while stonewalling and fighting the families in court. This agreement, including the ‘crash-victim beneficiaries fund’, has no bearing on the pending civil litigation against Boeing, which we plan to prosecute fully to ensure the families receive the justice they deserve,” Clifford Law Offices said in a statement. They said the 737 Max should not have been returned to service “until all of the airplane’s deficiencies are addressed and it has undergone transparent and independent safety reviews – which to date still has not occurred”.
Trump says he won’t attend Biden’s inauguration:	Donald Trump  announced on Friday that he would not attend the inauguration of Joe Biden on 20 January, after a violent mob of the president’s loyalists stormed the Capitol in an effort to overturn the result of the November election in an attack that left five people dead. His decision, which came as little surprise and was welcomed by the president-elect, nevertheless breaks with a longstanding tradition of presidents attending their successor’s inauguration ceremonies in a symbolic demonstration of the peaceful transfer of power between administrations. “To all of those who have asked, I will not be going to the Inauguration on January 20th,” Trump wrote on Twitter. Biden said Trump’s absence at the ceremony would be a “good thing”, telling reporters in Wilmington, Delaware, on Friday that the decision not to attend was “one of the few things he and I have ever agreed on”. “He exceeded even my worst notions about him,” Biden said. “He’s been an embarrassment to the country, embarrassed us around the world. He’s not worthy to hold that office.” After a months-long campaign to cling to power, Trump on Thursday recognized his defeat for the first time in a two-and-a-half-minute video posted on Twitter. While accepting that a “new administration will be inaugurated on January 20”, he also refused to give up his baseless claims that the election was stolen from him. Citing the importance of keeping with “historical precedents”, Biden said he would “honored” to have Mike Pence attend his inauguration, though the vice-president’s plans remain unclear. Biden will be sworn in on the steps of the Capitol, amid heightened security after the building was breached and vandalized on Wednesday. The Mayor of Washington DC, Muriel Bowser, extended a state of emergency order through inauguration day, saying of the mob that led the siege: “their motivation is ongoing”. Biden said he had full confidence in the Secret Service, the agency in charge of security at his inauguration, and predicted the event would take place “without a hitch”. The ceremony, which typically draws thousands of spectators and concludes with a parade along Pennsylvania Avenue, has already been greatly downsized as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. The inaugural committee has urged supporters not to travel to Washington to attend the event, and is instead planning a “virtual parade” across the country. The circumstances around Trump’s departure from the White House on 20 January have not yet been made public, though he is widely expected to return to his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida. Before the Christmas holiday, Trump had reportedly discussed plans for holding an event to announce his plans to run for president in 2024 instead of attending Biden’s inauguration. Before his election in 2016 and again in 2020, Trump refused to explicitly commit to a peaceful transfer of power. After his loss to Biden, Trump insisted without any evidence that the election had been stolen and refused to accept his defeat. Instead he whipped up his supporters with wild claims of a vast conspiracy to rig the election against him, culminating in a rally in Washington on Wednesday when he urged them to “walk down to the Capitol” and register their discontent over the election. He added that “you will never take back our country with weakness”. Shortly thereafter, rioters loyal to the president overwhelmed police and stormed the Capitol, where they shattered windows, vandalized congressional offices and stole property. The mob, who Trump later told “I love you” as he appealed for calm, disrupted the process of certifying the electoral college, the last step in affirming Biden’s victory. Members of Congress returned late in the evening on Wednesday to complete the process. Biden would be the next president of the United States, in a vote of 306 to 232. In the aftermath of the assault on the Capitol, several White House officials and at least two cabinet secretaries have resigned while calls are growing for Trump to be removed from office by the 25th amendment or by impeachment. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, has said the House is prepared to bring articles of impeachment against the president for a second time if the cabinet does not act to remove him. On Friday, she told lawmakers she discussed with the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, Mark Milley, “available precautions for preventing an unstable president from initiating military hostilities or accessing the launch codes and ordering a nuclear strike”. Throughout American history, there have only been a handful of presidents who did not attend the swearing-in of his successor, including John Adams, John Quincy Adams and Andrew Johnson, the first US president to be impeached. After his resignation, Richard Nixon did not attend the inauguration of Gerald Ford. After losing to Trump in 2016, Hillary Clinton attended his inauguration in her capacity as the former first lady. At the time she  said : “I’m here today to honor our democracy & its enduring values. I will never stop believing in our country & its future.” And in 1993, George HW Bush attended the inauguration of Clinton after losing his campaign for re-election. With the exception of Trump and Jimmy Carter, who is 96 and has suffered a series of health issues in recent years, all other former living presidents are expected to attend Biden’s inauguration.
Twitter permanently suspends Trump's account to prevent 'further incitement of violence':	Twitter has permanently suspended the account of  Donald Trump , citing his repeated violations of the company’s rules and risks including the “further incitement of violence”. Twitter assessed two tweets sent by Trump on Friday morning as “highly likely to encourage and inspire people to replicate the criminal acts that took place at the US Capitol on January 6, 2021”, the company said in a  statement . Plans for “future armed protests” are spreading on Twitter and elsewhere, the company warned, “including a proposed secondary attack on the US Capitol and state capitol buildings on January 17, 2021”. Twitter’s extraordinary decision to ban Trump’s personal account carries pointed symbolism for the embattled president, whose use of social media to stoke hatred and fear fueled both his unlikely political rise and his presidency’s ignominious end. It comes two days after a mob of Trump supporters violently stormed the US Capitol, wreaking havoc in an attack that has resulted in five deaths. Even as the rampage continued, Trump tweeted in praise of the rioters, prompting  Twitter  to temporarily suspend his account, with a warning that any further infractions would lead to a permanent ban. On Thursday, Facebook banned Trump from posting on its platforms at least through Joe Biden’s inauguration, citing the risk of inciting violence, a move that increased pressure on Twitter to finally unplug the erratic president’s bullhorn. Other social media companies have scurried to de-platform Trump and his most violent supporters; Google removed the rightwing social network Parler from its app store, citing the platform’s role in inciting violence. Among those calling for Trump’s suspension were 350 of Twitter’s own employees, the  Washington Post  reported. “In the context of horrific events this week, we made it clear on Wednesday that additional violations of the Twitter Rules would potentially result in this very course of action,” Twitter said in its statement. “Our determination is that the two Tweets … are likely to inspire others to replicate the violent acts that took place on January 6, 2021, and that there are multiple indicators that they are being received and understood as encouragement to do so.” Twitter’s decision was hailed by Trump’s critics and lambasted by his remaining supporters. Many civil rights advocates, who have long argued that platforms should cease allowing Trump to use their platforms to spread bigotry, seized the opportunity to call on Facebook and YouTube to follow suit. On Friday evening, Trump used multiple other Twitter accounts, including the official presidential account @POTUS and his campaign account @TeamTrump, in an attempt to tweet his complaints about the ban, but the tweets were quickly taken down. A Twitter spokesperson said that Trump was not allowed to use other accounts to evade his ban and that the company would continue to remove his tweets. The campaign account @TeamTrump was permanently banned from Twitter; Twitter said it would not suspend government accounts such as @POTUS or @WhiteHouse but might limit their use. The president tweeted this from the  @POTUS  account but the tweets have already been taken down by Twitter.  pic.twitter.com/pRqpFw8hYY “This is the outcome of years of inaction,”  said  Joan Donovan, an expert in misinformation and research director at Harvard’s Shorenstein Center. “Tech companies have assumed for far too long that their products are neutral. But political elites and the millionaires behind them, knew this assumption could be weaponized. This is a major failure of those who built this technology and claimed they could secure it.” In a statement that provided unprecedented detail about Twitter’s decision-making process, Twitter made it apparent that Trump’s months-long campaign of using Twitter to promote and amplify baseless conspiracy theories about the legitimacy of the presidential election had led directly to his suspension. Trump’s two final tweets read: “The 75,000,000 great American Patriots who voted for me, AMERICA FIRST, and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, will have a GIANT VOICE long into the future. They will not be disrespected or treated unfairly in any way, shape or form!!!” and “To all of those who have asked, I will not be going to the Inauguration on January 20th.” While those statements may appear relatively innocuous in comparison to some of Trump’s recent, heightened rhetoric, Twitter said that the president’s most avid and conspiracy-minded followers were not reading them as such during a particularly dangerous time. The decision not to attend the inauguration is “being received by a number of his supporters as further confirmation that the election was not legitimate” and may “serve as encouragement to those potentially considering violent acts that the inauguration would be a ‘safe’ target, as he will not be attending,” Twitter said. Additionally, Trump’s references to his supporters as “American patriots” who must “not be disrespected or treated unfairly” was being interpreted as an endorsement of the rioters and support of those who continue to reject the orderly transition of power. Trump is by no means alone in bearing responsibility for the dangerous proliferation of disinformation on Twitter. Though the platform carried out a  broad crackdown  of accounts and content related to the QAnon conspiracy in July, it has allowed a host of QAnon influencers to build massive audiences spreading baseless conspiracies about the election and supposed voter fraud since November. Figures such as the former national security adviser Michael Flynn, Trump attorney Sidney Powell, the  8Chan  administrator Ron Watkins, and attorney Lin Wood have spent weeks stoking the flames of QAnon-inflected election conspiracies on Twitter, with their false allegations reaching both masses of Trump supporters and Trump himself. On Friday, Twitter permanently suspended the accounts of Flynn, Powell and Watkins for violating its policy against “coordinated harmful activity”. Wood was suspended on Thursday. “We’ve been clear that we will take strong enforcement action on behavior that has the potential to lead to offline harm, and given the renewed potential for violence surrounding this type of behavior in the coming days, we will permanently suspend accounts that are solely dedicated to sharing QAnon content,” a company spokesperson said.
Hyundai's value surges by $9bn amid reports of Apple electric car deal:	Hyundai’s value surged by $9bn (£6.6bn) on Friday after reports that it could join with  Apple  in developing a driverless electric vehicle – despite confusion as it backtracked on a statement acknowledging “early discussion” with the iPhone manufacturer. Investors sent the South Korean carmaker’s share price on the Seoul exchange up almost 20%, as local media reported a possible tie-up on electric cars and batteries with Apple, which has been  developing its own vehicle technology . Reports on South Korea’s Economic Daily claimed the two firms were in talks. Hyundai originally issued a statement saying: “Apple and Hyundai are in discussion, but as it is early stage, nothing has been decided.” A subsequent statement to the stock exchange from Hyundai omitted any reference to Apple, merely saying there were “requests for cooperation on joint development of autonomous electric vehicles from various companies”. Last month it was reported that Apple was hoping to  launch a self-driving personal vehicle by 2024 , which, a source told Reuters, could represent an evolution in electric car battery technology in the way the iPhone evolved mobile phones. It was suggested that Apple could look for a traditional manufacturing partner to help make the car. Apple did not comment on the Hyundai statement. The scramble to invest in Hyundai comes after a year in which the share price of the market leader in electric vehicles, Tesla, has rocketed – to the extent that chief executive and major shareholder  Elon Musk this week overtook  Amazon’s Jeff Bezos as the world’s richest man. An Apple vehicle would have the design cachet to compete with the California company, which  shipped almost 500,000 vehicles  last year and has pushed the boundaries of autonomous driving as well as electric car technology. Hyundai has been keen to burnish its credentials, last month announcing it would develop in-house its own electric car platform and battery systems, expecting to extend the range of a single charge to 500km. It has also had an eye on more futuristic technologies, establishing a self-driving joint venture, Motional, with car component supplier Aptiv and ploughing $2bn into the new firm. Motional has announced plans with ride-hailing firm Lyft to launch robotaxis in the US from 2023. An investor in robotics firms, Hyundai in 2019 unveiled a  concept “walking” robocar  for tougher terrain. Apple is notoriously tight-lipped about its product development plans but it has been reported to have been working on  Project Titan , its electric and autonomous car vision, since 2014.
Twitter permanently suspends Trump's account, citing risk of 'further incitement of violence' – as it happened:	Friday evening summary A chaotic, shocking, tragic, and terrifying week in our country’s history comes to an end with a Friday afternoon flurry of breaking news. Here are the top stories of the evening.  McConnell says impeachment action unlikely until after Trump is out of office Senator Mitch McConnell said in a memo to fellow senators on Friday that if impeachment articles against Trump are filed this week, the earliest the Senate will address them would be 19 January – the day before Biden’s inauguration.  In the message, reported by  the Washington Post , McConnell said under the law unanimous agreement of all 100 senators would be required to take on impeachment proceedings before then.  This means Democrats will need to decide if they want to impeach Trump and thus spend the first several days or weeks of Biden’s presidency carrying it out.  Congress members pen inquiry to FBI and DHS over how it handled online warnings of this week’s insurrection  Today 35 Congress members have signed a letter addressed to the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security requesting more information on how extremist threats leading up to Wednesday’s riot at the Capitol were handled.  NEW: We are demanding to know whether  @FBI  and  @DHSgov  considered online extremist threats credible leading up to this week's insurrection. Law enforcement was woefully unprepared despite ample posts spread online—it can’t happen again.  pic.twitter.com/ZQdcshshZY The letter, spearheaded by Virginia representatives Jennifer Wexton and Don Beyer, cites ample evidence on social media of a planned insurrection and asks why more was not done to prevent Wednesday’s disaster. In the first week of January there were more than 1,200 posts from QAnon conspiracy theorists containing threats of violence and a video on TikTok encouraging people to bring guns to the capitol that had more than 270,000 views.  The agencies are being asked to respond by 15 January to a list of eight questions demanding accountability for the attacks, including whether they alerted relevant law enforcement agencies of threats of violence found on the platforms.  No changes to Facebook’s Trump suspension After Twitter made its suspension of Trump permanent on Friday evening, a reminder that the president is still only temporarily suspended from Facebook and Instagram.  The company has  reiterated today  that Trump will be suspended from posting on Facebook at least until Joe Biden is inaugurated on 20 January, though the ban could be made permanent after that.  In its explanation of ban, Twitter warned of more violence In its blog post explaining its reasoning for permanently suspending Trump, Twitter says they incite violence and could encourage similar actions in the future – in particular one planned for 17 January at the Capitol again. Please pay attention to this statement, everyone — just issued by Twitter executives: “Plans for future armed protests have already begun proliferating on and off-Twitter, including a proposed secondary attack on the US Capitol and state capitol buildings on January 17, 2021.” Some have cited  a message  being circulated on Parler that said “many of us will return on January 19 2021 carrying our weapons”.  Donald Trump , after being permanently suspended from Twitter under his personal account @theREALDonaldTrump, has tried to hijack the official presidential account @POTUS to tweet his grievances. Twitter is quickly deleting the posts before they can be shared, but users briefly could see messages from Trump slamming Twitter for coordinating with Democrats and the “radical left” to “silence” the president.  The social media platform had already said it will remove any new postings from Trump to @POTUS. If Trump  attempts to make  a new account, it will also be permanently suspended “at first detection”, according to Twitter’s rules. Twitter users react to a Trump-free platform As of Friday, the 8th of January,  Donald Trump  is no longer a Twitter user. Here is how users reacted to the shocking removal. i want to know how he finds out  pic.twitter.com/LkPtJ9ScTL Lmao Trump  pic.twitter.com/UWAqBFyuip I won’t rest until he is removed from that scene in Home Alone 2 i would give up a non-essential organ in exchange for video of someone telling him Put this screen shot in the presidential library  pic.twitter.com/flFc5RfKGq Twitter employees played a large role in Trump’s removal  Reporting from the Washington Post suggests internal pressure from Twitter employees on CEO Jack Dorsey may have played a role in the final decision to suspend Trump’s account.  The newspaper reviewed an internal letter addressed to the executive in which “roughly 350 Twitter employees asked for a clear account of the company’s decision-making process regarding the President’s tweets” surrounding the events on Wednesday.  In the letter, they also requested an investigation “into the past several years of corporate actions that led to Twitter’s role in the insurrection,” the Post reports. Full story  here .  What happens to Trump’s old tweets? Many people are sharing the weirdest and funniest posts from  Donald Trump  in memory of the president’s suspended account. But in all seriousness, what happens to social media records created by a president? Twitter’s suspension of Donald Trump’s account has also removed all of his thousands of tweets sent over the years. I personally find it useful as a reporter to be able to search through his tweets. They are an important part of the historical record. Where do they live now? When an account is suspended, it is no longer searchable on Twitter’s platform. This means it will be difficult for journalists, historians, and anyone else to look back on what the president tweeted to confirm accuracy. Independent  archives  of Trump’s tweets  do exist , but some have suggested an official resource maintaining them should remain. I’ve reached out to Twitter to see if it has any policy around archiving world leaders’ tweets and will update this coverage with any response.  In memoriam, some truly deranged Trump tweets Donald Trump  used Twitter to facilitate his rise to power, and to incite real-world violence with grave consequences. He also used it to scream into the void about Kristen Stewart and all the “haters and losers” who dared to challenge him. After the president was permanently removed from the platform on Friday, users shared some memorable posts. That time he was mad about Barney Frank’s nipples in memoriam, my all-time fav tweet:  pic.twitter.com/4pWDCSxlj8 That time he tweeted about his high IQ everyone post their favorite trump tweets i’ll start  pic.twitter.com/bvpvK1zciA That time he wished a happy 9/11 to all his haters and losers Trump commemorated the 12th anniversary of 9/11 by extending “my best wishes” to “haters and losers.”  pic.twitter.com/sWPB7Ll6PF That time he was very preoccupied with Kristen Stewart for some reason RIP  pic.twitter.com/kauVboaPYs Politicians – both friends and foes of Trump – react to his suspension from Twitter Critics of  Donald Trump  including his colleagues on Capitol Hill have long called for his account to be disabled, while his allies have attempted to defend or excuse the president’s online mayhem. Here are a few reactions from Friday evening: An overdue step. But it’s important to remember, this is much bigger than one person. It’s about an entire ecosystem that allows misinformation and hate to spread and fester unchecked.  https://t.co/wPc0AFWcgu Know that  #Trump  relies on  @Twitter  to exist in the same way we require oxygen to breathe. He is losing his marbles right now!  https://t.co/RTS4iz59fu Silencing people, not to mention the President of the US, is what happens in China not our country.  #Unbelievable Well it’s about damn time,  @jack .  pic.twitter.com/R38ivsMR8V We interrupt this coverage of  Donald Trump  being punted off Twitter forever to let you know that Google is now removing Parler, an app that positions itself as a conservative, “pro-free speech” alternative to mainstream social media such as Twitter and Facebook, from its app store. JUST IN: Google suspending Parler from the Google Play store  pic.twitter.com/Nyv59LoNWh That means it cannot be downloaded by new users. In the aftermath of Trump’s suspension, traffic to Parler  surged , leaving the app unusable for many. Meanwhile, Apple has given Parler a ultimatum to improve its moderation policies or be removed from the app store.  How other platforms stack up to Twitter after its removal of Trump Twitter’s permanent suspension of Donald Trump’s account on Friday marked an unprecedented step from a social media giant against an elected official.  But actions against the president have been snowballing since he encouraged a march on the Capitol on Wednesday that resulted in a violent riot. Here’s what other platforms have taken action: Donald Trump, Jr. calls his father’s suspension from Twitter ‘absolute insanity’ Donald Trump , Jr. tweeted in support of his father, the president, who was removed from Twitter on Friday evening. “We are living Orwell’s 1984,” he tweeted, referencing a dystopian science novel written by a socialist in criticism of totalitarianism. “Free-speech no longer exists in America. It died with big tech and what’s left is only there for a chosen few.” Trump, Jr. has also been censored on big tech platforms, including inn July 2020 when Twitter  forced him  to delete a video spreading misinformation about the Covid-19 pandemic.  Civil rights advocates celebrate Trump’s removal from Twitter, but say it’s too little too late Those who have long called for Donald Trump’s removal from Twitter praised the decision to finally disable the president’s account on Friday - but many said the move, which came after years of the president sharing lies and misinformation to his 88 million followers, was too little too late.  “These actions are long past due and appropriate,” said Angelo Carusone, president of Media Matters for America, a nonprofit media watchdog. “But, Twitter (and other platforms) doing this now is a lot like senior administration officials resigning with only days left – too little too late. Trump has repeatedly broken Twitter rules. If only Twitter and other platforms had acted earlier, Wednesday’s awful events could have been avoided. It is time for Facebook and other platforms to follow suit.” This is not the first time Trump has used his platform to call for violence. Before his presidency, in 2012, Carusone  points out , Trump did the same. He tweeted in May encouraging protestors to be shot,  after which  the tweet was hidden but his account remained online. There are hard lessons to be learned from these failures,  said Joan Donovan , an expert in misinformation at Harvard.  “Tech companies have assumed for far too long that their products are neutral,” Donovan said. “But political elites and the millionaires behind them, knew this assumption could be weaponized. This is a major failure of those who built this technology and claimed they could secure it.” Cracking down on Trump’s accounts does have positive effects on hate speech, however. Daily interactions of right-leaning Facebook pages significantly dropped after Trump’s temporary Facebook suspension, research from Media Matters found. It also showed right-leaning, left-leaning, and nonaligned pages each earned roughly a third of total engagement during this time.  Twitter explains why it has permanently suspended Trump After years of calls to remove Donald Trump from Twitter, why is the platform taking action now? Twitter outlined its decision-making process on Friday that led to the suspension of Trump’s account in a  blog post . The final tweets that led to Trump’s suspension are as follows: On January 8, 2021, President Donald J Trump tweeted: “The 75,000,000 great American Patriots who voted for me, AMERICA FIRST, and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, will have a GIANT VOICE long into the future. They will not be disrespected or treated unfairly in any way, shape or form!!!” Shortly thereafter, the president tweeted: “To all of those who have asked, I will not be going to the Inauguration on January 20th.” Twitter said that after assessing the tweets in the context of a violent storming of the Capitol on Wednesday, it determined these tweets violated Twitter’s  glorification of violence  policy and constituted immediate removal from the platform. The refusal by Trump to attend the inauguration marked a rejection of a peaceful transfer of power and and his tweet calling followers “patriots” could be read as a glorification of the storming of the Capitol on Wednesday.  Together, these messages are “likely to inspire others to replicate the violent acts that took place on January 6, 2021”, Twitter concluded, and thus suspended the account.  The Twitter account of president  Donald Trump  has been permanently suspended from the platform over repeated violations of the its rules, including incitement of violence. After close review of recent Tweets from the  @realDonaldTrump  account and the context around them we have permanently suspended the account due to the risk of further incitement of violence. https://t.co/CBpE1I6j8Y The company explained its decision in detail in a blog post. The move comes after days of increasing criticism of the platform for allowing the president, who had more than 88m followers, to share misinformation and hate speech unabated.  “After review of Tweets from the  @realDonaldTrump  account and the context around them – how they are being received and interpreted on and off Twitter – we have permanently suspended the account due to the risk of further incitement of violence,” the company said. Trump had previously had his account suspended for tweeting praise of his supporters who stormed the US Capitol on Wednesday, but was granted access again after deleting two tweets that violated platform rules.  From 88 million followers to this  pic.twitter.com/5aZkBUIAVE This suspension appears to be indefinite, if not permanent.  House lawmakers are set to introduce articles of impeachment against  Donald Trump  on Monday, accusing him of inciting an insurrection after the president encouraged a mob that stormed the Capitol building on Wednesday. The articles of impeachment –  written by  representatives David Cicilline of Rhode Island, Ted Lieu of California and Jamie Raskin of Maryland – have garnered signatures from more than 150 House Democrats. Though Trump has just less than two weeks left in office, lawmakers say the risk of leaving the volatile leader in office leaves no option but impeachment. The action would mark an unprecedented second impeachment during Trump’s presidential term.  “This conduct is so grave and this president presents such a clear and present danger to our democracy, I don’t think you can simply say let’s just wait it out” Cicilline  said in an interview . Pelosi has repeatedly pressured Vice-president Mike Pence to remove Trump using the 25th amendment to no avail. She said in a letter to House Democrats on Friday if Trump does not voluntarily leave office she will move forward with impeachment.  “Today the House Democratic Caucus had an hours-long conversation that was sad, moving, and patriotic,”  Pelosi said in a statement . “It was a conversation unlike any other, because it followed a day unlike any other.” Pelosi said deliberations are continuing.  Here are the steps that need to be carried out in order to impeach Trump: The Senate is currently split 50-50 between Republican and Democratic parties, meaning a number of Republicans would need to break allegiance to the party to vote Trump out early. One and a half Republican Senators has they may jump ship and vote for impeachment thus far. Some representatives said impeachment proceedings should be launched more quickly. Ilhan Omar, a Democratic Congresswoman from Minnesota said “Monday isn’t early enough”. “The nation is waiting for us to respond ASAP,” she tweeted on Friday. She previously strongly condemned Wednesday’s attack, saying “we can’t allow Trump to remain in office.” “It’s a matter of preserving our Republic and we need to fulfill our oath,” she wrote.  Murkowski has little to lose from quitting Alaska GOP Again, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska has become the first Republican senator to  call for Donald Trump to resign , immediately. She has threatened to leave the Republican party if it does not distance itself from the president, as fallout over his encouragement of a march on the Capitol continues. With Alaska's new Top 4 primary system, Murkowski has little electoral incentive to remain a Republican. It wouldn't surprise me if Democrats wind up with a 51-person caucus including 3 independents (King, Bernie, Murkowski). 👀  https://t.co/QwCSvHqC6B As some critics have noted, Murkowski has little to lose politically from leaving the Republican party in Alaska, which recently implemented a top 4 primary system. Moving to an independent status over her condemnation of Trump could further change the balance of the Senate. 
'We live in two Americas': LeBron blasts 'shameful' Trump in scathing appraisal:	LeBron James and his Los Angeles Lakers teammates were already upset after a Wisconsin prosecutor on Tuesday  decided not to charge a police officer  who shot a black man last year. Then came Wednesday when a violent mob loyal to US president Donald Trump  stormed the US Capitol  to delay Congress from certifying the results of November’s election. What James watched on television along with his family continued to reinforce his view of the wide divide in the country. “We live in two Americas and that was a prime example of that yesterday. If you don’t understand or see that then you need to take a step back. Not just one step but four or five or even 10 steps backward,” James said Thursday night after  finishing with a team-high 27 points  in the Lakers’ 118-109 loss to the San Antonio Spurs. “How do you want your kids or grandkids to live in this beautiful country? Because yesterday was not it. “I couldn't help but wonder, if it was my kind storming the Capitol, what would have been the outcome?"  @KingJames  addresses yesterday’s events in Washington, D.C.  pic.twitter.com/Csgl7ZeSSi “I couldn’t help but to wonder if those were my kind storming the Capitol what would have been the outcome. We all know what would have happened if anyone even got close let alone storm or get in the offices.” James wore a shirt walking into Staples Center before the game that said ‘DO YOU UNDERSTAND NOW?’ in large block lettering. He also had the message written on his sneakers during the game. In smaller letters, the shirt also contained a slogan  invoked by James in the past : “In memoriam of the countless Black lives lost to police brutality and racial injustice.” The four-time  NBA  Most Valuable Player expanded on his thoughts in a post on Instagram, describing the situation as “2 AMERIKKKAS”: DO YOU 🤬🤬🤬🤬 UNDERSTAND NOW???!! I know the answer to that. You still don’t cause no matter what happens you still won’t be judge, looked at crazy, chained, beaten, shot to death cause of the color of your skin!!!! 2 AMERIKKKAS we live in and it was at FULL CAPACITY LIVE IN DIRECT yesterday in our Nations CAPITAL AT THE CAPITAL!! 🤦🏾‍♂️😢😢😢.  #IPrayForBetterDaysForMyPeople  🙏🏾✊🏾🖤👑 When asked what we meant by his shirt, James said he wants people to understand what athletes and black people are saying. “You will never understand the feeling of being a black man and woman in America,” James said. “Do you understand how hard it is for us to continue to inspire and give everything we got? Everyone jumps on the bandwagon of what we provide, what we bring.  “The way we dress, our music, our culture, our food. Everyone steals from what we do and then they want to act like they did it or they brought it to this world. We don’t get our due diligence. We don’t get respect. We don’t get anything back for what we’ve given to this country besides a slap in the face.” “We don’t get anything back from what we’ve given this country besides a slap in the face.”  @KingJames  shares his thoughts on being Black in America.  pic.twitter.com/d4sx6XnmD5 Tuesday’s decision by a prosecutor in Kenosha, Wisconsin, not to bring charges against the officer who shot Jacob Blake  drew ire throughout the NBA . Blake’s shooting was one of many social issues players focused on last summer when play resumed in the Orlando, Florida, bubble. James has remained a critic of Trump during his four years in office and said that what happened at the Capitol was a direct correlation of what Trump represents. One thing you can never get back is time. We’ve literally just shit away four years “The events that took place yesterday was a direct correlation of the president that’s in the seat right now: of his actions, his beliefs, his wishes,” James said. “He cares about nobody besides himself. Nobody. Absolutely nobody. He doesn’t care about this country. He doesn’t care about his family. He doesn’t care about anybody besides himself. “We saw the tweets along the whole path to this destruction. Over the last four years we all knew. One thing you can never get back is time. We’ve literally just shit away four years. How do we recoup that?” He added: “Yesterday was shameful. We are supposed to be setting an example for all other countries on how to run things and change the world and yesterday we looked like a third-, fourth-, fifth-world country. It was just very embarrassing.” Players and coaches from both teams locked arms in a circle at midcourt during the national anthem before Thursday’s game at the Staples Center in downtown Los Angeles. The Lakers and Spurs are locking arms in a circle at halfcourt during the national anthem  pic.twitter.com/fICtAd1NEb Spurs coach Gregg Popovich, who also hasn’t held back in expressing his views about Trump, said he believed the president enjoyed Wednesday’s insurrection. “I believe with all my heart that Trump enjoyed it,” Popovich said 90 minutes before tipoff. “They talked about the police and how easy it was and the barriers were pulled and they just walked right in. That doesn’t happen unless there’s a wink and a nod somewhere. That just doesn’t happen. It’s never happened at any protest anybody’s ever been to. “That’s why I don’t think it’s so far fetched for people to start talking about the 25th amendment. We know it probably won’t happen.” Popovich also took time to laud James, calling him an “iconic figure”. “As a human being and citizen and someone who looks at the social issues of our time, he doesn’t do it with hate. He just tells the truth,” Popovich said of James.
UFC fighter Irwin Rivera jailed on charges of attempted murder in Florida:	An Ultimate Fighting Championship mixed martial arts fighter is accused of stabbing his two sisters early Thursday as they slept in a spare bedroom in his apartment because a “higher power” told him to do so, police in Florida said. Irwin Rivera, 31, who is known as ‘The Beast’, remained in the Palm Beach County Jail early Friday on two counts of premeditated attempted murder, according to jail records. An arrest report said multiple neighbors and one of the victims called 911 to report the stabbing at Rivera’s Boynton Beach home early Thursday morning. Arriving officers found a 22-year-old woman next to the road, covered in blood, an arrest report said. She had multiple stab wounds on her back, head and arm, and told officers her brother stabbed her. She told officers her sister was still in the house, the report said. The 33-year-old woman was found inside, also with multiple stab wounds. She had two collapsed lungs and was taken to Delray Medical Center, the report said. The sisters’ identity was not released. The Boynton Beach Police department said one victim is in stable condition, the other is in critical condition. The women came to visit their brother at his home and spent the night in his spare bedroom, they told investigators. They woke up to Rivera repeatedly stabbing them with a knife, the arrest report said. The woman told police she tried to fight him off, but he kept stabbing her. The younger sister ran from the room, the report said. The woman told police she was finally able to push him away and call police. Neighbors told officers they woke up to a loud banging sound at their front door They found a woman covered in blood and begging for help, the report said. “He’s trying to kill me! Please help my sister,” the arrest report said the woman told neighbors. As the door was opened, the neighbors saw Rivera walking by, also covered in blood, the report said. “Shut the door,” Rivera shouted at the neighbors, according to the report. He then shouted, “everything is OK”. He took off running when he saw the neighbors were on the phone, the report said. Delray Beach Police found Rivera about 7am, the report said. He spontaneously uttered “I killed my sisters,” according to the report. He was taken to the Boynton Beach Police Department, where he gave police a statement, and admitted to stabbing his sisters, the report said. He told investigators he used a brass knuckle knife to stab his sisters because a “higher power” told him it was “his purpose,” the report said. UFC officials released a statement to  MMA  Weekly, a digital publication that covers the profession. “UFC is aware of the recent incident involving Irwin Rivera and subsequently received information from his management that he has been exhibiting behavior consistent with mental health issues,” the statement said. The statement said Rivera’s career is on hold pending an investigation. A lawyer for Rivera was not listed on jail records.
A return to civility will not begin to quell the threat of fascism in the US:	W hat was this desperado putsch supposed to achieve? The mob of face-painted  LARPers , QAnon conspiracists, militiamen, neo-Nazis, Christian supremacists and endtimes preppers who invaded the Capitol building in Washington DC were never going to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election. And yet they are far from a few isolated cranks. This crowd, whose actions are  supported  by 45% of Republican voters, had been called to the capital by Donald Trump. Their “protest” had been  incited from the podium  by both Trump and Rudi Giuliani, ramming home their betrayal myth that the election was stolen. Trump’s campaign to  reverse the election results  and subvert constitutional law, backed by several elected Republican officials, has repeatedly  inspired violence . Trump has repeatedly backed the militias, from his bellowing approval of their anti-lockdown stunts to his support for vigilante  violence  against Black Lives Matter protesters, to his call for militia action on  election day . While Trump had been kept under control by the Republican establishment for most of his tenure, the last year – since the lockdown protests began – saw a process of radicalisation of the armed base, the administration and its white suburban supporters. The further the extra-parliamentary right went, the more violent it became, the further Trump went. Any violent exhortation was justified by a  hallucinatory anti-communism . What’s more, there has emerged a set of tacit alliances between law enforcement and armed vigilantes, as seen in the Black Lives Matter  protests . Reporting and inquiries will shed light on what happened in the coming weeks, but serious questions need to be asked about how an armed mob was able to “storm” the Capitol building in the first place, wandering corridors to take selfies with cops, exploring computer screens left unmanned by hastily-evacuated staff and hunting for elected officials to confront. It stretches credulity to think they could have taken over the debating chamber, even after what appears to have been a tense armed standoff, without some kind of orchestrated or de facto acquiescence. Their braying triumphalism after they were evicted, claiming victory, glossed over both this and the extraordinarily delayed arrival of the National Guard. This is all indicative of an incipient fascism, laying the cultural and political groundwork for a violent, extra-parliamentary mass movement of the right. It is a mistake to assume that fascism must take the form of dictatorship. Far-right movements today are shaped by the same factors: the decomposition of parliamentary legitimacy and their inherited organisational weaknesses. In that context, wielding the power of office is a pedagogical, formative experience. It allows movements with thin civic roots to project influence at a national level and try things out. Fascism does not arrive on the scene with full uniform and programme. The Jewish socialist Arthur Rosenberg traced the origins of  fascism as a mass movement  to the period before the first world war, when millions were already infected by  volkisch , racial-nationalist ideology, and by contempt for democratic government. It consolidates through experimentation, learning the ropes through episodes that, at first, appear amateurish and thuggish, from the  beer hall (Munich) putsch  to the demolition of the  Babri Masjid . First as farce, then as tragedy. There has been, for some time, accumulating data suggestive of a political rupture on the right. The growing number of people, particularly among the rich, who favour some form of authoritarian government, is one sign. The string of popularly elected, and often re-elected, rightist governments militantly challenging liberal legal norms and institutions is another. The rise of lone-wolf murderers and  conspiracist vigilantes  is yet another. And there is the proliferation of militias and  paramilitaries , often with close relationships to police and the  military rank and file . As the contemporary historian Kathleen Belew’s work has  demonstrated , many white-power and fascist currents were forged in the furnace of war. In the United States, the rupture has been building since before the Tea Party movement. During the 2008 election, paranoid racists brought guns and nooses to town hall meetings and called Obama a Muslim, the birth of the “birther” myth. It points to either a split in the Republican party or its complete capture by middle-class  enragés . This is a grievous problem for ruthless GOP establishment operators such as Senators Mitch McConnell and Lindsey Graham, who spent years defending the Trump administration, using him to consolidate their electoral base, strengthen a minoritarian grip on government and take over the courts. Their traditional allies, including the National Association of Manufacturers, are not  prepared to countenance  a party this out of control – but they can’t simply throw away half of the Republican vote. And this is their problem. Trumpism is not an aberration, but a mass phenomenon. Trump greatly expanded his base between 2016 and 2020,  adding  more than 10 million votes to its total. He expanded into places and demographic constituencies thought to be closed to him. No other Republican presidential candidate could have done this. And it was achieved precisely through the same means that led to the spectacle in the Capitol. To hope that Joe Biden can defuse this by restoring civility and bipartisanship to Washington would be unforgivably complacent. The United States, and not just the United States, urgently needs an anti-fascist movement. We have not begun to see the end of this. Richard Seymour is a political activist and author; his latest book is The Twittering Machine
Serena Williams rises above Tiriac and co but misogyny and racism take a toll:	T here has not been much reason to talk about  Serena Williams  lately. She last competed in late September, withdrawing from the second round of the French Open with an achilles injury, and has been resting, baking cookies with her family and training for the new season. Considering how uninteresting all of these things are, it would have been fair to assume that only when she finally began her season would she attract some attention in the new year. Instead, she attracted attention this week after Ion Tiriac, a former player and now owner of the Madrid Open,  sent unsolicited comments her way . Tiriac was appearing on a Romanian television show and was asked if he had doubts before Simona Halep’s 2019 Wimbledon final. He responded by referring to Williams, the Romanian’s opponent, as a monster. “At this age and the weight she is now, she does not move as easily as she did 15 years ago,” he said. “Serena was a sensational player. If she had a little decency, she would retire.” The only surprise was the journalist he was speaking to, Irina Pacurariu, directly challenged him. “You are mean. You were very misogynistic every time you judged Serena,” she said. None of this is a shock. Tiriac has directed similar comments towards Williams numerous times. It reflects what Williams has had to deal with throughout her career. Even when there is no reason for her name to cross any lips, at some point she will always have to deal with racist and/or sexist comments from people in positions of prominence within her own sport. It is worth recalling some of the incidents. Two years ago, in the early months of her return from maternity leave, Tiriac decided to shame her weight: “With all due respect, she is 36 years old and 90 kilograms,” he said to the German magazine  Sport Bild . “I would like to see something else, I would like to see a player like Steffi Graf.” In 2017, shortly after Williams announced her pregnancy, Tiriac’s good friend and countryman Illie Nastase, Romania’s Fed Cup captain, commented on Williams’s unborn child during the tie against Great Britain.  “Let’s see what colour it has . Chocolate with milk?” he said. In 2018, after Williams returned to grand slam competition in Paris wearing a bodysuit, the French federation president, Bernard Giudicelli, stated  he would ban such outfits . “I believe we have sometimes gone too far,” he said. “Serena’s outfit this year, for example, would no longer be accepted. You have to respect the game and the place.” In 2014, Shamil Tarpischev, president of the Russian tennis federation, referred to  Serena and her sister, Venus , as the Williams brothers on a talk show. Sitting quietly to his left was Williams’s old rival Elena Dementieva. There has always been enough misogyny to go around. In that Fed Cup tie,  Nastase was abusive to a female British journalist and the GB captain, Anne Keothavong . In 2016, the Indian Wells tournament director, Raymond Moore,  concluded his event with a flourish : “If I was a lady player, I’d go down every night on my knees and thank God that Roger Federer and Rafa Nadal were born because they have carried this sport.” As Justin Gimelstob, a former player, managed to rise up to a position of considerable influence on the ATP player council, he never received a proper reckoning for his threatening, misogynistic comments about Anna Kournikova and others.  It took an assault conviction  for him to be forced to step away from the tour. The most prominent women’s sport in the world is crawling with people in positions of power who have consistently demonstrated abhorrent misogyny and racism. While some have received punishment, these events have constantly been viewed as isolated incidents. There has never been any initiative from the governing bodies to preemptively address this culture and to hold even the most powerful figures to a clear code of conduct. As a black woman and one of the most prominent sports figures in the world, no athlete receives more consistent abuse than Williams. When these incidents occur, it is easy to conclude that she is strong and successful enough for outside voices not to bother her. But after two decades on the receiving end of misogyny it is difficult to imagine these incidents have not left a mark. Yet in a week she will travel to Australia to begin the 25th season of her career.
Senior Republicans should recoil in horror at Trump. But too many still fear him:	S urely this would be the moment. Surely the sight of a  horde storming the US Capitol , smashing windows and breaking down doors, determined to use brute, mob strength to overturn a free and fair election, surely that would mark the red line. After five years dismissing those who warned that Donald Trump posed a  clear and present danger to US democracy , branding them hysterics suffering from Trump Derangement Syndrome, surely this moment – when they saw the citadel of that democracy overrun by men clothed in the slogans of neo-Nazism (Six Million Wasn’t Enough, read  one ), waving the Confederate flag of slavery, racism and treason and carrying zip ties, apparently to bind the wrists and ankles of any hostages – would, at long last, make Republicans recoil from the man who had led them to this horror. After all, the link between Trump and the sacking of the halls of Congress was direct and unhidden. Short of carrying the battering ram himself, he could hardly have done more to lead the mob. “Let’s walk down Pennsylvania Avenue,”  he told  the “Save America” rally that preceded the attack, guiding them towards the House and Senate as lawmakers prepared to certify Joe Biden’s election victory. No need to bother with the “strong ones”, he said, referring to those Republicans who were already on side. The crowd was directed to focus instead on “the weak ones”: “We’re going to try and give them the kind of pride and boldness that they need to take back our country.” The thousands who had gathered, who revere Trump and call him  Daddy , did not need to be told twice. Hours into the attempted – and  planned  – insurrection, Trump again made plain the bonds that connect him to the men of havoc. “We love you,” he told them in a  video message , gently suggesting they go home. “You’re very special.” None of that is a surprise. They were only there for him, summoned to Washington by Trump’s big lie that the 2020 presidential election had been stolen through fraud – that they had been robbed of their champion by a wicked conspiracy that took in everyone from the Chinese Communist party to his own vice-president. The back of the Republican camel has proved remarkably durable in the Trump era, but surely the president’s role in inciting an attempted putsch would be the straw to finally break it. There are some signs of that, as several star enablers of the Trump era apparently discover their consciences at two minutes to midnight. There have been a couple of cabinet resignations, along with the departure of some White House staff. Trump’s former attorney general, William Barr,  condemned  Trump’s orchestration of the mob as “a betrayal of his office and supporters”. Senator Lindsey Graham  declared , “Enough is enough.” Mike Pence refused to indulge Trump’s delusion that as the ceremonial opener of the envelopes containing the 2020 results, Pence could overturn them. The Republican leader in the Senate, Mitch McConnell, stood against the effort of several colleagues to challenge those results and seven of them  abandoned  that effort once the rioters were cleared off the premises. The Wall Street Journal  editorial page , a longtime Trump cheerleader, now urges the president to resign or be removed from office. If this were a genuine shift by the bulk of the Republican party, it would be welcome – even if it would be several days late and many dollars short. It would attract deserved mockery for the absurdity of claiming to be shocked by Trump’s true nature now, less than a fortnight before the expiry of his term. How laughable to desert Trump for lighting the match this week, when you stood by and applauded as he built up the bonfire and drenched it in gasoline every day since the November election and for the previous four years. Elaine Chao resigned as commerce secretary, saying she was “deeply troubled” by Wednesday’s events. Yet she was perfectly happy to  stand at Trump’s side  – literally – as he praised the neo-Nazis who marched in Charlottesville in 2017 as “very fine people”. Pence did not speak out when, less than a week ago, a  tape recording  showed his boss putting the squeeze, Sopranos-style, on Georgia election officials, urging them to “find” the votes that would thwart the democratic will of that state’s citizens and anoint Trump the winner, rather than Biden. Above all, Pence, McConnell and the rest kept their mouths shut as Trump spun his big lie that the election had been stolen – the lie that would poison the minds of his followers so deeply, they eventually sought to seize America’s representative bodies by force. This would be the deserved response if  Republicans  were now collectively recoiling at the monster they had created, and on whose back they have been happy to ride until today. But there has been no such collective recoil, still less a deep reckoning with, or even recognition of, the fact that Republicanism has allowed the toxic far right to enter its bloodstream. Note that eight Republican senators and 139 members of the House of Representatives still  voted to reject  the outcome of the November election, even after the storming of Congress. McConnell may have taken a stand, but his counterpart in the House remains loyal to Trump. Pence seems uninterested in leading a cabinet revolt that would remove Trump under the 25 th  amendment of the constitution, and there’s little sign he’d have the votes around that table of nodding dogs anyway. The White House resignations that have come thus far have not carried much heft: they include  the social secretary  and the chief of staff to the first lady. Only  a single Republican  in the House has called for Trump’s removal. Why such inaction in the face of indisputable evidence that Trump poses a danger every hour he remains in the Oval Office? One  YouGov poll  provides a clue. Asked whether they support the assault on the Capitol, most Americans say a firm no. But among Republicans, more support the rioters than oppose them, 45% to 43%. Perhaps that’s no surprise, given that  less than half  of all Republicans believe Biden won the election. Ambitious Republicans – those such as Ted Cruz and Josh Hawley, eyeing 2024 – are aware of that constituency and they are frightened of it. For four years they have not dared offend it. And now the Republican party faces a choice, one that does not disappear with Trump’s  scripted hostage video  promising to behave nicely – doubtless prompted by fear of removal or of future legal action for incitement – but still refusing to admit he lost. Nor will it recede when Trump finally leaves on 20 January, especially if his most devoted supporters make good on their threat of more violence on, or ahead of, inauguration day. That choice is stark. Do Republicans continue to take the path laid by Trump, the path of lies and contempt for democracy? Or do they declare that, much as they hate Democrats, they are, in the end, democrats. In a two-party system such as America’s, it’s no exaggeration to say that the fate of the republic depends on their answer. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist
Not sure how you’re going to get through January? I can help:	S ome people are good with cold weather. Their cheeks pink prettily. They have a wardrobe of clothes that are somehow warm but also, as if by magic, flattering, and they are really, really good at skiing. And some of us are not. We – my people – develop a pallor in the winter that veers between what Farrow & Ball would call  Laura Palmer  Grey and Jaundiced Victorian Child. From September to May we have a constant cold, and what our winter wardrobe lacks in aesthetic appeal, it makes up for in having Kleenex stuffed in every pocket. Why some of us choose – willingly, apparently – to live in northern Europe, where it is,  to paraphrase Niles in Sleepless In Seattle , cold nine months of the year, is a question we have never answered satisfactorily to ourselves. So lockdown January is pretty much indistinguishable from my normal January, given that I always avoid leaving the house (too cold), never go out at night (are you insane?) and make no plans of any kind (see previous parentheses). If it weren’t for all the death, unemployment and anxiety that accompanies lockdown, I’d be quite enjoying this legally mandated winter hibernation. Those of you who usually spend some of January on skiing holidays or tramping through national parks (why, why, why?) are probably wondering how you’re going to get through this godforsaken month inside. For definitely the first and possibly the only time in my life, I have actual expertise I can bring to this situation. About a decade ago, my friend Charlie gave me what remains the greatest gift ever bestowed upon man or woman: a box set of  The Golden Girls . Yes, The Golden Girls: that 1980s US sitcom about a bunch of older women (actually played by women in their 50s and 60s: don’t think about that too much) living together in Florida. If you remember it, you perhaps think of  the incredible 1980s Miami decor  in Dorothy, Blanche, Rose and Sophia’s house, with the gladioli-print sofa and giant Chinese vases. Or maybe you think of the ludicrously catchy theme song. (Quick diversion. Top five greatest 80s US sitcom theme tunes, no arguments allowed, in reverse order: 5  Diff’rent Strokes ; 4  Perfect Strangers ; 3  Family Ties ; 2  The Golden Girls ; 1  Cheers .)  As you might have gleaned by now, I watch a  lot  of TV, but The Golden Girls is, bar none, my favourite show of all time. I love it so much that when I got my own home, I copied the living room (greens, whites, pinks, florals) and Blanche’s bedroom (palm-print wallpaper, velvet furniture). If you think that sounds obsessive, I probably shouldn’t tell you that I named my dog and my daughter after two of its stars. My passion for this show tends to surprise people, and I’m always surprised they’re surprised, because the first thing to say about The Golden Girls is it’s funny. A lot of 80s sitcoms weren’t (sorry, Diff’rent Strokes), but The Golden Girls is funny the way Cheers is funny. It’s also intensely comforting, with its running gags (Rose talking about Minnesota; Sophia talking about Sicily) and repeated shtick (Dorothy’s sarcasm; Blanche’s horniness). And this makes sense, because one of its writers, Mitch Hurwitz, went on to create the ultimate show about shticks, Arrested Development. I once  interviewed Hurwitz , ostensibly for the fourth series of Arrested, but instead focused quite heavily on The Golden Girls; Hurwitz, to his credit, was fine with that. “I remember when Sex And The City started happening and the characters would talk about sex and people would be so scandalised and I was like, ‘We did this! We talked about orgasms – with older women!’” Hurwitz rightly recalled. This is another reason I love it: it’s the most feminist show made – about a bunch of women living happily together, who don’t need men, but who do have sex, and not in an, “Eww, old ladies!” way. When’s the last time you saw an  80-year-old woman in bed with her boyfriend on TV ? Probably on The Golden Girls. And the women who appeared on it were all amazing.  Bea Arthur, best friend of Rock Hudson , was a proper goddess, and Betty White’s memoir If You Ask Me (And Of Course You Won’t) is fascinating. Rue McClanahan was married six times! Estelle Getty was heavily involved in HIV/Aids activism! All of them were (and are, in White’s case) in their own unique way heroic. I watch my Golden Girls box set every winter, because it’s funny and comforting, and because it’s set in Miami, which feels especially cheering this year, given that’s the only sun I’m likely to see. Living in Florida with my three best female friends is my fantasy future. As well as the future, it makes me think of the past, specifically, the Christmas vacations I spent as a child in Miami with my grandmother. Unlike my mother, she let me watch The Golden Girls. She was nothing like them, but seeing it today still reminds me of those trips. My love of Christmas may have baffled her immigrant Jewish mind, but all she wanted was to make me happy, so we would sit down and watch a sitcom about a bunch of pensioners. It turned out to be the present that never stopped giving. 
A British judge said US prisons are dangerously inhumane. Sadly, she's right:	W hat does it say about the humanitarian condition of  US prisons  and jails when one of the United States’ closest allies refuses to extradite a person for fear that American prison conditions would drive him to suicide? This is exactly what happened on Monday when a British court  ruled against  the United States’ extradition request for Wikileaks founder Julian Assange due to concerns that his health and safety cannot be assured in US custody. The United States fought vigorously to extradite Assange so that he can stand trial for alleged violations of the US Espionage Act, as well as other alleged cyber crimes. We were dismayed by Judge Vanessa Baraitser’s apparently sympathetic approach to the United States’ legal arguments, and we’re disappointed that the court did not reject the radical theory that foreign publishers can be prosecuted for publishing US secrets. The job of national security journalists is to publish the government’s secrets. Criminalizing that is a threat to press freedom and democratic accountability, and these charges should be dropped. Nevertheless, in her  ruling  Judge Baraitser denied extradition due to the significant risk that Assange would be placed in   solitary confinement , which she concluded would likely lead to his death by suicide. Assange has a long and documented history of mental illness, and psychiatric experts testified that, during his current incarceration in the United Kingdom, periodic visits from his spouse and children, as well as phone calls with his family, are important factors preventing him from attempting suicide or self-harm. These are things that would almost certainly be denied Assange in US custody. Prolonged solitary confinement – defined as the practice of confining people for 22 to 24 hours per day without meaningful human contact for a period of more than 15 days – can amount to torture, according to the United Nations. Solitary confinement is particularly dangerous for individuals suffering from mental illness, as well as children, nursing mothers and pregnant people. The United Nations’  Nelson Mandela Rules  prohibit prolonged solitary confinement, and restrict the use of solitary confinement for these high-risk individuals. A growing number of countries have implemented the Mandela Rules as part of a global movement against the continued use of this inhumane treatment, but these prohibitions have not been adopted by the US Bureau of Prisons or any American state – with the partial exception of  Colorado . According to the Prison Policy Initiative, an estimated 37% of people incarcerated in US state and federal prisons have a diagnosed mental illness, as do an estimated 44% of incarcerated people in local jails. And  studies  have shown that approximately half of all suicides and incidents of self-harm in American prisons and jails occur among people held in solitary confinement. In 2011, the ACLU’s National Prison Project launched the  Stop Solitary campaign , which advocates for the abolition of prolonged solitary confinement and the nationwide implementation of the Mandela Rules. Prior to the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, the number of people held in solitary confinement in the United States each day was estimated to range from  55,000 to 62,500 . After a decade of slow but steady progress by advocates to reduce the use of solitary confinement, recent events have made the situation worse. As of June 2020, the Unlock the Box campaign estimated that as many as  300,000  people were being held in solitary confinement in response to Covid-19 – a nearly 500% increase from pre-pandemic numbers. The increased use of solitary confinement, which is occurring in state and local prisons and jails as well as federal facilities, is being justified as a response to Covid-19, despite overwhelming public health evidence that solitary confinement is a dangerous and counterproductive response to the disease. Julian Assange  is far from the only person at risk of serious injury or death by the conditions which characterize US prisons and jails. The courts ought to be as concerned about the treatment of the hundreds of thousands of people who were held in solitary last year as they are about this man with an international following. “It is said that no one truly knows a nation until one has been inside its jails,” Nelson Mandela famously stated. So what does the United States’ continued over-reliance on a practice that is internationally recognized as tantamount to torture say about us? We certainly can do better. David Fathi is director of the ACLU National Prison Project
Trump's Maga insurrectionists were perverse US civil war re-enactors:	“ Big protest in DC on January 6th. Be there, will be wild! ” Donald Trump tweeted on December 19, a week after his would-be Brown Shirt followers rioted in the streets of Washington to protest the “stolen” election. When  Der Tag –  the climactic day of battle arrived – Trump assembled his true believers on the South Ellipse at the White House for a “Save America” rally, waving them up Pennsylvania Avenue as his army to nullify the congressional certification of electoral college votes in the presidential election. Near the steps of the Capitol, as Trump’s shock troops prepared themselves for the assault on the citadel, they built a bare but dramatic monument to their revenge fantasy:  wooden gallows  with steps leading up to a swinging noose. Smashing their way through the windows and doors of the Capitol, they rampaged in a mad dash, breaking furniture, slashing paintings and looting offices. One of the invaders roamed through the corridors carrying a large Confederate flag, the first and only time that emblem of the Slave Power has ever appeared inside the Capitol. Just two weeks earlier, on 21 December, at the request of the commonwealth of Virginia, the statue of Robert E Lee that the state had given as a gift to the Congress in 1909 to represent it in Statuary Hall was replaced with one of Barbara Rose Johns Powell, who as a teenager had integrated Virginia’s public schools. Trump’s rabble had first rioted in 2017 in defense of another statue of Lee, in Charlottesville, Virginia, after the city council had voted to remove it. “Jews will not replace us!” they chanted, and a young woman was murdered by a neo-Nazi. Trump praised them as “very fine people,” and tweeted, “Sad to see the history and culture of our great country being ripped apart with the removal of our beautiful statues and monuments.” The rioter parading through the Capitol with a Confederate flag, as though he had reached the high-water mark of Pickett’s Charge at Gettysburg, was captured in a photo between two portraits on the Senate side, one of Senator John C Calhoun, the proslavery ideologue and nullifier from South Carolina, and the other of Senator Charles Sumner, the abolitionist from Massachusetts. The neo-Confederate rioter appeared indifferent to the images, even as he flaunted the symbol of the Lost Cause for Trump’s lost cause in a new civil war. In a valentine to the vandals of the Capitol, Trump proclaimed, “We love you,” and, “You’re special.” The rabble was a mélange of true believers in conspiracy theories, paranoid delusions and twisted history. For the QAnon followers, their presence at the Capitol was the moment when the storm of the rapture would bring about the revelation of Trump’s final plan and his restoration to perpetual power. It was the culmination of Trump’s promise for apocalyptic change. For neo-Nazis, carrying flags with abstract versions of broken swastikas, and tattooed latter-day Klansmen, it was a stand for racial supremacy. Charging the gates of the Capitol was storming the gates of heaven. Or, alternatively, it was a heroic last-ditch defense of Trump’s bunker from the onslaught of hordes of impure infidels led by Joe Biden. As William Faulkner famously wrote, “The past is never dead. It’s not even past.” But the warped history that the Trump mob thinks it is enacting, reenacting or conjuring is a costume drama of militant ignorance. The true history sheds more light on their feeble attempted coup than their fervid visions of pedophile liberal celebrities acting in concert with the deep state and the Illuminati. When senators scrambled for cover from violent assailants, it recalled the nearly fatal attack on Charles Sumner. In 1856, after delivering a stem-winding speech against the effort to turn the Kansas territory into a slave state, “The Crime Against Kansas,” Sumner sat at his desk on the floor of the Senate writing letters. Representative Preston Brooks, of South Carolina, taking umbrage at his remarks, clubbed him with a gold-handled cane until he was almost dead. Blood ran across the floor of the Senate. The caning of Sumner was a precipitating outrage that helped bring on the civil war. President Lincoln was determined that Washington would never fall to the Confederacy. He ringed the city with forts. Tens of thousands of troops were stationed there. In August 1864, when a Confederate army came within sight of the Capitol, Lincoln himself rushed to Fort Stevens to participate in the battle, and was shot at. A young officer, Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr, later the supreme court justice, shouted at him, “Get down, you fool!” Lincoln directed the rebuilding of the Capitol dome, originally a wooden structure that had rotted, as a symbol of confidence in the ultimate victory of democracy. The dome was completed in December 1863, a month after Lincoln delivered the Gettysburg Address proclaiming “a new birth of freedom”. The Trump diehard brandishing the Confederate flag in the Capitol mocks the constitutional democracy that Lincoln died for Lincoln’s second inaugural took place at the newly restored Capitol. He ordered that units of Black soldiers, who had been recruited as a result of the Emancipation Proclamation, be present in force. In the Rotunda, where Trump’s rioters so recently frolicked, there was a disturbance as Lincoln passed through. A man rushing forward was restrained, later identified as John Wilkes Booth. The famed actor had become a Confederate secret service agent stalking Lincoln. Booth edged himself onto the Capitol Portico to observe Lincoln while he spoke. One hundred and fifty-six years later, Trump’s mob climbed over the spot where Booth had stood. “Right makes might,” Lincoln had stated in his Cooper Union address of 1860, which launched him on his campaign for the presidency. Six months later, on 11 July 1860, Charles Sumner came to Cooper Union to support Lincoln’s candidacy by speaking on the subject of The Republican Party: Its Origins, Necessity, and Permanence. He defined the new liberal party as the antithesis of John C Calhoun, “chief in all the pretensions of slavery and slave-masters,” who attacked “the self-evident truths of the declaration of independence as ‘absurd,’ and then to proclaim that human beings are ‘property’ under the constitution.” “All that the Republican party now opposes,” said Sumner, “may be found in John C Calhoun.” But now, it should be apparent in the last days of Trump, as he invokes the spirit of Calhoun’s nullification, that original Republican party has ceased to exist. The Trump diehard brandishing the Confederate flag in the Capitol mocks the constitutional democracy that Lincoln died for. Not since the intrusion of John Wilkes Booth has there been such a traitorous presence. Sidney Blumenthal, former senior adviser to President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton, has published three books of a projected five-volume political life of Abraham Lincoln:  A Self-Made Man ,  Wrestling With His Angel  and  All the Powers of Earth
For Spaniards who remember 1981, the storming of the Capitol looked eerily familiar:	Tension was high,  security was weak  and a bitter handover of power was under way when violent intruders forced the people’s representatives to stop their debate and cower on the floor. Future generations of Americans will identify this as a description of events at the Capitol in Washington DC on 6 January 2021. For Spaniards, however, it fits an earlier moment in history – an assault on Madrid’s parliament, the Congreso de los Diputados, on  23 February 1981 . Spain’s attackers – reactionary followers of the dictator General Francisco Franco, who had died six years earlier – were also led by men in silly hats, although Lieutenant Colonel Antonio Tejero was sporting the patent leather tricorn of Spain’s civil guard paramilitary police force rather than a  pair of buffalo horns . Comparisons mostly end there. Tejero was waving a real weapon. Some of the 200 soldiers and civil guards with him peppered the debating chamber ceiling with machine-gun fire. This was a proper coup attempt, not a shambolic human tidal wave containing costumed followers of an egomaniacal conspiracy theorist. In  Spain , tanks rolled down the streets of the eastern city of Valencia to support the coup. Some people began packing for exile. Others worried about firing squads, recalling the techniques employed by Franco. Reactions in the Spanish debating chamber were also different. The outgoing prime minister, Adolfo Suárez, and the deputy prime minister for defence affairs, General Manuel Gutiérrez Mellado, refused orders to hit the floor, while the latter angrily commanded the armed assailants to desist. They ignored him. The communist leader, Santiago Carrillo, was the only other deputy to remain in his seat, slouching calmly and chain-smoking. “Old, disobedient and smoking away,” is how Javier Cercas describes him in his masterpiece of literary non-fiction, The Anatomy of a Moment. “He understands that if he survives the gunfire, the  golpistas  [coup leaders] will execute him.” In Spain, there was no need to urge the head of state to make a television address condemning the assault. King Juan Carlos organised that himself, donning his commander-in-chief uniform and rebuking the “actions or attitudes of anyone who wants to interrupt by force the democratic process … voted on by the Spanish people”. He did not say, like Donald Trump, “ We love you . You’re very special.” Yet it seems Juan Carlos may also have unwittingly encouraged the plotters in advance, since many were convinced he was on their side. “In the King’s name!” some shouted during the assault. Those who stormed the Spanish parliament thought a military junta was ready to take over, led by a mysterious figure known as White Elephant (probably the now deceased former royal aide, General Alfonso Armada). When the gunmen burst in (failing to turn off a TV camera that recorded the whole thing), there were good reasons to believe people would die, but in the end nobody was hurt. White Elephant did not reveal themselves and, after 18 hours holding the deputies hostage, the attackers surrendered. The coup had flopped. I once met a musician who claimed that, during his military service, he had taken part in the coup. He recalled being bundled into a truck and deposited outside the parliament building, but he sneaked off to buy cigarettes while his unit awaited orders. When he returned, they had gone. A policeman told him they had entered the parliament building, so he ran in and joined them. For Spaniards, then, there was a spooky element of deja vu in the scenes transmitted live from Washington on Wednesday, not least because they combined real danger with farce. The good news, though, is that Spain’s coup was an end, not a beginning. When it failed, Spaniards realised they no longer had to fear an army that had been the backbone of Franco’s regime. Democracy and its institutions proved resilient, just as they have in the United States. The assailants went to jail, even if their shadowy backers mostly escaped identification and retribution. In fact, apart from a few frights in the 1980s, Spain has barely witnessed any further military stirrings in the post-Franco era – until last month. In a 6 December  “patriotic” letter , 34 aged generals and admirals, and hundreds of other ex-officers, claimed the Socialist-Podemos coalition government led by Pedro Sánchez was intent on imposing a form of communism. Publication of the letter, which was also signed by the 1981  coup plotter Major Ricardo Pardo  and one of Franco’s grandsons, followed revelations of a group Whatsapp chat among retired officers in which one participant wrote that “there is no other choice but to start  executing 26 million  sons-of-bitches”. The reactionary old Spanish military officers clearly feel emboldened by a global  normalisation of far-right , anti-democratic rhetoric, but their threats are empty. A year after the failed 1981 coup, Spaniards voted in their first leftwing government since the 1930s. The socialist prime minister Felipe González stayed in power for 14 years, overseeing a remarkable and solid transformation in Spain. The trauma, then, need not last. In fact, an incident like this can be purifying and clarifying. For Spain it marked the limits of violence and the definitive end of the rotten era of Francoism. In time, one can only hope the events in Washington on 6 January may seem just the same. Giles Tremlett is a correspondent based in Spain. He is the author of Ghosts of Spain, and biographies of Catherine of Aragon and Isabella of Castile
The Chinese government is trying to rebrand forced sterilization as feminism:	You know those horrific  mass detention camps in China ? Turns out we were all completely wrong about them. The Chinese government isn’t oppressing its Muslim minority population, it’s simply rounded up over a million Uighurs in order to open their minds. It’s not forcibly sterilizing Uighur women, it’s just teaching them feminist theory. I know that may sound a little hard to believe, but the Chinese government has firmly assured us that this is the case. On Thursday the Chinese embassy in the US  tweeted  a link to the findings of a report on demographics in Xinjiang, a predominantly Uighur area. Birth rates have dropped dramatically in recent years – something that many international observers believe is down to  forced sterilizations . That’s nonsense, according to the report, which was created by a  state-run thinktank , and reported on by China Daily, an English-language newspaper owned by the publicity department of the Chinese Communist p54arty. The real reason for declining Uighur birth rates is gender equality. “[I]n the process of eradicating extremism, the minds of Uygur women in Xinjiang were emancipated and gender equality and reproductive health were promoted, making them no longer baby-making machines,” the Chinese embassy in the US tweeted. “They are more confident and independent.” Does Twitter have any issue with this outrageous propaganda? Nah, of course not: the social network has said that the tweet doesn’t violate its  policy against hateful conduct . That doesn’t mean you can say whatever you like on Twitter without censure, of course. If you  incite a coup  then you will be locked out of your  account for 12 hours . Twitter takes its responsibilities very seriously! The full extent of what China is doing to its Uighur population isn’t clear. However, evidence of what some experts have called a form of “ demographic genocide ” is mounting. An Associated Press investigation last year found that the state of Xinjiang “regularly subjects minority women to pregnancy checks, and forces intrauterine devices, sterilization and even abortion on hundreds of thousands”. If ethnic minorities have too many children they’re threatened with internment, the AP said. The fact that China is brazenly rebranding demographic genocide as gender equality is outrageous and unconscionable – but not unprecedented. In the 1990s about 350,000 people were sterilized in Peru under a program promoted by President Alberto Fujimori, who argued a lower birth rate was the key to  eliminating poverty . “Peruvian women should be the owners of their destiny!”  Fujimori said  in a 1995 speech to congress. He presented his family-planning campaign as a step forward for feminism, and  even got funding  from the US Agency for International Development, USAid. Many of the women who were sterilized, however, came from  poor indigenous backgrounds  and were coerced or forced into the procedure. I find it hard to wrap my head around what’s happening in China: there are a million Muslim Uighurs in detention camps and the world is doing very little about it. Disney even shot  Mulan in the same region as these camps  –thanking the government entities in Xinjiang in the film’s credits. The fact that so many people seem to be turning a blind eye to what’s happening to the Uighurs, the fact that the Chinese government feels emboldened to crow about declining Uighur birth rates on social media, demonstrates the extent to which Muslims have been  dehumanized  by the “war on terror”. The west must hold China to account for what is happening to the Uighurs but it must also hold itself accountable. After 9/11 you could infringe civil liberties with impunity in the name of combating extremism. Michael Bloomberg, for example, has  never apologized  for an unconstitutional mass surveillance program targeting Muslims after 9/11; indeed, he’s justified it. “Of course we’re supposed to do that,”  he said.  Treat a huge group of people as if every single one of them is a potential terrorist? That’s what you’re supposed to do? Because that’s exactly what is happening in Xinjiang. China is simply following a playbook that America put together. More than 40 women  have submitted written testimony attesting to abuse by a gynecologist while in Immigration and Customs Enforcement custody. Dr Mahendra Amin performed so many hysterectomies that he was known as the “uterus collector”. The Moscow metro stopped hiring female drivers in the 1980s and “train driver” was added to a  long list of jobs considered too demanding  for women to undertake. It was removed from that list last year and the city’s transport department welcomes its first female driver on Sunday. Lahore’s high court abolished the test, saying the practice “offends the personal dignity of the female victim”. The tests  have been used to victim-blame : if an exam demonstrated that a woman was “habituated to sexual intercourse” then it was assumed she was less likely to have been raped. As well as being misogynistic it should be noted that virginity tests are entirely unscientific. Shockingly, they’re also  legal across much of America . A low-pressure system called Ahmet hit Germany last week. It brought low temperatures and the winds of change: Ahmet is part of a new campaign to make the weather news more diverse. “So far, our weather had mostly typical German names only, even though 26% of people in Germany have migrant roots,”  one of the leaders of the initiative explained . Cabinet ministers  approved the long-awaited bill on Sunday . While it’s not law yet, this is a hugely positive step. “The events of last year, both ‘honor killings’ that got national attention and the #MeToo movement in Iran, have increased the pressure on the government to push this bill that was in the making for almost a decade,” a researcher for Human Rights Watch told the  New York Times . Lockdown is causing more men to  experiment with their hair , apparently. The pandemic has caused some sperm banks to run low, the New York Times reports. Enterprising individuals with unregulated Facebook groups are stepping into plug the gap: meet the  Sperm Kings of America . Speculation was rife after the moving truck was pictured by Ivanka and Jared’s  Washington DC home on Thursday . However, the orange “College Hunks Hauling Junk” truck was just picking up Salvation Army donations, a source close to Ivanka said. Which is a shame: I can think of some trash that needs to be cleared away.
'She was deep into it': Ashli Babbitt, killed in Capitol riot, was devoted conspiracy theorist:	I n late December, the incoming vice-president, Kamala Harris, tweeted about her plans for the first hundred days of the Biden administration. She promised “to ensure Americans mask up, distribute 100M shots, and get students safely back to school”. Among the thousands of responses was an angry tweet from a 35-year-old air force veteran in San Diego. “No the fuck you will not!” Ashli Babbitt replied to Harris. “No masks, no you, no Biden the kid raper, no vaccines...sit your fraudulent ass down…we the ppl bitch!” Babbitt wasn’t just tweeting. She had a plan to fly to Washington DC the very next week to take part in a major public demonstration demanding that Donald Trump, not Joe Biden, be sworn in as president. Babbitt was shot to death during Trump supporters’ chaotic invasion of the Capitol, officials said, while four other people, including a Capitol police officer, also died. In the days since Babbitt and other Trump supporters stormed the Capitol building on 6 January, forcing lawmakers to flee or hide, her social media has been scoured for insights into her radicalization. Babbitt’s Twitter account shows a woman deeply engaged for months with a conspiracy theory that painted Democratic lawmakers as evil pedophiles, and then persuaded, and infuriated, by Trump and his allies’ lies about election fraud.  For weeks before she joined the mob in Washington, Babbitt had been retweeting false claims from Trump himself, as well as the pro-Trump lawyers Lin Wood and Sidney Powell, alleging massive voter fraud and asserting that Trump had won the 2020 election. Many of Babbitt’s tweets, according to extremism experts, also marked her as a believer in  QAnon , a conspiracy theory that claims Donald Trump has been trying to save the world from a cabal of satanic pedophiles, including Democratic politicians like Biden and Hollywood celebrities, and that he will soon bring his enemies to justice. Babbitt had not been a leader or major influencer within the QAnon movement, according to Marc-André Argentino, a researcher who studies QAnon and other extremist groups. She had not posted a lot of original content or sold QAnon-themed merchandise. But she had tweeted regularly about the conspiracy theory since February 2020, and she had posted a lot on Twitter in general, about 50 posts a day, he said. On election day, she had posted 77 times. Her social media also showed posts skeptical of masks and public health measures. She had responded with fury to an alert in early December that California public health officials were reinstating a stay-at-home order to prevent the spread of coronavirus, which was surging in southern California: “This is that commie bullshit.” The QAnon conspiracy theory, although lurid in its claims about the torture of children, is very much a political movement, not just a personal delusion, experts say. “The people that went to the Capitol weren’t just trying to save Trump, they were trying to stop the coming multiracial democracy” which they believed would institute “a radical leftist globalist agenda”, Joan Donovan, the research director at Harvard’s Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy, said. On Twitter, Babbitt had been sharing messages urging people like herself to take action, with messages like: “Your government doesn’t fear you anymore. That needs to change. ASAP.” Babbitt was a small business owner and self-described libertarian. She owned a San Diego-based business, Fowler’s Pool Service and Supply, according to California business records. Her LinkedIn profile lists her as the company owner since May 2017. In one tweet,  first reported by Bellingcat , Babbitt said that she had voted for Barack Obama before voting for Trump. In recent months, she had become a devoted adherent of conspiracy theories boosted by Trump and others. Babbitt also had a history of confrontational behavior. In 2016, she was charged with reckless endangerment, dangerous driving and malicious property damage in Maryland, but she was later acquitted, according to court records. A former girlfriend of Babbitt’s husband wrote in the application for a protection order against Babbitt that Babbitt had followed her in a car and rear-ended her three times, multiple news outlets  reported . “She was screaming at me and verbally threatening,” the complaint states. Attempts to reach Babbitt’s family were unsuccessful. Babbitt wrote that she believed the 6 January protest she was joining would be a pivotal moment for the country, and a fulfillment of some of the key events that QAnon believers had been expecting: “Nothing will stop us....they can try and try and try but the storm is here and it is descending upon DC in less than 24 hours....dark to light!” she tweeted the day before the rally, referencing key QAnon slogans. Since 2018, QAnon has been identified as  a potential domestic terror threat  and linked to a series of violent and criminal acts. Travis View, the host of the QAnon Anonymous podcast, said posts showed that Babbitt was “100% a dedicated QAnon follower. She was not casual about it. She was deep into it.” At that 6 January rally, Babbitt would listen as Trump urged   his supporters to march over to the Capitol building as lawmakers were in the process of officially certifying the 2020 election results, and confirming Biden’s victory. “You’ll never take back our country with weakness. You have to show strength, and you have to be strong,” Trump told them. “It was amazing to get to see the president talk,” Babbitt said afterwards, in a Facebook video obtained by TMZ. “We are walking to the Capitol in a mob. There is a sea of nothing but red, white and blue patriots.” She was grinning. At the Capitol, Babbitt would be among the crowds of Trump supporters who pushed and fought their way past the Capitol police and into the building itself, forcing lawmakers to flee or hide, and temporarily halting the certification of Biden’s election victory. Multiple videos would capture the moment in a Capitol hallway where Babbitt was at the front of a crowd stopped at a door to the Speaker’s Lobby, which has been shut and barricaded. On the other side of the door were members of Congress and Capitol police protecting them, according to news reports. Video obtained by the Washington Post shows Babbitt and other members of the mob  shouting at a cluster of officers who are guarding the door , telling them to step aside, as other Trump supporters pound on the door’s glass, shattering it. The video shows the officers moving away from the door, and members of the crowd surging forward, shouting “Break it down” and “Let’s fucking go” as they try to break through the door. Other widely circulated videos show Babbitt hopping up to push herself through one of the door’s glass panels, towards the legislators at the other end of the hallway, as a man shouts “Bust it down!” The footage shows a shot ringing out, and Babbitt falling to the ground. Officials would later confirm that she had been  shot by a Capitol police officer , and that the shooting is under investigation. Lawmakers from both parties who were present at the moment when Babbitt was shot have spoken out about the dangerous behavior of the crowd. “The mob was going to come through the door; there was a lot of members and staff that were in danger at the time,” the Oklahoma Republican congressman Markwayne Mullin said, according to Fox News. He defended the police officer’s decision to shoot Babbitt: “His actions will be judged in a lot of different ways moving forward, but his actions I believe saved people’s lives even more. Unfortunately, it did take one, though.” In interviews, members of Babbitt’s family have defended her political views, and her anger. “My sister was a normal Californian,” her brother, Roger Witthoeft, told the New York Times. “The issues she was mad about were the things all of us are mad about.” Babbitt had served in the military for 14 years, Witthoeft said. “If you feel like you gave the majority of your life to your country and you’re not being listened to, that is a hard pill to swallow. That’s why she was upset.”
San Francisco rents are plummeting – but its housing crisis could get worse:	A partment rental prices in San Francisco – a city mocked for being so unaffordable that residents  pay more than a grand each month  to sleep in a bunk bed and share space with strangers – have plummeted during the coronavirus crisis,  falling roughly 24% over the last year , according to new data. It might seem like good news for a city long known for its dizzying rents. But the drop wasn’t enough to  topple San Francisco from the top spot  of the list of costliest cities compiled by the rental company Zumper. One-bedroom apartments on average still rent for a staggering $2,660 a month.  Median single-family home  prices in the city, meanwhile, have continued to rise, reaching an exorbitant $1.625m. The numbers tell a troubling story about increasing inequality in the Bay Area, an issue compounded by Covid and the looming recession caused by the pandemic. Rents in the region are still too expensive for most residents, especially those who have lost income this year and were already clinging to the edge of a financial cliff. At the same time, tech workers and other high earners who easily adapted to work-from-home policies early in the pandemic while retaining big salaries have been able to lower their rental rates or cash in on new opportunities to purchase homes with extremely low interest rates. Even amid an  exodus from the city , San Francisco’s housing crisis may be getting worse. “Perspective is really important – and it is still ridiculously expensive,” said Matt Regan, the senior vice-president of public policy at the Bay Area Economic Institute. “The magnitude of the crisis before Covid and the mismatch between the number of people looking for housing and the number of people who could afford what was available was so enormous that – even with a phenomenal drop for a rental – we are still in a crisis”. Last spring, the California  Housing  Partnership Corporation (CHPC), an agency created by the state legislature in 1988 to assist non-profits and local governments to create and preserve affordable housing, calculated California needed roughly 1.3m more affordable rentals to meet housing needs. Faced with a costly recovery from the pandemic, the state may fall even further behind. Municipalities in the Bay Area alone need to build  more than 441,100 units over the next decade  to meet housing demands, according to an assessment released this year by the California department of housing and community development (HCD). The region is already far off pace. In the last cycle, the Bay Area issued permits for only 9% of the low-income housing the  agency said was needed  and roughly 71% of permits for market-rate housing. “We have been digging the hole deeper every year for decades and it’s going to take more than one year of cost depreciation to get out of it,” Regan said. “We are going to emerge from Covid and still have a housing crisis.” The drop in rental prices has done little to curb the blow for residents who suffered economically this year, many as a result of unemployment caused by Covid-19 restrictions. Half of Bay Area renters have lost income since last March and 11% haven’t been able to keep up their payments, according to data from the US Census Bureau. “The pandemic has added new layers to our pre-existing housing crisis,” said Sarah Treuhaft, the vice-president of research at Policy Link, an institution that studies racial and economic equity. “It has been a very unequal pandemic.”  Low-wage workers have been the hardest hit, especially those in the retail, restaurantand hospitality industries. People of color, who were disproportionately put on the frontline in low-paying jobs have borne the brunt. “Black workers have been hit so much harder than all others,” Treuhaft said, adding that census data shows roughly 85% of Black workers in California filed for unemployment last year compared with 39% of white workers. Nearly all Black workers in the state without a college education have been affected financially: 99% have filed for financial help. “From history we know that recessions tend to exacerbate inequality,” Treuhaft said. The impact is already being felt – and it’s likely to have a lasting effect. After the Great Recession, it took more than a decade for middle-class workers to recover. This time, too, experts expect the virus to have long-lasting economic effects. “The people who lost their jobs are not going to be able to get back into the labor market any time soon,” said Karen Chapple, faculty director and professor of city and regional planning at the University of California, Berkeley. “You end up having millions of folks who have diminished earnings. That is going to affect their ability to afford housing, or even just to stay in the middle class.” Chapple, who studies inequalities in the planning, development, and governance and oversees the Urban Displacement Project, a research initiative, expects that college grads will join low-income workers, people of color, and women – the people who have fallen in large numbers from the labor market this year – in seeing their long-term earning potential diminish. That means the pain could be felt for years to come, with lower wages affecting housing and displacement. Rent moratoriums, Chapple said, were a Band-Aid solution unless they were paired with the debt relief renters would need when the legislation expires. Most would not be able to afford months’ worth of payments, especially after losing income. And it would not just affect the poor. “It is also now affecting the middle class and moderate income households,” she said. The financial crunch brought on by the recovery and the recession will make it harder for states and local governments to invest in new housing. “You are going to have a lot of cities strapped in the next few years,” she said. “That is going to cause a lot of local disinvestment and a lot of displacement.” The pandemic has already changed California’s approach to the housing crisis and  hampered its efforts  to increase the number of affordable units, according to a report from the state’s legislative analyst’s Office. The governor, Gavin Newsom, had to scrap a proposal to invest $750m into the California Access to Housing and Services (CAAHS) fund and lawmakers have shifted focus to short-term solutions needed to keep people off the streets. Newsom has signed more than a dozen new housing bills and California lawmakers have developed a legislative package aimed at keeping people housed and increasing housing supply, but it will still be a challenge to maintain momentum amid tight resources and waning construction incentives. During a press conference on Friday, Newsom emphasized that housing production remained a top priority and outlined his new 2021 budget proposal. He has allocated an additional $500m in new low-income housing tax credits to encourage more production and announced the creation of a new accountability office within the state’s housing department to keep cities on track. It’s still unclear how exactly the new unit will enforce policies, but after years of missing targets, the state is ready to add teeth to its ambitious housing goals. “People who were previously not in need of assistance are now going to need it,” Matt Schwartz, president and CEO of the California Housing Partnership,  told KQED . “That’s something we’re all very concerned about. We had around  1.4 to 1.3 million households  who were living without an affordable place in California. Now that number is going to grow.” Anthemos Georgiades, Zumper’s CEO, thinks rental prices in the city will jump up again once the pandemic subsides. People will return and the city’s luxury market, its restaurants, yoga studios and smoothie shops will rebound with them. “I think the test of time will be whether those renters who are clearly not renewing their leases in  San Francisco  now, whether they come back,” Georgiades said. “Once the market does reset and people come back, we are right back to the same problem,” he added. “It is a bit like Groundhog Day – we are never going to build enough housing if San Francisco encounters its next boom.”
Insurrection: the day white supremacist terror came to the US Capitol:	If there was one single moment when the veil of American resilience crumbled and the Trumpist assault on democracy turned into an invasion, it arrived just before 1pm on Wednesday. That was when a group of pro-Trump militants burst through a flimsy outer barrier on the north-west side of the Capitol building and advanced on a secondary barricade guarded by four frightened police officers, dressed only in basic uniforms and soft caps. One of the officers can be seen resting his hands on the barrier in as casual a manner he can manage, in an attempt to defuse the confrontation. He clearly had no idea what was coming. On the other side, a young man in a white hoodie and a red Make America Great Again cap, pulls at the metal barricade but it holds. Then an older man, also red-capped but in full military uniform, takes the youth by the shoulder and whispers something in his ear as the swelling crowd around them chants “USA”. Ten seconds later, the crowd pushes together, the metal fortification collapses, and the Capitol police officers are overwhelmed. The crowd surges past rushing towards the great white domed building atop Capitol Hill. The protest has turned into an insurrection, breaching the home of US democracy, for the first time since the British army set it on fire in 1814. Even those who had warned in vain of the Trump crowd’s criminal intent were stunned at how quickly the nation’s defences buckled. This was America’s “shining city upon a hill” but only the thinnest blue line was there to guard it at the crucial hour. It later turned out that the Capitol police had turned down offers of support from the national guard, only calling for reinforcements when it was too late. The plan was to act as relaxed and low-key as possible, presumably so as not to irritate the crowd. The contrast with the mass deployments of over 5,000 troops for the Black Lives Matter protests in the summer could not have been more glaring. Then, Washington resembled a city under occupation. On Wednesday, it was close to defenceless. This appeared to be deliberate, at least in part.  Donald Trump  was not about to let the federal government go to war with “his people”, who he had invited to the nation’s capital in a last-ditch effort to reverse his emphatic election defeat, due to be certified by Congress on Wednesday. The broader issue was race. The protesters in the summer were largely Black, infuriated by repeated police killings of unarmed Black civilians. The mob which stormed the Capitol was almost entirely white. Efforts to build a concerted government response to the growing white supremacist terrorist threat had been stymied for years in the absence of political will and money. The warning signs along the road to Wednesday’s attempted putsch, the dress-rehearsal occupations of state capitols and a foiled plot to kidnap the Michigan governor, not to mention the activities of the Proud Boys and other far-right factions, were mostly ignored. The heedlessness was hardly surprising given that the commander-in-chief was leading the calls for sedition. He responded to extremist rallies against Democratic governors by tweeting out encouragement for his followers to “liberate” those states. In his effort to somehow upend his resounding defeat in November, he summoned the faithful by Twitter for a “StopTheSteal” rally to reverse the result. “Be there, will be wild!” he promised. Tens of thousands answered the call from around the country. Some drove all night, in part to avoid the price of a hotel. Some, like Texan real estate broker Jenna Ryan, arrived on a private jet with a group of friends, saying she was on the way to “storm the Capitol”. Ryan later posed with a smile and a V-for-victory hand sign in front of the smashed windows of the Capitol building and declared it “one of the best days of my life”. After a wave of condemnation, she issued a statement saying she did not condone violence and was “truly heartbroken for the people who have lost their lives”. The crowd that converged under the giant needle of the Washington Monument was a carnival mix of red-hatted Maga aficionados, men dressed like commandos, and a sprinkling of apocalyptic cults. A pair of women in scarves held yellow signs saying “Women belong in the kitchen” and ”Fake Christians Go to Hell”. Over the years, Trump has built a broad church for the aggrieved, for which the only doctrinal requirement has been loyalty to its high priest. Thousands of people filled one side of the mound under the monument and spilled on to Constitutional Avenue across from the Ellipse, an oval park in front of the White House where a stage had been set up, protected by bulletproof glass. The choice of music on the sound system seemed deliberately melancholic, including Elton John’s Funeral for a Friend, the My Heart Will Go On theme from Titanic, and In the End, by Linkin Park, in which the repeated refrain is: “I tried so hard and got so far. But in the end it doesn’t even matter.” The tempo picked up with the Village People’s Macho Man to introduce the warm-up act, 76-year-old Trump attorney Rudy Giuliani, who called for the election to be resolved through “trial by combat”. A smartphone video of the Donald Trump Jr filmed inside the marquee backstage showed him and his girlfriend, Kimberly Guilfoyle, giddy with excitement. Guilfoyle breaks into a hip-thrusting dance and then shouts into the camera: “Have the courage to do the right thing! Fight!” Trump’s 74-minute speech began close to noon, and was a grab-bag of familiar resentments against the media (the “enemy of the people”), Democrats, “weak Republicans” and his latest target, his own deputy, Mike Pence, who had minutes earlier declared to Congress he had no power to reverse the election result. “We’re going to have to fight much harder and Mike Pence is going to have to come through for us,” Trump declared. “If he doesn’t, that will be a sad day for our country.” He told the thousands of people before him to march down Pennsylvania Avenue the mile and a half to the Capitol, to put pressure on Congress “peacefully and patriotically”. But in an address that used the words “fight” and “fighting” 20 times, from the mouth of a leader who had consistently winked at violence by his followers, it had the weight of a caveat tacked on as an afterthought. The crowd was certainly primed for conflict, after years of hyperbole and demonisation of enemies by their leader, who had convinced them he was their solitary hope in a looming existential struggle. Kasey Botelho, a young woman from Rhode Island sitting under one of Washington’s many cherry trees with her boyfriend Mike, speculated on what would happen if Congress did not bend to the president’s will. “Honestly, I’m not 100% sure, because the supreme court failed us. I think Trump’s only option he really has left is to call military action into it because he has the right to do that,” she said. “I think we’ve waited enough and dealt with enough shit … to go through with it, get it over with.” Jacobb Lake, a contractor who had driven overnight with his teenage son from Joplin, Missouri, was standing on Constitution Avenue with a handmade sign bearing the insignia of the QAnon conspiracy theory subculture, and declaring “My vote is not for sale. This will not be forgotten.” He had an even more dire prediction than Botelho for America’s future if the effort to overturn the election failed, and Biden took office. “World war three,” Lake said, adding that the nation “might split up”. Trump had said he would accompany his supporters to the Capitol but as soon as he finished speaking, he left in his motorcade for the 100-metre drive back to the White House. Some of the crowd peeled away and scattered across the city, but many thousands made their way across the lawns of the National Mall heading eastwards towards Congress. By that time, the day had already taken on a much darker hue. Two pipe bombs had been found at Republican and Democratic party offices near Congress and the assault on the Capitol had begun. Those who had gathered there in the morning were a harder-edged crowd than the Ellipse – more male with a lot more paramilitary gear. Someone had hung a rope noose on a frame on the Capitol grounds, and the vocabulary was noticeably more violent. “I heard at least three different rioters at the Capitol say that they hoped to find Vice-President Mike Pence and execute him by hanging him from a Capitol Hill tree as a traitor,” Jim Bourg, news pictures editor in Reuters’ Washington bureau, recalled on Twitter. “It was a common line being repeated. Many more were just talking about how the [vice-president] should be executed.” Some of the gathering mob turned on journalists, demanding to know their affiliation, and in several cases attacking them. Some were thrown to the ground, and one photographer was thrown off a low wall. As it became clear they would not be fired upon, the attackers gained in confidence. A few scaled a wall up to a terrace and then used scaffolding to climb higher still, where they could start smashing windows. By 2pm, they were inside the building. Members of Congress had been holding a joint session in the House of Representatives chamber to certify the electoral college results – something that was a half-hour formality in normal times but which had been prolonged by the objections from Trump loyalists. Vice-President Pence, in the chair for the session, was abruptly whisked out of the room by his security detail and a security officer strode into the centre of the chamber to declare an emergency. Plainclothes officers rammed a wooden chest against the main door to the chamber and drew their pistols. Senators and representatives in the well of the chamber were ushered out of a back exit, while members and press in the gallery were told to duck down and don the gas masks kept in bags under each seat. Lisa Blunt Rochester, Democratic representative from Delaware, began to pray out loud for “peace in the land, peace in this country … right now in the name of Jesus … Protect America.” The tiled corridors outside the chamber were filling up with insurrectionists. Some police officers kept up efforts to contain them, while others simply gave up and even waved them through. At least one policeman was caught on camera taking a selfie with an insurgent. One man unfurled a Confederate flag, a reminder that the US had its own long history of political violence which has snaked above and below the surface for decades and was now strutting unashamed in broad daylight in the heart of political power. Finding the main door to the House chamber blocked, a group of rioters found their way to a side entrance, smashing the glass out of the doors leading to the Speaker’s Lobby. First through the breach was Ashli Bobbitt, a 35-year-old air force veteran from San Diego. She had once been an Obama supporter but during the Trump era, had been drawn into a parallel culture of QAnon conspiracy theories. Wearing a Trump flag around her waist and a Stars and Stripes backpack, video footage shows her climbing through the damaged wooden door, ignoring the shouted orders from inside to retreat, when a plainclothes police officer emerged from an office on the other side and shot her once in the neck. She fell backwards on to the floor and died, soon afterwards at about 2.45pm, illuminated by the mobile phones of other rioters filming her last moments. Elsewhere in the building a Capitol police officer, Brian Sicknick, was fatally injured in a melee with rioters, reportedly by being attacked with a fire extinguisher. He died of his wounds on Thursday night. Three other people died of “medical emergencies” in the course of the breach, at least one of them from a heart attack, bringing the full death toll to five. Back in the White House, the president and his aides were transfixed by the unprecedented scenes they could see on their television screens. The Washington Post cited an aide as saying Trump was “bemused” by the spectacle. He saw the rioters as fighting for his cause but found them aesthetically distasteful and “low-class”. According to this account, the president was characteristically focused on his own grievances: that Pence had betrayed him, and that his followers were being judged more harshly than the anti-Trump demonstrators in the summer. He refused to condemn his own people, despite the desperate pleas from his erstwhile allies on Capitol Hill to call off the assailants. When Trump was finally persuaded to send a calming presidential message, it was on his terms. He began by repeating his groundless claim that he was the victim of a fraudulent election. He told people to go home but added: “We love you; you’re very special.” Witnesses said he was oblivious to the gravity of what had occurred: the five deaths, the unprecedented violation of Congress, the irrevocable damage to America’s reputation and the very real possibility his vice-president could have been lynched in response to Trump’s vilification. It was only after White House counsel, Pat Cipillone, made clear to Trump the extent of his legal liability for the storming of the Capitol, that Trump adjusted his tone in a second video on Thursday night, finally conceding defeat in the election two months earlier, and denouncing the insurrection. By then, the backlash had already begun. Congress had certified the result, his congressional supporters were being shunned by fellow Republicans, Facebook and then Twitter banned him indefinitely and Democrats prepared for a second impeachment, likely to begin this coming week. The Trump era is not quite over, however. There are still 10 days of this presidency left, and reports from the Oval Office suggest he no longer feels chastened, regretting having agreed to an orderly transition. He has flatly refused to attend his successor’s inauguration on 20 January. No one who knows Trump is betting he will now just slink quietly out of the back door of history.
Police arrest Florida man who allegedly carried Pelosi's lectern in the Capitol:	A man who was seen carrying Nancy Pelosi’s lectern away from the House of Representatives during the US Capitol riot on Wednesday has been arrested in Florida. The news came alongside reports of arrests of other Trump supporters. On Friday, the Department of Justice  announced  charges against a man accused of bringing guns and molotov cocktails to Washington. Another was reported to have brought with him an assault rifle and ammunition and told friends he planned to shoot the House speaker – or run her over. The man seen carrying the speaker’s lectern, Adam Christian Johnson, 36, was booked into the Pinellas county jail on Friday night, on a federal warrant and pending charges. The Pinellas county sheriff’s office released a booking photograph. The FBI had been searching for Johnson, after pictures of his role in the riot  went viral . The whereabouts of the lectern was not immediately known. A man who was pictured sitting at Pelosi’s desk, 60-year-old Richard Barnett from Gravette, Arkansas,  was also arrested . Having bragged to reporters about taking an envelope from the speaker’s office, he was reportedly charged with entering and remaining on restricted grounds, violent entry and theft of public property. The riot and attack on the Capitol was incited by Donald Trump, who told supporters to “fight like hell” against the supposedly stolen election which he in fact lost conclusively to Joe Biden. Five people died, including  a rioter shot by law enforcement  and a police officer reportedly hit with a fire extinguisher while confronting intruders. Calls for the president’s removal from office have continued to grow. Last night Lisa Murkowski became the first Republican senator to call for Trump to resign. Democrats in the House, under Pelosi, are preparing articles of impeachment charging Trump with inciting an insurrection and having “gravely endangered the security of the United States” and its institutions. On Friday the DoJ said one of the Capitol attackers, Lonnie Leroy Coffman, 70 and from Alabama, was alleged to have had in his vehicle “one black handgun, one M4 Carbine assault rifle along with rifle magazines loaded with ammunition, and components for the construction of 11 ‘Molotov cocktails’ in the form of mason jars filled with ignitable substances, rags, and lighters”. A DoJ statement said: “Coffman was [also] found to have on his person a 9mm Smith & Wesson handgun [and] a 22-caliber derringer style handgun. “… Coffman told officers that the mason jars contained melted Styrofoam and gasoline. [The federal  Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives ] advised that the combination of melted Styrofoam and gasoline is an explosive mixture that has the effect of napalm because, when detonated, the substance causes the flammable liquid to better stick to objects that it hits.” Coffman was in custody, charged with unlawful possession of a destructive device, which carries a sentence of up to 10 years, and carrying a pistol without a license under Washington DC law, which carries a term of up to five years. Citing court documents, CNN  reported  that another of the attackers, Cleveland Grover Meredith Jr, was alleged to have sent texts in which he said he had “a shit ton of ... armour-piercing ammo” and wanted to “[put] a bullet in [Pelosi’s] noggin on Live TV”. He also reportedly said he had considered running Pelosi over. FBI agents who searched Meredith’s truck and trailer reportedly found a Glock 19, a 9mm pistol and an assault rifle and “approximately hundreds of rounds of ammunition”. Thirteen members of the Trump mob faced federal charges as of Saturday morning, CNN reported, among them Christopher Alberts of Maryland, accused of wearing a bulletproof vest and carrying a handgun and ammunition on Capitol grounds. Security arrangements  for Biden’s inauguration , on 20 January, are under urgent review.
UK Covid restrictions may be too lax, health experts warn:	The current national lockdown restrictions could be too lax to curb rocketing infections, say experts, and police will focus on enforcing the rules rather than on explaining them, government sources said. New infections and deaths in the UK reached record highs on Friday. A government advertising campaign fronted by the UK’s chief medical adviser, Prof Chris Whitty,  urges people to behave as if they have Covid-19  and “once more, stay home”, as hospitals across the country are getting close to capacity, particularly in London and the south-east, where in some areas as many as one in 20 people have the virus and the capital’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has  declared a state of emergency . Boris Johnson described the latest surge in infections as alarming. Prof Susan Michie, a health psychologist who advises the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), told the BBC Today programme that there had been 90% compliance with the third lockdown, but that government guidance was still enabling too much mixing on public transport and busier streets. “This is quite a lax lockdown. Because we’ve still got a lot of household contact, people go in and out of each other’s houses, if you’re a cleaner, a non-essential tradesperson, a nanny; you have mass gatherings in terms of religious events, nurseries being open,” Michie said. Prof Robert West, a participant in the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Behaviours (SPI-B), said the current restrictions were “still allowing a lot of activity which is spreading the virus”. West, a professor of health psychology at University College London, said he, as well as epidemiologists, medical scientists and virologists he had spoken to, thought the rules should be tightened, emphasising that more children  were going to school  than in the first lockdown and that schools were “a very important seed of community infection”. He told the BBC: “Because we have the more infectious variant, which is somewhere around 50% more infectious than last time round in March, that means that if we were to achieve the same result as we got in March we would have to have a stricter lockdown, and it’s not stricter. It’s actually less strict.” Adam Kucharski, an associate professor of infectious disease and epidemiology at the  London  School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, said cases would continue to rise in the coming weeks. “I think the key period is going to be the next week or so. Even if we get that reproduction number down to 1, if we get the epidemic flat, that’s an epidemic that’s going to be plateauing at this really high level of hospitalisations.” He said data suggested there was more movement in the population than during the first peak in April, despite each social interaction now being much riskier than in the spring. “To some extent, we can think of this as a new pandemic in a pandemic. New data is suggesting that the risk from every contact is probably 40-50% higher than it was. “So both for the UK and for many other countries as well, we need to get away from this idea that we’re going to see a repeat of what happened last spring with our behaviours and really face the possibility that this is much riskier and we’re going to have to work much harder to reduce the impact.” Wendy Simon, the acting mayor of Liverpool, which now has more than 800 cases per 100,000 people, told Today: “I do think the majority of people do get what the threat is; the difficulty is some of the messages around, perhaps, not becoming so ill, particularly with younger people. […] Particularly since Christmas, the age group between 20 and 40 are those that have been most impacted; we’ve seen a lot more people reporting feeling ill with the virus.” Justin Varney, the director of public health in Birmingham, said: “We’re very worried. We still haven’t seen the impact on the NHS of the rapid rise that we saw around the 28 and 29 December after the Christmas bubble. So it is going to get a lot, lot worse, unless we really get this under control.” The national lockdown, Varney said, was “the right move”, but it would take about another two weeks before the effects of lockdown would begin driving numbers down. Prof Rupert Pearse, an intensive care consultant, told Today: “I’m very worried that we’ve reached the peak and we’re really not seeing the kind of behaviour that we saw in the first wave. I and many of my colleagues in medicine are extremely worried that the peak, this third wave, is just going to carry on rising and rising.” Prof Kevin Fenton, the London regional director for Public Health  England , said on BBC Breakfast that people doubting the seriousness of the situation needed to read and listen to the words of NHS staff, and Covid-19 patients who had had “this very severe disease and are suffering from the long-term effects of it”. “This is the reality and that is the truth. So the advice would be listen, read, but stay at home. Protect yourself, protect your families.” Fenton added that there were “things we could do better” to reduce the number of infections, including greater compliance with mask wearing and social distancing when using public transport and shopping for essential goods. Police forces across the country have said they will enforce the nationwide restrictions more strictly. The Met police said Londoners “can expect officers to be more inquisitive as to why they see them out and about” to make sure they have a reasonable excuse for leaving their homes. Derbyshire police issued two women with £200 fines when they went for a walk on Wednesday at a remote spot about five miles from their homes, and described their actions as “clearly not in the spirit of the national effort” to reduce travel and the possible spread of coronavirus. The force has  since said  all fixed penalty notices issued during the latest national lockdown will be reviewed after it received clarification about coronavirus regulations.
Property developer funds pop-up gay bar as condition of planning permission:	A property developer has promised to pay £100,000 to fund a “pop-up LGBT+ bar” to give Londoners an inclusive place to meet during the demolition and redevelopment of a popular gay nightclub. The Joiners Arms in Hackney was an institution, attracting a host of famous names among its regulars, including Alexander McQueen, Rufus Wainwright and Sir Ian McKellen, before it was bought and closed by the developer Regal London in 2015. Regal said it recognised the pain and frustration the six-year delay in redeveloping the site had caused the LGBTQ+ community, and it was offering the money so that a new bar could open as soon as possible. It is believed to be the first time that a property developer has offered to pay the cost of setting up a temporary gay bar as a condition of securing planning permission. “It is very unusual,” said Steve Harrington, Regal’s planning director. “We have had a lot of workshops over Zoom with the  Friends of the Joiners Arms  and got to know them, and the importance of protecting the Joiners, and we want to do our part. We are fantastically proud of the outcome.” Tower Hamlets council, which had  previously ruled  that the development could only go ahead if it included an LGBTQ+ club for at least 25 years, said it welcomed Regal’s offer to pay for the set-up of the temporary venue. John Biggs, mayor of Tower Hamlets, said: “I’m pleased that through our innovative planning policies we were able to protect an LGBT+ space at the site of the Joiners Arms when Tower Hamlets council approved the application in 2018. “I’m now keen to see things progress on the site as soon as possible, and that means finding a viable scheme that develops the building, and delivers this LGBT+ venue so – as we recover from Covid-19 – Tower Hamlets is at the forefront of celebrating its diverse community and being a place people want to visit. In the meantime, we will work with the Greater London Authority to see if we can find a temporary home for the Friends of the Joiners Arms.’’ Tower Hamlets development planning committee will vote on the amended planning proposals on 14 January.  The plans  for the site also include a hotel, offices and nine flats. The developer had previously won permission for an office-led development. The £100,000 that Regal has committed to the temporary LGBT+ space takes the total the developer has pledged to the recreation of a new Joiners Arms venue to £238,000. It had already promised to contribute £138,000 to the fit-out of the new venue in the Hackney Road development. The new bar – which will have a licence to stay open until 4am at the weekend. just as the Joiners Arms had - will also be charged no rent for 18 months. Amy Roberts, of the Friends of the Joiners Arms, said: “We have always said that the best thing for the local and wider queer community, and existing residents, would be the provision of much-needed social housing and the re-opening of the Joiners Arms as a unique, wonky community-run queer pub. “If the development goes ahead, we need to ensure the queer community has a long-term replacement venue plus, meanwhile, a space to compensate for years of enforced closure.” John Sizzle, co-owner of nearby gay bar The Glory, said: “The protection of our queer spaces is an ongoing necessity. These venues, buildings and monuments combine to become our churches. “These are places where we congregate to love, laugh and cry. Places where we learn and grow into producing loving adults, and places where we impart our knowledge and pass on that important history. “The Friends of the Joiners Arms are devoted to ensuring that our collective history and our places of worship, our churches, are preserved for future generations to gain strength and wisdom from.” While the Joiners Arms had attracted a lot of well-known LGBTQ+ faces, its founder David Pollard said it was intended as a place for all “joyful sinners”, and it was his punters’ attitudes to life that made the place come alive. “We don’t want to know how important you are. Are you interesting to talk to? Are you a good shag? Can you dance? These are the questions we’re interested in as a pub,” Pollard told  i-D  magazine.
Parents, please don't take a school place just because you can:	I n March 2020, when we first went into lockdown, my school went overnight from over 200 pupils to having between three and 10 pupils. Having seen it coming way before the government – not that you needed the gift of prophecy – we were prepared with remote learning from the very next day. We were able to keep staff and pupils safe, and invite in the handful of pupils who we knew were more at risk, satisfied that this would work within our risk assessments. Today, the picture in my school and in those of many of my peers could not be more different. Today I have nearly a quarter of my pupils eligible for a place. All of them want it and more are still getting in touch. How has that picture changed so significantly in under 10 months with practically the same cohort of pupils? Who are these pupils? There is the core group, the ones we saw in the last lockdown, whose parents are health professionals, food distributors, social workers, bus drivers and children of those working in education. They know the drill and there is mutual respect between us communicated in nods at the end of the day. Then we have the parents who technically qualify for a place because one of them works in a key worker profession, but actually they and their partner were able to look after their child the last time. This time though, they’ve weighed up the personal cost of how difficult they found home schooling with the risks to their child. Then there are the vulnerable children. Last time, that was based on school knowledge because actually we know the children best. This time there is strict categorisation, which as always misses the nuances. Not every child who has a local authority care plan (known as an EHCP) needs a place – I know that many parents of special needs children find this deeply insulting, that their child is deemed vulnerable. Vulnerable from what? But now we have to encourage these families in and mark them in the registers as not attending. Therefore some come in. My greatest concern is the pupils who do not fit in the vulnerable category but absolutely should. Because the reality is, these are the ones without any agency looking out for them. The ones without social workers who truly need the stability of school. The ones who keep me and thousands of other teachers awake at night. Some may scoff at the idea of having 25% of our pupils in. Surely that would make it easier to socially distance. But a couple of problems have arisen. Firstly, we are now under a legal framework which entitles all the pupils who are at home learning to have a standard of remote learning equivalent to what they would get in school. And too right, of course they should. Though seriously, Gavin Williamson, I know Ofsted inspectors have bugger all to do at the moment, but telling parents to run to them when they don’t quite like something with their learning is a bit low when only a minute before you said you trusted teachers. Contrary to popular belief, it is impossible to be both in two places at once. Many parents demanded full days of live lessons. Thankfully, I have been able to persuade my community that this is not desirable or attainable for practical reasons, if anything, but I know other schools are ploughing on. Secondly, a third of my staff are off sick with Covid-19. I have no doubt they caught it from school in the last few days of term, which fittingly was the week my local authority was threatened with legal action for asking us to close due to case rates. I swear, Mr Williamson, if any of them have long-term health implications or, God forbid, die as a result, I will be taking you to court. And this really is the point: infection rates are alarmingly high. Parents have written to me about hospitalisations of themselves and family members. Our staff and community are experiencing this in a serious and sometimes deadly way. Our prime minister finally told us that schools were vectors for the infection. The only way to drive this down is to drive down attendance. So parents, just because you are eligible for a place doesn’t mean you should take it. The author is the head teacher of a state primary school in London
Maga mob's Capitol invasion makes Trump's assault on democracy literal:	The US Capitol, the seat of American democracy, has been stormed by a pro-Donald Trump mob, egged on by the president in a desperate and violent effort to overturn the results of the election. Minutes after the news spread that the vice-president had announced he would not do the president’s bidding and reverse Trump’s defeat to Joe Biden at the ballot box, hundreds of pro-Trump rioters broke down the barriers around the Capitol building, and surged forward. Footage from inside the building showed that some pro-Trump rioters had reached one of the doors to the Capitol and smashed out the glass. A group managed to make their way to the atrium of the Senate Rotunda, carrying Confederate flags. The Capitol police were outnumbered and seemed to melt away. One female rioter was shot and later died of her injuries, according to the DC police. Three other people experienced “medical emergencies” throughout the day and died. Explosive devices were found near the offices of the Democratic National Committee and the Republican National Committee. Several police officers were also injured. It was the most dramatic challenge to the US democratic system since the civil war and it forced the suspension of a joint session of Congress that had convened to certify the results of November’s presidential election. Members of Congress were told to put on gas masks after teargas was fired in the Rotunda of the US Capitol, and the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and other senators were led out, escorted by staff and police. A 6pm curfew was declared in the capital, and the Pentagon said about 1,100 DC national guard would be deployed to help support law enforcement agencies. And a few hundred miles away in Georgia, votes were being counted in runoff elections. Democrats Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff both won their races, giving Democrats control of the Senate for the opening of Joe Biden’s presidency in a unmistakable renunciation of Trump and Trumpism in the deep south. The crowds in Washington, however, had been told by their leader that the votes against him had been rigged, and told to march on the Capitol to “stand strong for the integrity of our elections” and to “save our democracy”. Trump told them to converge on Congress “peacefully and patriotically” but order broke down just minutes after he spoke. The mob, in Make America Great Again caps, rushed up the Capitol steps, forcing the police to withdraw, firing flash-bangs and paintballs from higher balconies in an effort to keep them at bay. The massed ranks of national guard and federal agencies who had driven peaceful Black Lives Matter protesters off the streets around the White House over the summer were nowhere to be seen. In the eyes of the rioters, the democratic procedures and traditions of which the US has thus far been so proud, had been transformed, by their leader’s insistent oratory, into the mere trappings of betrayal. As protesters took selfies inside the Senate chamber and offices, Trump tweeted “Remember, WE are the Party of Law & Order respect the Law and our great men and women in Blue.” But the outgoing president came under increasing pressure – from allies and foes – to condemn the violence. Joe Biden lamented the “assault on the rule of law” in Washington, a “citadel of liberty”. “The scenes of chaos at the Capitol do not reflect a true America, do not represent who we are,” the president-elect said. “What we’re seeing is a small number of extremists dedicated to lawlessness.” Biden said the violence at the Capitol “borders on sedition” and “must end now”. “I call on President Trump to go on national television now, to fulfill his oath and defend the constitution and demand an end to this siege,” Biden said. “It’s not a protest; it’s insurrection. The world is watching.” Trump’s vice-president called on the rioters to leave the Capitol immediately, going further than Trump who merely called for his supported to “remain peaceful”. In a tweet on Wednesday afternoon, Pence said, “This attack on our Capitol will not be tolerated and those involved will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.” Hours after his supporters had stormed the Capitol, Trump released a video telling them: “Go home, we love you, you’re very special,”. But he also used the video to repeat his baseless claims about the “fraudulent” vote which he lost. At the other end of the national mall, half an hour before the Capitol was besieged, the defeated president had painted a stark picture. Those Republicans who voted to upturn the election were the patriots, and the others were “weak” and “pathetic” allowing Democrats to destroy the country. Trump singled out his vice-president, Pence, who until Wednesday had been loyal to a fault. “Mike Pence is going to have to come through for us, and if he doesn’t, that will be a sad day for our country,” Trump yelled from a stage that had been set up a block from the White House, for a crowd that had gathered on the grassy Ellipse below the national monument. As the president was speaking, Pence was, for the first time, doing the opposite of what he was been told by his boss. He formally notified Congress that his role was a ceremonial one, to read out the election results, not to change them. Trump had promised his supporters he would accompany them on their walk to the Capitol, but instead drove in his motorcade the hundred metres back to the White House, from where he fired off a tweet disowning Pence who he alleged “didn’t have the courage” to protect the country and the constitution. The day had begun seemingly like any other American political carnival, with bright flags, exuberant costumes and vendors selling T-shirts and hotdogs. It was only with a closer look, that something it became apparent far more dystopian was at hand, with a seething potential for violence. “Fuck Your Feelings, Trump 2020,” was the message on the fastest-selling T-shirt. Some of the flags declared: “Fuck Biden”. The crowd that sprawled across the Ellipse was a mix of families and the elderly, men and women, young and old. Only about one in 10 was wearing camouflage gear, though that was more than the percentage wearing masks. A young couple, Kasey and Mike, were sitting under one of the ornamental cherry trees planted along the mall, having traveled down from Rhode Island to witness the climactic day. They spoke with the dreamy smiles of two people in love, sharing a moment in history, but their message was one of looming conflict. “People here are mad. They’ve watched so many people destroy our country like that. I don’t think they’re just gonna sit back any more,” Kasey said, convinced that a Biden win would lead to a bleak, socialist state. “I think Trump’s only option he really has left is to call military action into it because he has the right to do that.” 
Covid in the UK: why is it so bad now and when will cases decline?:	The UK is seeing record numbers of people testing positive for coronavirus, with more than 60,000 positive tests reported on three days this week. But mass testing was not available during the first wave, and even now testing is aimed at those with symptoms so does not capture all cases. Similarly, population surveys such as that from the Office for National Statistics only began in late spring. However, the latest ONS data shows about  one in 50 people  in the community in England had coronavirus in the most recent week: an alarmingly high figure. The situation in hospitals is perhaps easier to compare against the first wave, and the picture is bleak: both daily hospital admissions and the number of people in hospital with Covid have exceeded figures from the first wave, with more than  30,000 Covid patients now being treated in hospital  compared with a peak of 21,684 in April. NHS workers have reiterated that the situation  is worse today , with a growing number of hospitals cancelling even urgent operations and fears there could be a shortfall of more than 5,000 beds by 19 January. Daily reported deaths from Covid within 28 days of a positive test have not yet exceeded those of the first wave, in part because of the introduction of medications such as  dexamethasone , although deaths also lag infections and hospitalisations. But the death toll is climbing steeply, with a total of more than 100,000 deaths likely to be reached by the end of the month. The  UK variant  is certainly a big factor: experts say it is between 50% and 70% more transmissible than older variants.  “Given that the old variants declined over Christmas in all regions while the new variants rose, I think the new variant explains most of the increases seen. But it is very hard to definitively unpick the causes of increases in case numbers,” Prof Neil Ferguson told the Guardian. The time lag between infection and hospitalisation means Christmas mixing might be starting to be seen in other data: Prof Christina Pagel, a member of Independent Sage, said regions that were allowed to mix over Christmas – the north-west, north-east, Midlands and south-west – have experienced quite steep increases in admissions over the last few days. But, she said: “You can’t say for sure that it’s Christmas or the new strain, except of course that both together will compound the impact.” A winter surge  was certainly anticipated , and many called for tighter measures to be taken sooner at various points since the summer,  including scientists  on the Scientific Advisory Group on Emergencies (Sage). Whether a rise in cases could have been avoided even with a lockdown is another matter. During the UK lockdown in the spring the  R number fell to between 0.6 and 0.9  by the end of April, however  research , led by scientists at Imperial College London, largely based on data relating to the second England lockdown, has revealed the new variant has an R number0.4-0.8 larger than older variants, making it doubtful similar measures would lower the R number to below 1. One document from Sage dated to 22 December noted that: “It is not known whether measures with similar stringency and adherence as spring, with both primary and secondary schools closed, would be sufficient to bring R below 1 in the presence of the new variant.”  The latest data from the ONS survey does offer some hope, with models suggesting the rise in positivity rate for Covid is showing tentative signs of slowing in London and other regions that have been under tier 4 for restrictions for some weeks, however the ONS team urged caution. “The proportion of people testing positive for Covid-19 has continued to rise across all regions in recent weeks,” they said. “Caution should be taken in overinterpreting any small movements in the latest trend.” The number of people reported as testing positive fell on Thursday compared with earlier in the week. However, it is too soon to say that the peak in cases has been passed, not least as the high number of cases midweek could include some effect of delays over the festive period, while cases rose to more than 68,000 on Friday. There are also concerns that the national lockdown could take longer to slow the spread of cases than in March due to the variant, meaning it could take more than two weeks from the start of lockdown for the peak to be reached. Any peak that does occur would be seen several weeks later in hospitalisations and, subsequently, deaths.  The evidence here is mixed. While some doctors are reporting seeing more younger patients in hospital than in the first wave,  data from the intensive care national audit and research centre  suggests the characteristics of patients critically ill with Covid have not changed between the first and second waves. Over the course of the pandemic, the majority of those who have been hospitalised and died have been 65 years or older. However, analysis of  NHS  England data appears to show that those aged 64 or younger are making up a greater proportion of hospital admissions than in the first wave. According to the latest report, dated 31 December, the median age for those admitted to intensive care with Covid from 1 September was 62 years, compared with 60 years for those admitted up to 31 August, with 67% of the former group male, compared with 70% for the earlier cohort. Other characteristics are also similar, although the proportion of intensive care patients who are white has risen. The  arrival of vaccines  means a growing number of people, particularly those most vulnerable to Covid, will gain protection against the disease, with the first dose offering some protection within about 12 days. Last month Prof Jonathan Van-Tam told BBC News that the impact of vaccination could be dramatic. “If we can get through phase 1 [of the priority list] and it is a highly effective vaccine and there is very, very high uptake, then we could in theory take out 99% of hospitalisations and deaths related to Covid-19,” he said. However, so far only 1.3 million people in the UK have had at least a first dose of vaccine and the impact of vaccination will take several weeks to show up in the data, with the effects likely to be seen first in death figures, and later hospitalisation statistics. Prof Kamlesh Khunti, who sits on Sage and is also a member of the Independent Sage group of experts, warned that even with vaccination, masks, social distancing and other measures are likely to be needed for a long time. “It is months before we can starting thinking about stopping any of those,” he said. “We need to get 70-80% of the population immunised to control the spread of the virus,” Khunti said. But there are other positive developments:  further drugs are being discovered  that could help save the lives of the sickest Covid patients, while the approval of novel vaccine technologies means that even if new variants elude current Covid jabs, new vaccines can be developed relatively quickly. Additional reporting by Niamh McIntyre
Trump has lost Twitter, his biggest political megaphone. Now what?:	From his first executive tweet on the morning of inauguration day 2017 to his final tweet on Friday, announcing that he would not attend his successor’s inauguration, Donald Trump’s personal  Twitter  account has served as the president’s official platform. For four years, the @realDonaldTrump Twitter feed was both public square and personal dialogue, a place where he made policy announcements and taunted political enemies; threatened military reprisal and boasted about his TV ratings. But it was also, perhaps most dangerously, a place where he sought to bend reality to his will, unleashing a combustible, near-daily stream of misinformation, lies and outrage to his more than 87 million followers. After he was defeated by Joe Biden, Trump used his account to amplify conspiracy theories and lies about the election result. Twitter began placing warning labels on his claims. But the missives kept coming. On Wednesday, a mob of rioters loyal to the president stormed the US Capitol in a violent attempt to overturn the results of a presidential election he lost unambiguously. Following the deadly insurrection, Twitter locked Trump’s account for 12 hours and required him to delete a series of tweets it said were in violation of the platform’s policies. And on Friday, Twitter  permanently suspended  Trump’s account, citing the “risk of further incitement of violence”, indefinitely muting the president’s megaphone of choice. His banishment from Twitter is likely to further enrage the president at a moment when even his allies fear what  he may do in his final days .   The removal is also a symbolic censure of a president whose use of the platform to spread lies and sow discontent helped fuel his unlikely political rise and paved the way for his presidency’s dark end. With less than two weeks before he leaves office, Trump is facing growing calls for his removal. Trump tepidly appealed for calm, while praising the rioters in multiple tweets, including one in which he said their actions were “the things and events that happen when a sacred landslide election victory is so unceremoniously & viciously stripped away from great patriots who have been badly & unfairly treated for so long”. Facebook has banned Trump from its platform for at least two weeks, ensuring he would not have access to his account for the rest of his term. Other social networks have also taken action, leaving Trump with fewer and fewer mainstream channels from which to wage his political battles and command the news cycle. Trump’s use of Twitter posed an unprecedented challenge for journalists and White House staff – a not insignificant number of whom learned of their firing from the president’s Twitter feed. Trump used the platform to undermine factcheckers and shift the media’s attention from one extraordinary provocation to the next, first in 140 characters and later in 280. What began 12 years ago   with the stream-of-conscious musings of a reality TV star became the irrepressible voice of an American president. And there was alway a tweet for that. The suspension enraged Trump’s supporters and conservatives who have long accused social media platforms of liberal bias. Donald Trump  Jr, his eldest son, decried the decision and declared free speech dead in America. Arguing that Iran’s supreme leader and other “dictatorial regimes” were allowed to use the service, he wondered why his father would be denied access. “Mao would be proud,” he tweeted. The Republican senator Lindsey Graham, a longtime defender of the president who broke with Trump after the riots, called the decision a “serious mistake” and also made the comparison to the ayatollah. But the move was welcomed by Democrats and civil rights groups who have been pushing Twitter for years to take a harder line against the president, who has shared tweets from white nationalists, antisemites and other extremists. Color of Change, a racial justice organization that has been pushing tech executives to police Trump’s online behavior more aggressively, launched a petition shortly after chaos erupted on Capitol Hill to remove Trump from Twitter. “Twitter has been Trump’s largest megaphone – his vehicle to reach the public, spread lies and hate and incite violence,” Rashad Robinson, the group’s president, tweeted after Twitter’s announcement. “This overdue but crucial step couldn’t have happened without the work of grassroots voices, Twitter employees, elected leaders and more.” Without access to his Twitter account, which has been emptied of his many thousands of tweets, Trump may soon find it more difficult to remain a dominant political force in his post-presidency. In a sign of his reliance on the platform, Trump attempted to keep tweeting on Friday from the @POTUS account and the @TeamTrump account. The tweets were removed almost immediately, and the @TeamTrump account was also suspended. In a White House statement, written partially in all-caps as Trump was prone to tweet, he was defiant. “I predicted this would happen,” the president said, teasing a “big announcement soon” and “the possibilities of building out our own platform in the near future.” “STAY TUNED!” he added. Even as many celebrate Trump’s removal from Twitter after 1,450 days of outrage, attacks and fearmongering, they also warn that it does little to hobble the online web of lies and misinformation that he amplified from the Oval Office. Senator Mark Warner, the incoming chair of the Senate intelligence committee, applauded Twitter’s decision as an “overdue step” but said on the platform that the problem of misinformation and extremism online was “much bigger than one person”. “It’s about an entire ecosystem that allows misinformation and hate to spread and fester unchecked,” he wrote.
Is 'hysterical' market speculation pushing us towards another crash?:	I nsurrections are not usually seen by investors as buy signals. Yet even as rioters  stormed the seat of US legislative government  last week, stock market indices hit new highs in New York, adding another chapter to 12 months of apparent defiance of economic gravity. Wall Street, measured by the benchmark S&P 500, was not alone in starting 2021 with a bang. London’s FTSE 100 jumped by more than 6% in the first week of the year as investors took in a heady cocktail of a President Joe Biden ready and  able to spend money , cheap borrowing costs, and the hopes that vaccines will end the coronavirus lockdowns. Yet amid the exuberance a serious concern looms: are we on the cusp of another colossal crash? Some veteran investors believe so. Jeremy Grantham, the British co-founder of the US investment firm GMO, gave some of his fellow investors pause last week when he described “ a fully fledged epic bubble ” that has grown out of the recovery from the financial crisis of 2008-09. “Featuring extreme overvaluation, explosive price increases, frenzied issuance, and hysterically speculative investor behaviour, I believe this event will be recorded as one of the great bubbles of financial history,” he wrote in a  letter to investors . Analysts at Bank of America joined him last Friday, warning of “frothy prices, greedy positioning” and telling their clients to sell equities. There is a growing divide in the investment world: on the one side are believers that the recovery from the pandemic will add extra impetus to stock markets; on the other are those who think that bubbles are inflating to bursting point. There are relatively few investors who do not admit to the existence of speculative bubbles in some parts of the financial markets. The mania for bitcoin, the cryptocurrency, appeared to have dissipated in December 2017, when prices  fell from just short of $20,000  to dip below $4,000 in 2019. But enthusiasm for bitcoin is back: after  passing the $20,000  mark in December, its price has doubled and hit highs near $42,000 last Friday. Other contenders for bubble status are Tesla and fellow electric car pioneer rivals such as Nikola and China’s Nio, whose shares have surged in value as investors scramble to stake claims in the green-transition gold rush. The spectacular tenfold increase in Tesla’s market value since the start of 2020 made chief executive  Elon Musk the world’s richest person last week . The carmaker is worth more than the next seven most valuable legacy carmakers combined, despite making a fraction of their profits. Yet bitcoin and Tesla have by no means been the only beneficiaries. While 2020 for most of us will be remembered as the year we were confined to our homes, for financial markets it was a year in which prices escaped their constraints. Paul Tudor Jones, a billionaire hedge fund manager, last month pointed out that more companies were priced at more than 100 times their earnings than at any other point in history – and about 50% more than during the dotcom bubble of the early 2000s. Guy Monson, chief investment officer at Sarasin & Partners, a London-based investment firm, said 2020 was marked by “near universal asset-price inflation”, a direct consequence of central banks injecting trillions of dollars into the economy by buying government bonds through a process known as quantitative easing (QE). The virus effectively caused a “no-fault downturn”, said Monson, meaning there was little political pushback against bailouts from government and central banks.  Unlike overextended bankers  in the banking crisis of 2008-09, it was difficult to blame pub owners or hairdressers for a government order to shut up shop. Central bank asset purchases under QE ran at roughly three times the rate of the financial crisis at the height of the pandemic, Monson added. The main question keeping investors awake at night is whether Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell and counterparts such as the European Central Bank’s Christine Lagarde or the Bank of England’s Andrew Bailey will ever be able to raise interest rates to anything like their pre-2008 levels. Even a hint that the Fed might try to reduce the flow of stimulus has been enough to depress markets in the past, notably during the “taper tantrum” of 2013. The jump in borrowing costs was enough to persuade central bankers that taking away support would cause painful stock market drops. Some argue that, by certain yardsticks, market valuations are not quite as over-inflated. The S&P 500 is worth about 22 times predicted earnings for 2021, higher than the long-term average of about 16, but lower than the 30 hit before the dotcom bubble burst, according to Kiran Ganesh, a multi-asset strategist at UBS Global Wealth Management. “This is an environment to be pro-risk,” he said, pointing to cyclical companies that struggled during the early stages of the pandemic, such as big industrial manufacturers, banks and utilities companies. However, he warned against “Fomo” – the bubble-stoking fear of missing out – drawing people towards companies that had already seen their values rocket. Ganesh added that there was little sign central banks had the desire or the ability to raise interest rates and bond yields, which move inversely to prices, above historically low levels, providing the conditions for continued stock market gains. There were particular opportunities for UK companies to catch up with the US, he added, in part because of a Brexit deal that reduced uncertainty, albeit at the  cost of raising other trade barriers . But others believe central bankers’ efforts to stave off financial collapse have stored up problems for the future, and already low interest rates mean they will have little room for manoeuvre if inflation rises or – perhaps more likely – growth does not meet investors’ great expectations. Central banks were “already vastly overextended” before the pandemic, said Sven Henrich, founder of market analysts NorthmanTrader. Central bankers knew their policies were feeding a stock market bubble with the side effect of fuelling inequality between already wealthy shareholders and those who could not take part in the equity boom, he argued. However, their inability to retreat without causing panic would cause problems if they lost control, he said. “The concern I have is they have created a massive asset bubble and price distortion,” Henrich said. “They have created this monster that they need to keep feeding.”
Twisted brilliance: Patricia Highsmith at 100:	T here has always been something fundamentally difficult about  Patricia Highsmith . And not difficult   in the way that most people mean it: ironic, quirky, feminist (“Well-behaved women rarely make history”, and so on). I mean truly, legitimately difficult; a well of darkness with no discernible bottom. Which is not to say that she wasn’t, in her own way, endearing. She was, after all, a genius, a bona fide eccentric. She loved animals, particularly snails, which she kept by the hundred as pets and took to parties clinging to a leaf of lettuce in her handbag. Writer and critic  Terry Castle  describes how she once “smuggled her cherished pet snails through French customs by hiding six or eight of them under each bosom”. She was famous for her wit and wicked sense of humour, and she wrote compellingly of loneliness and empathetically about disempowered housewives and children. And yet she was a hateful person. She was shockingly, unrepentantly racist and antisemitic, even with respect to the era in which she lived. She believed gay people were essentially unfaithful and promiscuous and incapable of true sexual passion; she had a nasty habit of murdering versions of her ex-lovers in her fiction; she believed menstruating women should not be permitted in libraries. This mix of misogyny and homophobia coming from a gay woman might seem surprising; the truth was, while she didn’t like other people, she didn’t much like herself, either. The Price of Salt  (later reissued as  Carol )   –  the lesbian love story Highsmith published under the pen name Claire Morgan in 1952 – is curiously absent of these pessimisms. There are no violent crimes, no sociopathic protagonists. Even though her reasons for distancing herself via a pseudonym have nothing to do with this fact – she had a career to worry about, and she didn’t want to be “labelled a lesbian-book writer” – it feels correct that she might also not want herself associated with such a fundamentally optimistic book. Because it was the opposite – violence, torment, obsession, all bubbling beneath a cool veneer – that was the signature of her fiction. Here, now, at the centenary of her birth – her canonisation cemented, her complete collected diaries on the verge of publication – readers grapple with this darkness. What does it mean to love the work of an author Castle describes as the “doyenne of the psychological suspense novel, depressive homosexual, mean drunk, and one of the greatest, darkest American storytellers since Poe?” Perhaps they recognise that you don’t come to  Patricia Highsmith  for goodness or light or comfort. You come to her for uncanny observations about human depravity; you come to her because you’ve forgotten the sour taste of fear. Highsmith is probably best known for her novels  The Talented Mr Ripley   and  Strangers on a Train .  And yet short stories, which she was writing at the age of 15, were her foundation as well as her bread and butter. At the time of her death, she had published no fewer than seven collections, and there was ample material for a volume of uncollected stories to be published posthumously. “Short stories are absolutely essential to me, like poetry: I write a lot of both,” she told one   interviewer. “Only a fraction of the stories I have written ever appeared in print.” (This prodigious output is at least partially a result of her surfeit of ideas, which occurred to her, she said, “as frequently as rats have orgasms”.) In his introduction to her collection  Eleven , Graham Greene talks about the way in which Highsmith adapts to the short story: “She is after the quick kill rather than the slow encirclement of the reader, and how admirably and with what field-craft she hunts us down.” In her prickly, misanthropic stories, her obsession with obsession is on display, big feelings and bad habits redirected to gruesome ends. Sometimes it plays out with her telltale violence. In “The Button”, a father’s disappointment in his life boils over into murder; in “The Snail-Watcher”, her beloved pets become an instrument of body horror and monstrosity. And elsewhere – as with the protagonists of “Not This Life, Maybe the Next” and “The Romantic” – her characters are besieged by a quiet misery; they have to learn to accept, if not prefer, their own company. (Even Highsmith’s love of the third person seems tinged by self-loathing. “I have bogged down twice in first-person-singular books, so emphatically that I abandoned any idea of writing the books,” she wrote in  Plotting and Writing Suspense Fiction . “I don’t know what was the matter, except that I got sick and tired of writing the pronoun ‘I’, and I was plagued with an idiotic feeling that the person telling the story was sitting at a desk writing it. Fatal!”) Rereading Highsmith’s work, I was struck by how much she reminded me of  Shirley Jackson . Both wrote in a clean and economical style that often gave way to breathtaking flourishes; both wrote in genres (suspense, horror) in which their gender was a liability. Both wrote characters liberated by the deaths of their difficult mothers; both had cartoonishly challenging relationships with the same. (Having attempted to abort Patricia by drinking turpentine, Mary Highsmith would joke that her daughter loved the smell. She was “demanding, seductive, [and] catastrophically unloving,” according to Castle . ) Loneliness was a shared theme; menace, claustrophobia. But Jackson’s protagonists were predominantly women; Highsmith, on the other hand, preferred the voices of men. With Jackson, you get the sense that she is twitching the curtain for you, the reader, allowing you to see something she can see. With Highsmith, there is a distinct feeling of being chased toward something near and terrible, and not being able to look anywhere but where she wants you to look. * In the last few years, the unbearable nearness of sex and death has blossomed into its own queer meme: “I would let Rachel Weisz run me over with a car.” “I want Sandra Oh to throw me off a building.” “Please, Cate Blanchett, step on my throat.”  Jia Tolentino  calls this “desiring a sensation strong enough to silence itself”, and with Highsmith this challenge is more literal than most. To read her is to access her desires, her darkness, her difficulties; her loneliness and self-loathing and terrible mother and love of snails. It feels good to be hunted. If you read the genres of suspense – crime and mystery and horror in its many iterations – you know the sensation of allowing a master of her craft to pursue you through a maze; the tingly energy of the chase, the eroticism of encountering the end of the line. “Murder,” Highsmith wrote in her diary in 1950, “is a kind of making love, a kind of possessing.” When you read one of Highsmith’s stories, you’ve given her permission to follow you, catch you, take you apart. Get ready to run. •  Under a Dark Angel’s Eye: The Selected Stories of Patricia Highsmith  is published by Virago (RRP £20) on  14 January . To order a copy go to  guardianbookshop.com . Delivery charges may apply.
Indigenous voice to parliament to have no veto power under interim plans:	The federal government will be obliged to consult the Indigenous voice to parliament when crafting laws on race, native title and racial discrimination that impact upon Aboriginal Australians. But the body will have no power to overturn policy or prevent laws coming into force, according to interim proposals. The  Indigenous Australians  minister, Ken Wyatt, on Saturday launched a second stage of Indigenous voice co-design meetings, saying the consultative process would run for four months, with a final report expected between June and August. The interim report, meanwhile, was published on Saturday, having been handed to Wyatt in late October. Along with the obligation to consult the body on race laws, parliament would also be expected to seek its advice on issues broadly relevant to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. The national Indigenous voice would be made up of either 16 or 18 members, either directly elected or drawn from regional and local bodies. Those local voice bodies will also inform the national voice. The report makes clear the national Indigenous voice will not deliver government programs, provide mediation between Indigenous organisations or serve as a clearing house for research activity. Wyatt said more consultation with Indigenous communities was crucial and the government had not yet decided on its preferred approach. “I want to ensure the voices of all 800,000 Indigenous Australians can be heard ... the more people that provide their feedback, the greater chance we have to refine the best possible options and set up structures that enjoy long-term success,” he said in a statement. But federal Labor said many Indigenous people would be disappointed the voice won’t be added to the Australian constitution, and said it was difficult to foresee progress on the issue before the next election. The party said it remains committed to the full Uluru Statement, including a constitutionally enshrined voice, a committee to oversee the process of mediation and treaty-making and a “truth-telling” process. “A voice must be able to provide full and frank advice. It must be secure and it should not be subject to the whims of the government of the day ... this report fails in that context,” a group of Labor MPs led by the party’s Indigenous spokeswoman,  Linda Burney , said in a statement. Three working groups on the issue – taking in 52 members – have met more than 70 times since talks began on the voice in October 2019. The government selected its own advisers, Indigenous and non-Indigenous, three separate committees and a senior advisory group. Terms of reference also imposed limits on what participants could discuss. The federal government has never supported a constitutionally enshrined Indigenous voice and Wyatt in November warned a referendum on its addition to the constitution could fail, destroying the entire movement.
Covid livid: Canadian fury at leaders' holidays amid other people's misery:	Across  Canada , December was a month of cancelled gatherings with friends and family and holidays spent alone. Vacations to escape snow and frozen rain were put on hold as Covid-19 cases surged again. The message across the country had been clear: a shared sense of solidarity and sacrifice was necessary to fight the coronavirus. But over the last two weeks, the country has been convulsed by fury and  disbelief  as more than a dozen politicians, political aides and senior public health figures have admitted to hopping on a plane for tropical vacations over the winter holiday. “It’s incredibly insulting to frontline workers, to people grieving the loss of loved ones and to those not able to see their families – whether they’re in hospital or not,” said one ICU nurse in the province of Alberta. “It’s tone-deaf to those who have lost their jobs, to businesses or those who are struggling to put food on their table.” While the outrage is unlikely to bring down a federal or provincial government, the outbreak of anger speaks to a growing frustration with the country’s political leadership, say experts. “The public is livid. A lot of them just see blatant hypocrisy and find it morally reprehensible,” said Nelson Wiseman, a professor of political science at the University of Toronto. “It feeds cynicism and lowers public trust – not just in politicians, but in institutions.” The scandal began last week, when it emerged that Ontario’s then provincial finance minister, Rod Phillips, had not only traded the grey skies of Ajax, Ontario, for the white sand beaches of St Bart’s but also posted messages on social media apparently  crafted to conceal  his whereabouts. In a  holiday greeting video  posted when he was already in the Caribbean, Philips sat by a roaring fire, sipping eggnog as he thanked his constituents for their “sacrifice”. Amid a swift backlash Phillips  returned to Ontario and resigned . But fresh revelations that politicians across the political spectrum had taken ill-advised vacations kept coming. In Saskatchewan, the provincial minister of highways said his trip  to California  was essential to finalize a real-estate transaction, although his house wasn’t even listed when he travelled. The Conservative federal senator Don Pletts  posted a video  acknowledging the pandemic “has forced us to change some of those traditions, since we cannot travel and gather as we normally would”. Days later, he went on holiday to Mexico. And in Alberta – the province with the  one of the worst rates  of case growth – eight provincial leaders and staffers  admitted to travelling abroad . The province’s municipal affairs minister, Tracy Allard – a key figure in the rollout of Covid-19 vaccines – apologised for taking a family trip to Hawaii despite her government’s own recommendations against travel. She and four others either resigned or were stripped of their legislative duties this week. Justin Trudeau acknowledged that officials had disregarded the very advice they had given to the public. Two of his parliamentary secretaries stepped down after travelling outside of the country for family reasons. “All Canadians were so disappointed to see so many examples of folks who should have known better doing things that put us all at risk,” said the prime minister. But for some communities, the expressions of contrition have not gone far enough. In the town of Slave Lake, Alberta, the mayor and six city councillors have called on their regional assembly representative, Pat Rehn, to resign after he posted a Christmas message from Mexico. “It is no secret the people of this Region have lost faith in your ability to do your job,” the group  said a letter  to Rehn. Even health officials have been caught in the scandal. This week, both the  CEO of an Ontario hospital  and  the head  of a university’s school of public health admitted they travelled to sunny destinations. “There was clearly no political calculation behind this – because they didn’t think they’d been caught,” said Wiseman. In a country where winter-like weather can last for nearly six months, the scofflaws’ tropical destinations twisted the knife for many Canadians. “We are a winter people, but we feel better when there is no winter,” said David Phillips, senior climatologist at Environment Canada “These [politicians] were going for the layered down – not layered up – look, while the average person is stuck at home.” The scandals have elicited near-universal condemnation from the pandemic-weary public, but they have been particularly hurtful for healthcare workers especially those in the hardest-hit provinces. “It’s infuriating to have [politicians] hide behind misleading Christmas messages that seem to demonstrate solidarity with hardworking people when in actuality they are untroubled by their unethical and dangerous behaviour,” said the ICU nurse in Alberta,  which has some of the highest infection rates in the country . “We expect more and deserve better respect than this.” Another nurse in the province said news of trips came as morale in the hospitals reached rock bottom after months of “suffering and death”. “We have been disappointed with such frequency that this feels like exactly what we would expect from our leadership,” she said. “Their practice of personal exceptionalism is honestly just a slap in the face, but we’re too busy trying to keep people alive to engage.”
Fears of 'twindemic' recede as US influenza rates stay low:	As Covid-19 continues to surge in the US, with a record number of more than 4,000 virus  deaths  on Friday, some good news has come from data about the flu. During a typical flu season, the number of people getting the flu would just be starting to rise, with the peak typically coming in February. Yet so far, only 0.2% of 400,000 swabs for the flu have been positive, according to  data  from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. During the same time last year, the positivity  rate  was 13%. With hospitals across the country near or at capacity with Covid-19 patients – about 132,000 people are currently  hospitalized  with Covid – flu’s minimal presence is a blessing. At least 38 million Americans had the virus during the 2019-20 season. While the flu is less deadly than Covid-19, it has the potential to strain the healthcare system during a bad year.  Last year , 400,000 people were hospitalized with the flu and 22,000 died from it. “Covid is causing an incredible stress on the healthcare system in many parts of the country,” said Dr William Schaffner, a professor of preventive medicine and infectious diseases at Vanderbilt University. “Even if we had a mild to average [flu] season, we would all be swamped at the moment.” Instead, “we’re having, to date, a profoundly mild influenza season,” Schaffner said. Multiple factors have played a role in dampening the flu this season. The virus usually makes its way to the northern hemisphere after spreading in the southern hemisphere, which experiences its flu season from June to August. But the 2020 flu season in the south was virtually  non-existent . Public health experts believed that measures in the southern hemisphere to prevent the spread of Covid-19 also worked to stop the spread of the flu. Though the flu is also a respiratory virus, it is not as transmissible as Covid-19, so mask-wearing and social distancing are more effective at disrupting flu spread than the spread of Covid-19. The low number of cases, paired with the decrease in travel between the northern and southern hemisphere, boded well for the flu season in the north. Still, Americans were  urged  to get the flu vaccine to decrease the chances of a feared “twindemic” of flu and Covid-19. More than 192m doses of the flu vaccine were distributed throughout the US by the end of December, according to the CDC, the highest number of doses distributed in a single flu season. It appears the bulk of those doses have been used. More adults in the US got the vaccine this season compared with years past, according to the  CDC . About 53% of adults have received the flu vaccines. Around the same time last year, 42% of adults had been vaccinated while 48% were vaccinated by the end of the last flu season. Schaffner said schools undertaking measures to prevent the spread of Covid-19 – extensive cleaning, masks and social distancing and holding classes virtually – probably also played a key role in stopping the flu’s spread. Children shed the flu virus more than adults do and for longer periods of time, making it easy to spread to family members and teachers who can spread it to other adults. “Children have been much more isolated, so this distribution mechanism has been effectively shut down,” he said. While there is much to celebrate about the low flu numbers, the US is not out of the woods yet: there is still a chance the virus could see a surge, especially since millions of Americans  traveled  over the holidays. But Schaffner said there was cautious optimism that the US had avoided the worst of a “twindemic”. “We continue to be very alert to that possibility, but so far, I think we’re on a record-setting pace for a low flu season.”
‘You've got to stay silly’: secrets of joy from the over-70s:	Irene Lewington, 92,  London When my husband died in 2001, it took time to find my feet again: years of caring for him had taken a toll. One day I woke up and thought, “Right, now it’s my time”: you’ve got to make the most of the time you have left. I did a computer course, tried skydiving, then gave drag racing a go. My sixtysomething son and I drive up to the courses together, then he jumps out and I take the wheel. I get such a buzz from it; I’m never happy if I cross the line at under 100mph. Nothing has gone wrong so far. My children are pensioners themselves; they don’t need me the way they used to. I’ve no regrets about raising our family and working hard to support them – but that job is done now. If I dropped dead tomorrow, it wouldn’t change the world, so I may as well enjoy myself. While you’re still breathing, just get on with it and have some fun. I’ve still got swimming with sharks at the London Aquarium to arrange. Jeni Coombs, 73, Bognor Regis I’ve been volunteering at the Age UK gym since I moved here a few years back, so didn’t think much of being asked to help oversee some new classes. When I was told they were pole fitness and burlesque lessons, I couldn’t wait. I’d never done anything like it, but I threw myself in at the deep end. I’ve been dressed as a nun, dancing on a pole on our Sister Act float at the Bognor carnival, and done a saucy festive chair dance to Santa Baby in cute velvet shorts. For most of my life I would have been too embarrassed – worried what people might think of me. That, I’ve realised, doesn’t matter. If someone isn’t pleased you’re enjoying yourself, then that’s their problem, not yours. There’s nothing like feeling sexy to keep you young. My kids don’t say much about it, but honestly? It’s none of their business.  Kevan Gee, 75, Rugeley The kids were worried about us at the start of lockdown, with all the talk of the over-70s being vulnerable. I sent them some videos, the first of me jumping on the sofa like a toddler; I was decorating the house one day, so I put on silly clothes and danced around with my paintbrush to  Billy Joel’s Uptown Girl , as my wife jiggled around with a feather duster. I worked as a supervisor at a power station for many years: humour kept the team happy on good days and stopped anyone getting dejected when critical incidents and mistakes occurred. A lighthearted approach instead of iron fist discipline keeps everyone smiling and on side. You’ve got to stay childish and silly; once you lose that, you settle into an austere and miserable old age. And it’s not only about keeping yourself happy, but the people around you, too. Janie Booth, 79, London I was on the train home a few years ago, returning from playing a small part in an episode of Doctors. I got talking to a wealthy-looking man in his 50s. He looked miserable, and asked why I was grinning. I said how fabulous my day at work had been. He told me he’d wanted to be a weatherman but never followed up on it because he wanted a big house with all the trimmings. I didn’t want to upset him by asking about his job, but he was as rich as anything. He hated all the jobs he’d ever done. “Darling,” I said, “you’ve done it all wrong.” I have been an actor for 63 years and I’m very good at it. I’ve done plenty of television, films and theatre: I love playing parts of insulting brevity wherever they come. Of course, if international stardom had come knocking I’d have loved it, but I do what I do because it’s fun. I took three years out in my 50s to learn how to restore furniture because I fancied it, then went straight back to acting; just follow what you feel in your heart. John Starbrook, 90, Windsor My wife laughed at me in 1983 when I told her I was going up to London to register for the marathon. I’d never considered running before, but heard on the radio that the deadline was that afternoon, and on a whim thought, why not? It felt like such an achievement when I crossed the finish line, but I was exhausted and swore I’d never do it again. To this day, I’ve completed 32 London marathons, and 52 in total. I was the oldest person competing last time. If you try something and fail, it’s still better than not trying. I never thought I’d finish my first marathon, and could have not bothered to take the punt. Jumping in head-first set me on a course for the rest of my life. Now I ask people what their dreams are, and keep them motivated. My greatest pleasure is twisting the arms of people who think something like running or swimming isn’t for them, and then seeing them finish their first triathlon with a massive smile. I don’t want people to look at me and think I’m impressive. Just see what I do and think, well, if that old fella can do it, I can, too. David Cook, 79, Gloucestershire I had a strange childhood: my father was a banker in Australia and our family was travelling by boat to his new posting when we were captured by the Germans and taken to Japan. My mother, father, older sister and I were held as prisoners of war until 1945. My challenge was to face that, and find a future that was better. I came to faith in my late teens. As a clergyman, I’ve seen every form of suffering. I could easily have become an atheist: I’ve dealt with everything from suicides to car accidents, cancer, divorce and murder. I’ve learned that it’s how you face these things, then learn from them, that counts. Don’t avoid people who are suffering; reach out to them, take their pain and enter into it. Listen, so you feel it yourself, then, with their permission, offer guidance: don’t bury or deny suffering, embrace it; its power will quickly be diminished and you’ll grow from it when you do. Make sure they are surrounded by loved ones to support them, whether they’re weeping, consumed by anger or searching for joy. Remember, these feelings won’t dissipate quickly – make sure they know you’re in with them for the long haul. Of course, I’d tell them the church is here, too. Hazel Mason, 71, London I was aware of climate change before I joined  Extinction Rebellion , but I’m no politician or scientist; I just assumed that at some point powerful people would take the lead. But when I heard on the radio that Donald Trump was pulling out of the Paris climate agreement, it became obvious to me we couldn’t leave it to them. I felt deeply that I had to do something: if I didn’t, I’d be negligent. When I look at my grandchildren, I try to imagine their futures. I won’t be here in a few decades to help them, so I asked myself: what can I do with the years I have? That’s when I founded the Extinction Rebellion grandparents’ group: I realised it’s never too late to stand up and be counted. I started off running information stalls and family activities at festivals; since then I’ve protested and been arrested, too.
Government breaks promise to maintain ban on bee-harming pesticide:	A pesticide believed to kill bees has been authorised for use in  England  despite an EU-wide ban two years ago and an explicit government pledge to keep the restrictions. Following lobbying from the National Farmers’ Union (NFU) and British Sugar, a product containing the neonicotinoid thiamethoxam was sanctioned for emergency use on sugar beet seeds this year because of the threat posed by a virus. Conservationists have described the decision as regressive and called for safeguards to prevent the pollution of rivers with rainwater containing the chemical at a time when British insects are  in serious decline . The decision by 11 countries to allow emergency use of the product comes amid a growing awareness of the harmful role played by refined sugar in the development of long-term health problems. Matt Shardlow, the chief executive of the invertebrate conservation group Buglife, said it was an “environmentally regressive” decision that would destroy wildflowers and add to an “onslaught” on insects. “In addition, no action is proposed to prevent the pollution of rivers with insecticides applied to sugar beet,” he said. “Nothing has changed scientifically since the decision to ban neonics from use on sugar beet in 2018. They are still going to harm the environment.” Michael Sly, the chairman of the NFU sugar board, said he was relieved the application had been granted and that the sector was working to find long-term solutions to virus yellows disease. “Any treatment will be used in a limited and controlled way on sugar beet, a non-flowering crop, and only when the scientific threshold has been independently judged to have been met,” he said. “Virus yellows disease is having an unprecedented impact on Britain’s sugar beet crop, with some growers experiencing yield losses of up to 80%, and this authorisation is desperately needed to fight this disease. It will be crucial in ensuring that Britain’s sugar beet growers continue to have viable farm businesses.” The EU  agreed to a ban  on all outdoor uses of thiamethoxam in 2018 to protect bees. When the UK pledged to back the ban, Michael Gove, then the environment secretary,  said : “The weight of evidence now shows the risks neonicotinoids pose to our environment, particularly to the bees and other pollinators which play such a key part in our £100bn food industry, is greater than previously understood … We cannot afford to put our pollinator populations at risk.” He also  wrote in the Guardian : “Unless the evidence base changes again, the government will keep these restrictions in place after we have left the EU.” The UK, however, has now joined EU countries including Belgium, Denmark and Spain in signing emergency authorisations for its use, according to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra). A similar emergency application for England in 2018 was refused after government pesticide advisers said it would “cause unacceptable effects to bees in flowering crops and flowering plants in field margins”. It added that it would harm “birds and mammals eating seedlings from treated seed and birds consuming pelleted seed” and risked “adversely impacting populations of aquatic insects”. Scientists have observed significant declines in some British bee species since 2007, coinciding with the introduction of thiamethoxam, which was previously widely used. Studies suggest that it weakens bees’ immune systems, harms the development of baby bees’ brains and can leave them unable to fly. Another study has found honey samples being contaminated  by neonicotinoids . The proposed use of the pesticide to protect beet crops in the east of England in 2018 was estimated by the government to be worth about £18m. Yields from 2020 are forecast to be down by as much as 25% on previous years, Defra said. The pesticide, sold by the Chinese-owned agrochemical company Syngenta, is advertised as increasing crop yields by 13%. A Defra spokesperson said: “Emergency authorisations for pesticides are only granted in exceptional circumstances where diseases or pests cannot be controlled by any other reasonable means. Emergency authorisations are used by countries across Europe. “Pesticides can only be used where we judge there to be no harm to human health and animal health, and no unacceptable risks to the environment. The temporary use of this product is strictly limited to a non-flowering crop and will be tightly controlled to minimise any potential risk to pollinators.” In the final line of its background statement, Defra added: “Protecting pollinators is a priority for this government.”
Firms halt deliveries from UK to EU over Brexit border problems:	A growing number of retailers and courier firms are suspending or cutting back deliveries into the EU as companies grapple with new border controls as well as import taxes. On Friday DPD, the international delivery giant, said it was “pausing” its road service from the UK into  Europe , including the Republic of Ireland. Separately, Marks & Spencer said it was concerned that a third of the products in its Irish food halls, including Percy Pig sweets, would now be subject to import tariffs. Such taxes could spell higher prices for shoppers. DPD said new border procedures, including additional customs paperwork, needed for parcels destined for Europe were putting extra pressure on turnaround and transit times. The company said it was returning one-fifth of parcels to the sender because they had incorrect or incomplete data attached. It also blamed delays and congestion at UK ports for its decision, as well as more rigid requirements for Channel crossings. The firm said it hoped to restart the service on Wednesday. The Cabinet Office minister, Michael Gove, said he expected there to be “significant additional disruption” at UK borders as a result of  Brexit  customs changes in the coming weeks. Speaking to broadcasters, he said: “So far disruption at the border hasn’t been too profound but it is the case that in the weeks ahead we expect that there will be significant additional disruption, particularly on the Dover-Calais route. It is our responsibility in government to make sure that business is as ready as possible, and hauliers and traders have already done a lot but we have to redouble our efforts to communicate the precise paperwork that is required in order to make sure that trade can flow freely.” Although the government sealed a  “tariff-free” trade deal  on Christmas Eve, it has emerged that food and clothing products that do not qualify as made in Britain could be hit with levies. Under the agreement, if more than 40% of the pre-finished value of a UK firm’s product was not British, it would attract tariffs. Boris Johnson was said to have swerved the topic of Brexit impact in a call with more than 200 business leaders earlier this week.  “It was a meaningless call, it was all mottoes – we are going to build back business better, build back business greener – and a few patsy questions about how much better it would be, nothing about the realities of Brexit and Covid hitting us all hard,” said one business leader. The department store chains Debenhams and John Lewis, which recently closed its international business, are among the big names no longer serving the Irish market. Fortnum & Mason, the famous London department store, has also temporarily ceased shipping to  Northern Ireland  and EU countries. The bookseller Waterstones has also suspended sales to customers in EU countries, as has the fashion chain Jigsaw. Retailers have been hit by the cost of customs paperwork that applies to all imports and exports, including goods moving from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. M&S has temporarily cut nearly 400 products from the food and drink aisles of its 20 stores in Northern Ireland. Sainsbury’s has made a similar move and filled the gaps on its shelves with products from Spar shops. The moves are designed to simplify the business and so avoid the delays at the border amid reports of retailers having trucks turned back. The reduction of M&S’s range equates to about 5% of the 6,500 products usually sold in M&S food halls and includes popular ready-meals such as lasagne and beef bourguignon, as well as takeaway salads and some essential lines such as bread, sugar and teabags. A spokesperson for M&S said it had served customers in Northern Ireland for over 50 years and its priority was to provide the “same choice … our loyal customers have always enjoyed”. Its stores had been receiving regular deliveries this week but the changes came as it moved over to new processes, he said. M&S has also warned that more than 2,000 of its food products,  including Percy Pigs , could attract new import taxes when re-exported to its stores in EU countries such as Ireland and France. The new “rules of origin” regulations dictate whether tariffs must be paid based on where a product’s ingredients come from and where it has been manufactured. The M&S chief executive, Steve Rowe, said: “Tariff-free does not feel like tariff-free when you read the fine print. For big businesses there will be time-consuming workarounds but for a lot of others this means paying tariffs or rebasing into the EU.” Tesco said it had experienced short delays moving goods into Northern Ireland but that it had a “good supply of products coming into Northern Ireland”. It added: “There has been a short delay on certain products but we’re working with suppliers to get these back on the shelves as quickly as possible and direct customers to alternatives where we can.” Tesco said it was discussing the rules of origin regulations with HMRC and Irish Revenue and hoped “to find a satisfactory resolution as quickly as possible”. The British Retail Consortium said: “At least 50 of our members, all of them large retailers, face potential tariffs for re-exporting goods to the EU.” Dominic Goudie, the head of international trade at the Food and Drink Federation, said some product-specific rules meant exports were no longer viable, with “serious challenges for supply chains that span across the UK and EU”. He also said EU-produced food and drink that moved to other EU markets via Great Britain without further manufacturing taking place in Britain faced the payment of full EU tariffs on return to the EU. “As a result, suppliers are being forced to cancel deliveries of products to customers, particular those in Ireland,” he added. One unnamed source for a logistics business spoke of mayhem behind the scenes. He described how one truckload of parcels had to be completely offloaded and relabelled on Thursday night before export to the EU, simply because one line on the code for goods was wrong. He also told of companies hiking charges for invoices to £3.50 a parcel going to Europe, making low-value goods too expensive to export. John Arbon Textiles, a small artisan knitting wool company in Devon, said it had been told by DPD that its spools and balls of fibre would not be accepted in Europe. “I feel DPD are being cautious, but I have no confidence that I can send anything to my customers in the EU at the moment,” the business’s owner, Juliet Arbon, said. Northern Ireland’s chief vet has said goods arriving in the region, which is now following EU rules for imports, would be destroyed or returned if not compliant after a short grace period. Robert Huey told a Stormont committee that some companies contracted to do the paperwork for hauliers were “overwhelmed” and in one case a staff member had to show a major supermarket how to complete its paperwork.
ICU medics in London plead with public to follow Covid rules:	Intensive care medics in  London  have made a fresh appeal to the public to comply fully with England’s coronavirus restrictions, as they struggle to deal with more patients than at any time over the last four winters. Morale among ICU staff is tumbling and concerns have been expressed about a “mass exodus” as the second wave of Covid infections escalates rapidly in London and elsewhere in England. Some doctors and nurses have already quit. Dr Rebecca Lewis, a co-secretary of the Doctors’ Association UK and a senior intensive care registrar at the Royal Brompton hospital, said the government had done little to look after doctors and nurses, and that many had in effect been forced to work for 10 months without a break as a result of cancelled leave and staff shortages. “NHS staff repeatedly warned the government against relaxing guidelines over Christmas but unfortunately these warnings were not heeded, and we are now seeing the grave consequences,” she said. “It is becoming more and more difficult to see how we will avoid a mass exodus of doctors and nurses after all this is over, due to the impossible mental strain working through this pandemic has put them under. Little has been done to look after and protect those who are tasked with looking after us, and we will continue to see the consequences of this even beyond the pandemic.” Morale has also been sapped by some people’s flagrant breaches of restrictions, protests by Covid deniers outside some London hospitals over the past week. Worked the late A&E SHO shift on NYE and came out to this. Hundreds of maskless, drunk people in huge groups shouting "Covid is a hoax", literally outside the building where hundreds are sick and dying. Why do people still not realise the seriousness of this pandemic?  pic.twitter.com/KTkCtNf62A “It makes me feel so angry,” said an intensive care nurse at University College London hospital (UCLH), who asked not to be named. “I just saw them on the ground floor, not wearing any masks, but we didn’t discuss among colleagues because we don’t have any time.” The stress reached a peak this week seeing women like her, in their 30s, severely ill with the virus and fearing she could suffer the same fate. “I’ve got palpitations going into work, it’s so horrific. We’re not immune to trauma either,” she said. As she spoke to the Guardian on Friday, the number of deaths recorded daily reached its highest since the start of the pandemic, and the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan,  declared a major incident  as the number of infections in the capital rose steeply. Some sections of the public have failed to perceive the damage the virus is causing, according to a critical care nurse at Barnet hospital. “Fake news is really damaging, because some people believe it. I don’t know what their motivation is but ultimately it has a malicious intent,” she said. The government’s initial failure to prioritise healthcare staff for vaccination had also dampened staff’s spirits, she said, coming on the back of longstanding concerns over  NHS  underfunding and a wider failure to address poor public health. “Morale is dreadful, I’m really sorry to say that,” she said. “People do this job because they believe in it. We are one of the few countries in the world with universal healthcare from cradle to grave, but there’s a limit. People are working long shifts, are off sick, and there’s just so much work to do.” The enforced absence of patients’ families has also deeply affected healthcare workers. “The emotional and physical toll does not necessarily arise from wearing PPE all day and night; its knowing families can’t be at the patients’ bedside,” said an intensive care doctor at UCLH. “It’s horrible having to update relatives over the phone to tell them that they’ve got worse or there’s no change.” With about four or five patients per nurse, as opposed to the ideal scenario of one-to-one care, there are concerns senior doctors could be forced to ration treatment if the rate of infection and hospital admissions does not subside quickly. A nurse treating Covid patients at the Royal London hospital said that in a recent fortnight, at least one person she had been caring for had died each shift. “Waking up in the morning to come in has just been getting harder and harder because every shift is complete shit,” she said. “But then you get on the tube after your shift and see people not wearing a mask, and there’s just still a lot of people out, considering how bad it is.” She hasn’t seen her siblings since March because she fears spreading Covid to her family, and believes the weekly clap for carers, which returned on Thursday, would remain a hollow gesture until more people begin obeying the lockdown. Back on the ward, capacity has long been exceeded and there have been chaotic scenes. “We had a Covid patient waiting in A&E for up to 49 hours for a bed the other day, and that wasn’t even the worst we’ve had, she said.  “My colleagues and friends have been great cheering me up. Just knowing that at some point it will eventually be over is the only thing keeping me going, but we’ve still got the peak to come.”
The Queen and Prince Philip receive first dose of Covid vaccine:	The Queen  and the Duke of Edinburgh have been vaccinated against Covid, joining more than a million people in the UK who have been given the jab. In an unusual move, Buckingham Palace – which rarely comments on the private health matters of the couple – announced that the 94-year-old head of state and her consort had been given the injection. It is understood the Queen decided the information should be made public to prevent speculation. A Buckingham Palace spokesman said: “The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh have today received Covid-19 vaccinations.” A royal source confirmed to PA Media that a royal household doctor had administered the injections at Windsor Castle. The Queen and Philip have been spending the lockdown in England at the castle after deciding to to forgo the traditional family gathering at Sandringham. The Queen and the Duke will have been in the second priority group, for those aged  80 and older , after care home residents and staff. Discussions have reportedly been taking place in government about how to deploy public figures to encourage people to receive the vaccine amid scepticism among some. The health secretary, Matt Hancock, tweeted: “I’m delighted that Her Majesty the Queen & HRH the Duke of Edinburgh have received their Covid vaccine. We are defeating this virus jab by jab.”  It is said that Prince Charles, the Duchess of Cornwall and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will let the public know when they have been inoculated. Charles and Prince William tested positive for Covid last year but did not report any serious adverse consequences. Queen Margrethe of Denmark, the third cousin of Elizabeth II, became the first European monarch to receive the coronavirus vaccine this week. In 1957, the Queen made public that Charles and his sister, Princess Anne, then eight and six, had been inoculated against polio with what was then a new vaccine.
Ten babies killed after fire tears through hospital in India:	Ten babies were killed in a maternity unit in the Indian state of Maharashtra early on Saturday when fire tore through a major hospital. Staff rescued seven of the newborn infants at the Bhandara district hospital but were beaten back before they could reach 10 others, Pramod Khandate, a senior doctor, said. All of those who died were aged between a few days and three months, according to reports. “The cause of the fire is not known yet but our staff extinguished the fire as soon as they could. The smoke led to the babies suffocating,” Khandate said. Nurses on duty noticed a fire coming from the hospital’s neonatal unit and raised the alarm. The fire brigade stopped the blaze from spreading to other parts of the hospital and other patients were moved to safety. “Heart-wrenching tragedy in Bhandara, Maharashtra, where we have lost precious young lives,” prime minister Narendra Modi said on Twitter. Opposition leader Rahul Gandhi called the deaths “extremely tragic”. Authorities ordered an immediate inquiry into the latest disaster to raise doubts about safety in Indian hospitals. More than 90 people died in an  inferno in a Kolkata hospital in 2011 . A fire at a hospital in Ahmedabad in August killed eight coronavirus patients. Another five Covid-19 patients died in a blaze in a clinic in Rajkot in November. The supreme court called for a report on safety in coronavirus hospitals because of the incidents.
Bill Gates joins Blackstone in bid to buy British private jet firm:	Bill Gates has joined a £3bn bidding war to buy the world’s largest private jet operator just as he prepares to publish his new book  How to Avoid a Climate Disaster . Cascade Investment, the fund that manages much of Gates’s $134bn personal fortune,  announced on Friday  it had teamed up with US private equity firm Blackstone in a bid for British private jet operator Signature Aviation. The Cascade and Blackstone offer came just hours after rival American private equity firm Carlyle made an approach to buy Signature, which handles more than 1.6m private jet flights a year. Cascade is already the biggest investor in Signature with a 19% stake. According to  a study by academics at Lund University , Gates is  one of the world’s biggest “super-emitters”  due to his regular private jet travel. He took 59 flights in one year travelling more than 200,000 miles, according to the report, which estimated that Gates’ private jet travel emitted about 1,600 tonnes of carbon dioxide. That compares with a global average of less than five tonnes per person. Researchers have found that private jets emit  up to 40 times as much carbon dioxide per passenger than commercial jets . Gates, who says in  the foreword to his forthcoming book  that he has spent a decade investigating the causes and effects of climate change, did not respond to requests for comment about his views on the carbon footprint of private jets. The billionaire has previously said that owning private planes was his “guilty pleasure”.  In a Reddit Ask Me Anything in 2014, Gates said : “Owning a plane is a guilty pleasure. Warren Buffett called his the Indefensible. I do get to a lot of places for  Foundation  work I wouldn’t be able to go to without it.”
Denver police officers who detained four black girls will not be charged:	Suburban  Denver  police officers will not be charged after detaining four black girls at gunpoint this summer and handcuffing two after wrongly suspecting they were riding in a stolen car, prosecutors said on Friday. The same day, the Colorado attorney general opened a grand jury investigation into the death of Elijah McClain,  a 23-year-old black man who was stopped  as he walked down the street, placed in a neck hold and injected with a sedative in 2019. Both involved officers from the Aurora police department and drew national attention during a national reckoning over racism and police brutality. Months after video of the girls lying face down in a parking lot – some in tears – spread on social media, a review by the district attorney found no evidence beyond a reasonable doubt that the officers acted unlawfully during the 2 August traffic stop. However, the chief deputy district attorney, Clinton McKinzie, called it “disturbing” and urged the police department to review its policies. “What happened to the innocent occupants is unacceptable and preventable,” McKinzie wrote. Police eventually determined the car carrying the girls, who ranged in age from six to 17, had the same license plate number as a motorcycle they were seeking from another state. One officer, Madisen Moen, had graduated from the police academy two days before and the other, Darian Dasko, was her field training officer, McKinzie said. The prosecutor also said it was difficult for the officers to see who was inside the vehicle partly because of its tinted windows. David Lane, a lawyer for the driver and the girls, said he was not surprised by the decision, which he said fitted a pattern in Aurora and the US. “When white cops point guns at small black children, there are no consequences in America,” he said. Lane plans to sue the city and the officers as early as next week under a new police accountability law passed in  Colorado  during protests over racial injustice. He thinks a local jury familiar with the city and including more people of color would be more likely to grant justice than a federal jury from a wider area. Aurora police apologized after video taken by a bystander showed the girls lying on their stomachs, with the 17-year-old and 12-year-old handcuffed behind their backs. The 14-year-old and six-year-old were lying next to the car. They could be heard crying and screaming. A woman was seen being led away in handcuffs. Driver Brittney Gilliam, who had taken her nieces, sister and daughter to a nail salon, has characterized the officers’ actions as police brutality. “There’s no excuse why you didn’t handle it a different type of way,” Gilliam told KUSA-TV. “You could have even told them, ‘Step off to the side, let me ask your mom or your auntie a few questions so we can get this cleared up.’ There was different ways to handle it.” Police are instructed to draw their guns and put people on the ground when dealing with a suspected stolen car, but the police chief, Vanessa Wilson, has said they should have changed course after Gilliam said the car was not stolen and that she had children inside. Wilson also ordered an internal investigation. Meanwhile, Colorado’s attorney general, Phil Weiser, opened a grand jury investigation into McClain’s death as part of his investigation of the case that started last summer. “The grand jury is an investigative tool that has the power to compel testimony from witnesses and require production of documents and other relevant information that would otherwise be unavailable,” Weiser said in a statement. Police stopped McClain as he walked home on 29 August 2019, after a 911 caller reported someone wearing a ski mask and waving his hands. His family said McClain wore the mask because he had a blood condition that caused him to get cold easily. Body-camera video shows an officer telling McClain to stop because he was “being suspicious”. The officer tells him to relax, and McClain asks police to let go, saying, “You guys started to arrest me, and I was stopping my music to listen.” Police say McClain fought back when officers tried to take him into custody. In the video, McClain can be heard saying he couldn’t breathe and sometimes crying out or sobbing. Officers used a neck hold on McClain that has been banned in several places. Paramedics arrived and injected him with ketamine to calm him. McClain suffered cardiac arrest and later was taken off life support. Governor Jared Polis ordered Weiser to investigate as protests over the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis brought new attention to McClain’s death. It’s one of several reviews by police, city and federal governments. Lawyer Mari Newman said the McClain family was hopeful Weiser was committed to an impartial investigation but the use of the secretive grand jury process made them wonder whether law enforcement was being held to a different standard. She noted that sometimes prosecutors steer grand juries away from charges by limiting the evidence they present. “If the grand jury in Elijah McClain’s case doesn’t indict the officers and medics responsible for killing him, it will be because the attorney general’s office did not want charges to be brought,“ she said. “That would be a grave injustice.”
Kim Jong-un calls US 'biggest enemy' and says nuclear submarine plans 'complete':	North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, has called the United States his nuclear-armed nation’s “biggest enemy” and revealed that plans for a nuclear-powered submarine are complete, state media said. Kim’s declaration on Saturday also included a call to develop smaller, more adapatable nuclear warheads, comes less than two weeks before the inauguration of Joe Biden as US president, and after a  tumultuous relationship between Kim and the outgoing Donald Trump . Kim and Trump first engaged in a war of words and mutual threats, before an extraordinary diplomatic “bromance” that featured headline-grabbing summits and  declarations of love  by the US president. But no substantive progress was made, with the process deadlocked after a  meeting in Hanoi broke up  over sanctions relief and what the North would be willing to give up in return. Pyongyang “should focus and be developed on subverting the US, the biggest obstacle for our revolution and our biggest enemy”, Kim told the five-yearly congress of the ruling Workers’ Party of Korea, the official KCNA news agency reported. “No matter who is in power, the true nature of its policy against  North Korea  will never change,” it quoted him as saying, without mentioning Biden by name. Pyongyang has poured vast amounts of resources into developing its nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, which it says it needs to defend itself against a possible US invasion. The programmes have made rapid progress under Kim, including by far its most powerful nuclear blast to date and missiles capable of reaching the whole US, at a cost of increasingly stringent international sanctions. The North has completed plans for a nuclear-powered submarine, Kim said – something that would change the strategic balance. “New planning research for a nuclear-powered submarine has been completed and is to enter the final examination process,” Kim told the congress. The country should “further advance nuclear technology” and develop small-sized, lightweight nuclear warheads “to be applied differently depending on target subjects”, he added. He said  North Korea  must also advance the precision attack capability on targets in the 15,000km (9,320-mile) striking range, an apparent reference to the US mainland, and develop technology to manufacture smaller, lighter nuclear warheads to be mounted on long-range missiles more easily. “Nothing would be more foolish and dangerous than not strengthening our might tirelessly and having an easy-going attitude at a time when we clearly see the enemy’s state-of-the-art weapons are being increased more than ever,” Kim said. “The reality is that we can achieve peace and prosperity on the Korean Peninsula when we constantly build up our national defense and suppress U.S. military threats.” The comments came in Kim’s nine-hour work report to the meeting, spread over three days, which KCNA was reporting in detail for the first time. Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this report.
Pelosi spoke to top military leader to ensure Trump can’t launch nuclear attack:	Nancy Pelosi spoke to the head of the US military on Friday, seeking assurance that  Donald Trump  will not be able to launch a nuclear strike during his last days in office. At the end of a bizarre and dangerous week in which the US Capitol was stormed by supporters of the president, in an attack that left five people dead and prompted widespread  calls for his immediate removal , the House speaker told Democrats she had called Gen Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Amid  rising tensions with Iran  and other foreign policy challenges, Pelosi  sought  to “to discuss available precautions for preventing an unstable president from initiating military hostilities or accessing the launch codes and ordering a nuclear strike”. A spokesman for Milley confirmed the conversation. “Speaker Pelosi initiated a call with the chairman,” the spokesman  said . “He answered her questions regarding the process of nuclear command authority.” Trump remains commander-in-chief of the US armed forces. Before the storming of the Capitol on Wednesday, all 10 former defense secretaries still living had  called  for the military to stay out of the transition of power. Five people  including a Capitol police officer  died as a result of the assault on the Capitol, which occurred after Trump  addressed  supporters about his attempts to overturn his defeat by Joe Biden and encouraged them to “fight like hell”. Rioters broke into the House and Senate chambers and  offices including that of Pelosi . Regardless, Republicans in both chambers moved ahead with objections to Trump’s electoral college defeat. The objections were defeated. Democrats  called  for Mike Pence and members of the cabinet to invoke the 25th amendment, which provides for the removal of a president deemed unfit for office. Such a move would put Trump out of power until inauguration day, 20 January, even if he contested it. In a statement on Thursday, Pelosi  said : “The president’s dangerous acts necessitate his immediate removal from office. We look forward to hearing from the vice-president as soon as possible and to receiving a positive answer as to whether he and the cabinet will honour their oath to the constitution and to Americans.” But the idea is seen as a non-starter, not least as the transportation secretary, Elaine Chao, has led what could be multiple cabinet resignations. Influential sources including the editorial page of the Wall Street Journal have called on Trump to resign. On Friday, Pelosi said  House Democrats  would otherwise move towards  a second impeachment . Trump was acquitted in the first last February, over approaches to Ukraine for dirt on Biden, after a short trial in the Republican-held Senate. Informing Democrats of her conversation with Gen Milley, Pelosi wrote: “The situation of this unhinged president could not be more dangerous, and we must do everything that we can to protect the American people from his unbalanced assault on our country and our democracy.” She also said she and the Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, had not heard back from Pence. “We still hope to hear from him as soon as possible with a positive answer,” Pelosi wrote. “Nearly 50 years ago, after years of enabling their rogue president, Republicans in Congress finally told President [Richard] Nixon that it was time to go. Today, following the president’s dangerous and seditious acts, Republicans in Congress need to follow that example and call on Trump to depart his office – immediately.” Some Republicans  in Congress, representatives Adam Kinzinger and Steve Stivers among them, have done so, as have Maryland’s governor, Larry Hogan, and Colin Powell, the former general and secretary of state who remains a party grandee. In the Senate, Ben Sasse of Nebraska indicated support for impeachment. The House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, however,  said  on Friday he opposes a second impeachment, as it would “only divide our country more”. Nonetheless, Pelosi said: “If the president does not leave office imminently and willingly, the Congress will proceed with our action.”
At least three people die in Spain's worst snowstorm in 50 years:	The Spanish government has urged people to stay at home after at least three people died as the worst snowstorm in 50 years struck the country, bringing Madrid and the surrounding region to a frozen standstill and leaving hundreds of motorists trapped in their cars. Storm Filomena hit  Spain  on Friday, bringing snowfalls not seen in Madrid since 1971, according to the state meteorological office, Aemet. The snow continued overnight and into Saturday, by which time 50cm had fallen in parts of the Madrid region. A man and a woman drowned near the Andalucian town of Fuengirola after their car was swept away by a swollen river in the early hours of Saturday, and a man died in the village of Zarzalejo in Madrid region after becoming buried in the snow. Emergency services said the death on Saturday of a homeless man in the Madrid neighbourhood of Carabanchel was due to a cardiac arrest and not, as initially believed, to the cold.  Five Spanish provinces – Valencia, Castellón, Tarragona, Teruel and Zaragoza – remained in red alert on Saturday afternoon. As Barajas airport in Madrid closed, train services in and out of the capital were cancelled and emergency services and military rescue teams worked to free stranded motorists and clear main roads, the government called on people to stay indoors, warning the worst may be yet to come. “The situation is serious and we can’t ignore it,” the transport minister, José Luis Ábalos, told reporters on Saturday afternoon. “I want to stress the need for people to stay at home and follow the guidance from the authorities. When the storm abates, we’ll be facing an intense cold front, which will bring very low temperatures that will mean we’ll need to deal with ice. We’ll be getting into a situation that may be more dangerous than the one we’re in right now.” Spain’s interior minister, Fernando Grande-Marlaska​, said 1,500 people had been rescued in the Madrid region but that 650 roads across Spain were still affected by the storms. He defended the central government’s response to the emergency, and said: “We haven’t had a situation liked this for 50 years.” Rubén del Campo, a spokesman for Aemet, offered a similar assessment: “We’re talking about an exceptional snowfall; you’d probably have to look back to the 1970s for snowfall of a similar magnitude in and around the capital.” Del Campo said the heavy snows were moving north from the centre of the Iberian peninsula towards Valencia, Aragón, Catalonia, Navarra and the Basque Country. By Sunday, Storm Filomena would drift out across the Mediterranean, giving way to a cold front, icy conditions and temperatures as low as -10C in some places, he said. The regional president of Madrid, Isabel Díaz Ayuso, echoed the call for people to stay at home as she announced that schools and universities in the region would be closed on Monday and Tuesday and urged non-essential civil servants to work from home. “It’s best to stay home for a few days because broken tree branches and icy patches are making walking dangerous,” she said. Broken branches, snapped under the weight of the snow, littered many streets in the capital on Saturday, and there were long queues for bread and other basic items in some neighbourhood shops. Sandra Morena, a 22-year-old security guard, became stranded in her car on Friday night as she drove to work. She was rescued by an army team on Saturday morning. “It usually takes me 15 minutes but this time it has been 12 hours freezing, without food or water, crying with other people because we didn’t know how we were going to get out of there,” she told the Associated Press. “Snow can be very beautiful but spending the night trapped in a car because of it is no fun.”
Coronavirus live news: Pope to have Covid vaccine next week; UK deaths surpass 80,000 after 1,035 recorded:	Twelve people have been arrested for breaching Covid-19 restrictions during an anti-lockdown protest in  south-west   London , the Metropolitan Police said. A crowd of about 30 people marched down Clapham High Street on Saturday afternoon, chanting “take your freedom back” while being heckled by members of the public. Dozens of officers were deployed to Clapham Common to try and contain the demonstration, which was organised by the group StandUpX. The small group of protestors eventually returned to Clapham Common park before being dispersed by police. So the anti-Vaxxers are out demonstrating in Clapham Common today... They’re shouting ‘what’s happening in China is going to happen here ‘ ... ... which from an epidemiological perspective one can only respond ‘I hope so’...  pic.twitter.com/RNAzGj5lEb Pope Francis  has said he plans to have a Covid vaccination as early as next week and urged everyone to get a shot in order to protect lives. In an interview with Italian TV station Canale 5, the Pope, 84, said: I believe that ethically everyone should take the vaccine. It is an ethical choice because you are gambling with your health, with your life, but you are also gambling with the lives of others. The Vatican City, the smallest independent country in the world, has said it will shortly launch its own vaccination campaign against the virus, with the pope adding: “Next week, we will start doing it here, in the Vatican, and I have booked myself in. It must be done.”  In the same interview, the pontiff also denounced  the violence in Washington  as an assault on democracy, saying: “I was astonished because they are people so disciplined in democracy. There is always something that isn’t working (with) people taking a path against the community, against democracy, against the common good.” Cuba  has signed an accord with  Iran  to transfer the technology for its most advanced Covid vaccine candidate and carry out last-stage clinical trials of the shot in the Islamic Republic. Soberana (Sovereign) 2 will be tested in Phase III trials in around 150,000 people in Havana after it has completed Phase II trials which started on 22 December, officials have confirmed. Cuba’s Finlay Vaccine Institute said late on Friday it has signed an accord with Iran’s Pasteur Institute to collaborate on testing of the vaccine. “This synergy will enable both countries to advance more rapidly in the immunization against the SARS-CoV-2 virus,” it said on its Twitter account.  Twenty-one people in  Marseille  have tested positive for the new variant of Covid initially found in  England , the southern French city’s police department said on Saturday. Officials added that the new cases of the variant had been discovered within a family cluster.  The news comes as Marseille joins Strasbourg and Dijon in having its curfew moved forward to 6pm from 8pm, running through to 6am the following morning. The tighter restrictions form part of the government’s response to halt the spread of the virus.  In the UK, 1,035 more people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19, according to government data, bringing the total to 80,868. The government said that, as of 9am on Saturday, there had been a further 59,937 lab-confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK, meaning the total number of cases has now exceeded three million. Friday saw the highest number of UK deaths - 1,325- reported on a single day since the outbreak began.  There were 59,937 people in the UK that tested positive for Covid-19 on Saturday, down from 68,053 the previous day.  See the official release  here . A long queue has been seen in Forest Hill,  south London , as people queued to receive Covid-19 vaccinations. Maria Demetrious filmed a queue winding around several corners after dropping off her father, 85, and mother, 79, for his jab at the Jenner Practice on Friday. Her brother, Paul, who posted the video on Twitter, said: “My parents have been isolating since February 20. On arrival for Dad’s Covid-19 vaccine time slot met this circus! They left without it!”  The Care Quality Commission commented on the video, saying the incident had been raised for review. Hi everyone, this is Yohannes Lowe. I’ll be taking over the live blog now. As always, please feel free to drop me a message on  Twitter  if you have any coverage suggestions.  The UK’s health secretary,  Matt Hancock,  has said he is delighted that the Queen has had her first dose of the vaccine. I'm delighted that Her Majesty the Queen & HRH the Duke of Edinburgh have received their COVID vaccine. We are defeating this virus jab by jab. https://t.co/uUkfW3rhyB The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh have received their Covid-19 vaccinations, joining more than a million people in the UK who have been given the jab. In an unusual move Buckingham Palace, which rarely comments on the private health matters of the monarch, 94, and her husband, had been given the injection. It is understood that the Queen decided the information should be made public to prevent inaccuracies and further speculation. A Buckingham Palace spokesman said: The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh have today received Covid-19 vaccinations. A royal source confirmed to PA Media that the injections were administered by a royal household doctor at Windsor Castle. The Queen and Prince Philip have been spending the lockdown in England at Windsor Castle, in Berkshire, after deciding to have a quiet Christmas and forgo the traditional family gathering at Sandringham. Health officials in Ireland have said they believe that three cases of the South African coronavirus variant have been contained. The country is grappling with a surge that has exceeded the first wave of the pandemic. On Friday it confirmed its first cases of the variant in people who had travelled to Ireland from South Africa over the Christmas holidays. Ireland’s second wave has been partly driven by the arrival of a variant first discovered in England. It was detected in 25% of positive cases that underwent further testing in the week to 3 January, up from 9% two weeks earlier. Cillian De Gascun , the head of Ireland’s national virus laboratory, told the national broadcaster RTÉ: The UK variant is of more concern to us purely because of the amount of virus that’s on the island, and we know that it’s transmitting in the community. The good thing about the South African variant is we know exactly where those cases came from, they have been contained, controlled and contact-traced, and to the best of my knowledge there was no onward transmission. The government on Wednesday announced its strictest lockdown measures since early last year, warning that a “tsunami” of infections fuelled by the UK variant and the relaxation of curbs ahead of Christmas could overwhelm the healthcare system.   France  is to extend its Covid-19 curfew to a further eight departments, the country’s prime minister,  Jean Castex,  said on Saturday, citing a “tough and necessary” response as some opposed the restrictions in several cities.  France has been increasing its anti-virus restrictions in the face of rising cases and imposed a post-New Year curfew on 15 of its 101 departments, Agence France-Presse reports.  The country has recorded about 67,000 deaths to date from some 2.7m cases and the R value is rising.  The new departments likely to be subject to an earlier curfew are primarily in the east of the country, including  Bas-Rhin ,  Haut-Rhin  and  C ô te d’Or , as well as the central one of  Cher . Castex highlighted the southern port of  Marseille , France’s second largest city, where local politicians of all stripes have voiced opposition to extending the partial lockdown and questioned its effectiveness.  “In reality we are applying the same criteria to Marseille as we apply elsewhere,” he said, confirming the earlier lockdown would be extended to eight departments including the  Bouches-du-Rhone , which includes Marseille.  “Everybody is conscious of the epidemic not weakening or that on the contrary it is growing stronger in some areas,” he said.  Castex also defended the government’s vaccine rollout strategy, criticised in some quarters for its slow start. “The objective is to go quickly, [but] do it in absolutely irreproachable security conditions.” Opinion polls show around half the French population are sceptical about having the jab, notably more than in neighbouring countries.  Turkey  confirmed 11,749 new cases on Friday, including 1,291 asymptomatic patients, taking the tally of infections to 2.3 million.  186 further deaths were recorded, bringing the country’s total to 22,450, the Andalou Agency reported. The figures represent a significant drop in the countrywide number of coronavirus cases from the 32,102 new infections reported on 15 December. Health minister  Fahrettin Koca  announced on Twitter that there had been a 40% drop in the caseload of both  Istanbul  and the Aegean province  Izmir , as well as a reduction of roughly 60% both in the capital  Ankara  and the northwestern  Bursa  province. Koca added that discussions with public health authorities in four of Turkey’s biggest cities on preparations to start Turkey’s vaccination campaign were ongoing. A growing number of scientists are calling for tighter restrictions in  England  in light of surging infections in many parts of the country. Prof  Robert West , a participant in the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Behaviours (SPI-B), said the current restrictions are “still allowing a lot of activity which is spreading the virus”.  The professor of health psychology at University College London said he, as well as other epidemiologists, medical scientists and virologists he has spoken to, think the rules should be tightened. He told BBC News that more children were going to school than in the first lockdown and that schools were “a very important seed of community infection”.  “Because we have the more infectious variant, which is somewhere around 50% more infectious than last time round in March, that means that if we were to achieve the same result as we got in March we would have to have a stricter lockdown, and it’s not stricter. It’s actually less strict,” he said. Some scientists have estimated that the variant could be as much as 70% more transmissible, PA reports.  Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccine will arrive in  France  on Monday, French prime minister  Jean Castex  said, as the country steps up its vaccination drive following a sluggish start.  Castex and the health minister,  Olivier Veran,  visited a health centre in  Tarbes , southwestern France, on Saturday as part of the government’s campaign to accelerate France’s vaccine rollout.  Vaccinations also took place in  Taverny, near Paris . The French medical regulator HAS said on Friday it had approved the Moderna vaccine, having previously cleared Pfizer/BioNTech’s rival.   President  Emmanuel Macron  held phone conversations on Friday with German chancellor  Angela Merkel  and European Commission president  Ursula von der Leyen  to discuss Europe’s vaccine strategy, Reuters reports. US-based Moderna said on Monday the it would produce at least 600m doses of its Covid-19 vaccine in 2021, up by 100m doses from its previous forecast.  There have been a further 2,373 cases of coronavirus in  Wales , taking the total number of confirmed cases to 168,094.  Public Health Wales reported another 62 deaths, taking the total in Wales since the start of the pandemic to 3,919.  A nurse working in a hospital in the Welsh region hardest hit by Covid deaths spoke about how she felt “overwhelming fear” as 13 ambulances queued up outside its A&E department.  Senior A&E nurse Sarah Fogarasy told BBC Wales the situation at the Royal Glamorgan hospital, where there was no capacity at the unit, had left her wanting “to leave”.   Fogarasy said: “[...] It got to 13 patients outside – I had no capacity in this unit, no resuscitation capacity, no capacity to put a patient on CPAP [continuous positive airway pressure] should they require that and no physical areas to put a patient in. It was overwhelming.  “This bit makes me quite emotional. For the first time I was sat trying to coordinate this department and I had that overwhelming fear that I just wanted to leave. I was just ‘I’m done. I’m done with this.’ “And it’s scary, it fills you full of fear when you have got 13 ambulances outside, queuing around the car park. Where do you go from that?” Amanda Farrow, a senior doctor, described the pressure at the hospital in  Pontyclun  last Saturday as “unrelenting”.  Cwm Taf Morgannwg health board, which runs the hospital, has reported 1,091 deaths of patients with coronavirus.
Greece faces legal action over alleged expulsion of Syrian to Turkey:	In the latest allegation that Greek authorities are illegally expelling refugees , lawyers will this week file a case at the UN human rights committee on behalf of a Syrian man living in Germany, who says he was picked up and sent to  Turkey  while he searched for his brother in Greece. The 26-year-old told the Guardian that he had been detained and forced into a boat to Turkey in November 2016. His papers were confiscated which meant he was not able to return to Germany, where he had been granted asylum, for three years. The man – who has not been named – said he flew to Greece after he heard that his 11-year-old brother had tried to follow him to  Europe  but had disappeared crossing the border from Turkey to Greece. “All I could think about was my brother,” he said. He travelled to a small town in the north-east Evros region where the boy had last been heard of and started showing people his photograph, hoping to trigger someone’s memory. It was at this point that three policemen picked him up and took him to a detention centre, he said. Greek authorities confiscated his identification papers, strip-searched him and put him in a cell with around 50 other detainees . He said he saw families with children in one cell, and he also identified German-speaking officers at his detention. The man said that late at night he was taken by authorities to the border with other detainees and put on a small boat across the Evros/Meriç River to Turkey. Hours later, the group were picked up by the Turkish military. Distraught and without his documents, he eventually reached the German embassy in Istanbul a few days later, where he tried to explain how he had ended up there when only days before he had been at home in Germany. It was three years before his documents were reissued. During this time he attempted to cross back to  Greece  and was pushed back 11 times. He finally made it to Athens, where he relied on the kindness of strangers to survive. He found a lawyer through Greek NGO Human Rights 360, and he was finally able to return to Germany last year and his residency was reissued in May. “There are so many people who are oppressed and face great injustice … others should know about this,” he said. He still hopes to hear news of his young brother, who remains missing. Amanda Brown, a researcher at the  Global Legal Action Network (Glan)  who has worked on the case, said it was “an emblematic and aggravated example of Greece’s clandestine deportation apparatus”. She added: “A legally present foreign national is apprehended, solely due to his race and national origin. He is then stripped of his documentation, subjected to an enforced disappearance, and violently expelled overnight to a country he did not come from. He is then forced to endure repeated instances of border violence until he can recover his documents and return home years later. “Even his EU asylum status, which Germany had granted him, couldn’t protect him. This approach to migration governance is inhuman and manifestly unlawful.” Forensic Architecture, based at the University of London, has digitally  recreated the alleged pushbacks  from Greece to Turkey. “Our research confirms that pushbacks in the Evros/Meriç border are both systematic and widespread,” said Stefanos Levidis, project coordinator at Forensic Architecture. “What emerges is a picture of a violent practice where beatings are customary, at times amounting to torture, and which relies on a wide network of state and EU border defence infrastructure as well as the deadly river landscape itself,” he said. Valentina Azarova, a legal adviser to Glan, who is filing this case with Human Rights 360, said she hopes it will result in accountability. “Instances before the Greek public prosecutor and administrative courts have failed because Greek authorities have persisted in denying that such incidents are even occurring,” she said. “This state-sanctioned policy of summary expulsion and enforced disappearance along the Evros border is an abuse of power by the Greek state – for both systemically perpetrating such illegal acts without an institutional trail, and for actively concealing evidence of the abuses and denying the claimant and countless others access to justice.” The Greek ministry for migration and the Greek police did not respond to a request for comment.
Dangerous spices: why India's cooking powders pose a risk of lead poisoning:	A n outbreak of a mystery illness over two days in early December in the south Indian city of Eluru saw more than 560 people hospitalised, most of them children, and baffled doctors. Symptoms were described as being similar to epilepsy, with convulsions and vomiting accompanied by burning eyes and loss of consciousness. Recovery tended to be quick although the death of one man was attributed to the illness. In the midst of the Covid pandemic theories circulated that it was caused by too much disinfectant or vegetables washed in chlorine. Local traders saw sales slump. Last week the Andhra Pradesh state government announced that pesticide residue in the water was the “main reason” for the illness, based on preliminary findings from the All  India  Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), which studied blood samples from patients. AIIMS also reported high heavy metal content in local milk, while NEERI found dangerous levels of mercury in surface water. It has become a political row – with the opposition party in the state demanding a full inquiry. But lead poisoning in India is a longstanding public health issue. A  study this year  by Unicef and the NGO Pure Earth documented childhood lead poisoning. “In data gathered over 15 years, we’ve found that India is the most affected,” says Richard Fuller, founder of Pure Earth. And the problem often comes from an unexpected source – Indian spices and curry powders. Dr Ipsita Mazumdar is a professor of biochemistry at Kolkata’s KPC Medical College and Hospital and has been studying the effects of lead poisoning from food powders since 2014. Over a three-month period, Mazumdar tested some of the country’s most popular spices – chilli, cumin, curry powder, garam masala and chat masala. She tested 52 samples of turmeric, assessing branded and packaged varieties, as well as loose powders sold by street vendors in Kolkata. She found lead in all of them. The cause, she found, was food colouring contaminated with compounds of lead. Lead chromate was added to the turmeric to brighten its golden colour and lead oxide gave the chilli powders a rich red hue. The other spices tested, including curry powders, garam and chat masalas, had small amounts of lead, but not at such high levels as the turmeric and chilli. “Keep in mind that the ill effects of lead exposure build up over time and that these spices are used in households every day and across India,” she says. “Unlike other sources of lead contamination that have been identified, like automobile exhaust, leaded paints and pipes used in homes, this is a hidden hazard. We really aren’t aware of the full scope of this problem yet.” Lead exposure can be particularly harmful to children under five, who absorb  4–5 times more of the toxic metal from a given source  than adults and, as result, can suffer long-term physical, cognitive and neurological damage. Lead exposure during pregnancy can also affect a child’s growth and their ability to see, hear and learn. In urban areas, the improper processing of lead acid car batteries causes toxic material to leach into the ground, says Fuller.  India produces an estimated 30m cars a year and is the  fourth largest automobile manufacturer  in the world. Lead acid batteries last about four years before they are recycled, often in back yards and scrap metal businesses across India’s cities, posing a huge health hazard. “The automobile industry is booming, but much of the recycling of lead acid batteries lies in the hands of small scrap dealers who do not have the means of processing them safely,” says Fuller.  Pure Earth has identified more than 700 potentially toxic sites in India, 225 of which were assessed. Of these, all but one were contaminated by lead that had leached into the environment, affecting soil and water sources. India’s high goods and services tax (GST) of 28% is one reason batteries find their way to these scrap dealers in the first place, Fuller says. “The informal sector is under the radar, but bigger manufacturers have higher operating costs as a result of GST. If the GST were scrapped, lead acid batteries would be processed by bigger plants, and with greater safety.” One of India’s biggest studies on lead poisoning was conducted in 1995 by the  George Foundation  (now  Shanti Bhavan ), which tested the blood of 15,000 children and 5,000 adults. “We found that lead poisoning was a major obstacle to growth, affecting more than 50% of Indian children before puberty,” says Ajit George, director of operations for the Shanti Bhavan children’s project. About half of the under-12s in the study had a blood lead level double that considered by the World Health Organization to cause symptoms of  decreased intelligence, behavioural difficulties and learning problems .  While there is no “safe” lead exposure, especially in children, as the level increases, so does the severity of the problems. That research from 25 years ago drove new regulations for Indian oil corporations and the phasing out of leaded petrol and now, the target of eliminating lead paints. But there are other risks that have not yet been addressed, says George. “In rural India, high levels of lead were found in cooking utensils, the moulds of aluminium cookware and in ceramic glaze,” he says. These small-scale industries will always be harder to regulate. Vigilance is key to avoid devastating consequences, but greater awareness is needed to combat all sources of contamination, says Mazumdar.
'Alarming': female prison population rises by 100,000 in past decade – report:	The number of women being jailed globally has increased by more than 100,000 in the past decade, despite international rules aimed at reducing the female prison population. New data released by Penal Reform International around the 10th anniversary of the “ Bangkok Rules ” adopted by the UN show there are now 741,000 women and girls in prison. “The number of women in prison globally is climbing at an alarming rate – even though they are typically convicted of low-level, nonviolent crime,” said Olivia Rope, executive director of  Penal Reform International . The organisation’s research highlights a lack of progress, with women unduly imprisoned in numerous countries. More than  80 organisations have signed a call  to action for governments to fully implement the rules and review policies to reduce the number of women behind bars. “Shocking systemic cases of human rights violations, including violence and mistreatment, persist worldwide,” said Rope. “Many women are deprived of essential health and rehabilitation services and face physical or sexual violence in prison.” The Bangkok Rules were implemented to reduce the imprisonment of women by promoting noncustodial alternatives and addressing the causes of their offending. Yet over the past decade in every region except Europe, the numbers have risen.  Restrictions relating to the pandemic have further impinged on women’s rights and access to justice. The suspension of visits in most prisons has prevented families from providing essential items, such as sanitary products, and supplemental food to provide adequate nutrition for pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers. “Covid-19 measures have had a devastating impact on women in prison, with many denied any contact with their children or excluded from emergency release programmes,” said Rope. The call to action highlights that many women – who represent between 2% and 9% of national prison populations – are imprisoned as a result of discrimination or crimes committed in poverty. Women are also disproportionately affected by punitive drug policies, with  35% in prison for drug-related offences compared with 19% of men . Gaby, who is from Mexico and grew up in a rural town blighted by the marijuana industry, was arrested for drug trafficking in 2012 and sentenced to 10 years in prison, despite having clear vulnerabilities. She was 12 when her father, who had emigrated, stopped sending money. She began transporting marijuana to Mexico City and was a victim of sexual violence, resulting in the birth of her first baby when she was 15. Following an abusive relationship she had a second child who was born with cerebral palsy, requiring lifelong care. Gaby, who was released in 2019, had asked the judge whether she could accompany her son to medical appointments and then return to prison. But her request was denied, meaning she had to make the heartbreaking decision to send him to a public institution to receive vital medical care. “A high proportion of women in prison have a history of abuse and violence, increasing the risk of mental health issues,” said Anand Grover, a member of the global commission on drug policy and former UN special rapporteur on the right to health. “Women’s specific needs are often ignored, revealing that gender inequality does not stop at the prison doors.” Former prisoner Rosma Karlina, 43, from West Java in Indonesia, said: “Prison clearly doesn’t provide a deterrence for people who use drugs. Inside, I accessed and used drugs without any fear of being caught. I didn’t learn anything there.” Karlina, who since her release has helped more than 40 women with their drug addictions, was arrested for possession of heroin in 2008. She spent more than three years in a severely overcrowded prison with 90 people sleeping in rooms designed for 45. She recalled: “Many female inmates were taken advantage of by the male inmates or prison guards. People were getting sick and dying due to [poor] health services.” Ban Ki-moon, former secretary-general of the UN who helped steer the adoption of the Bangkok Rules when in post, said: “The rules promote alternatives to imprisonment for women, particularly in light of the health risks posed by Covid-19, governments must do more to make sure imprisonment is used as a last resort.”
Pornhub to ban unverified uploads after child abuse content claims:	Pornhub, one of the largest adult content sites in the world, has announced it will be banning unverified video uploads after allegations that it has been hosting child abuse videos. An investigation by the  New York Times last week  claimed Pornhub was hosting non-consensual and child abuse content on its website. Activists have  long called for changes to Pornhub’s business model , claiming it was not carrying out sufficient checks to ensure videos were consensual. Pornhub, visited by users 100m times a day, has denied a systemic problem with child abuse videos on the site, and said the New York Times claims were “irresponsible and flagrantly untrue”. Since the allegations were reported, credit card company Mastercard has said it will permanently block the use of its cards on the site. Visa said it was suspending payments until an investigation was completed. In its statement on the proposed changes, Pornhub says that from now on it will: “only allow properly identified users to upload content. We have banned downloads. We have made some key expansions to our moderation process, and we recently launched a trusted flagger programme with dozens of non-profit organisations.” Pornhub has always insisted its procedures to stop illegal content are robust, but the site, which is owned by tech company Mindgeek, has been criticised for features that allow users to upload hardcore and extreme pornography without sufficient identity checks. The company has introduced an immediate change, making it impossible for anyone other than established professionals and partners to the site to upload content. This will be replaced in the new year with a new process for verifying users using an identification protocol. Activists from groups including  Not Your Porn  also campaigned against the download button, arguing it allowed non-consensual videos to be repeatedly shared and reposted, even when they had been removed by Pornhub. This feature has also been disabled for all but paid users within a specific programme. The site was criticised last year for continuing to host videos by the amateur porn specialist GirlsDoPorn – a company that offered girls being featured in porn “for the first and only time” –  even as a court in San Diego heard evidence that the videos were made  using dishonesty and abuse. The official GirlsDoPorn page was not removed from Pornhub until October, although the court began hearing evidence in August.  Its videos were still being found on Pornhub months later.
‘Deeply dark criminal activity’ drives rise in child abuse images online:	Child abuse experts are warning that an growing trend of children being groomed through webcams and live streaming by predators has led to a  sharp rise in the number of abusive images  circulating online since the beginning of the pandemic. Much of this abuse is happening in children’s own homes while their parents or caregivers are in another room, according to the  Internet Watch Foundation  (IWF), which says it had already dealt with an increased number of reports of online child abuse images this year.  September was a record month  with 15,000 reports from the public, 5,000 more than the same month in 2019. By the end of November, 138,000 reports sent to the IWF were confirmed to contain child sexual abuse imagery, which was then removed, compared to 132,730 in all of 2019. The growing number of images identified and removed was achieved despite the team working at reduced capacity because of lockdown. In the first six months of 2020, 44% of all the child sexual abuse content the IWF dealt with involved images filmed by the victims themselves, up from 29% in 2019. Sarah Smith is technical projects manager at the IWF. She said online grooming is driving the growth in abuse, with predators filming through webcams and live streaming sites. “When I first joined the organisation in 2009, typically the content we were dealing with was images of contact sexual abuse, for example intra-familial abuse with an adult and child depicted in the images. In recent years we have seen a really big increase in what we call ‘self generated content’, which is where there may not be an adult present in the images. “It could take place on a social media platform where children are present and offenders are grooming and coercing them into sexual activity. That is then made into a permanent image.” These images can then be shared on image hosting sites. IWF image analyst Isobel* described how she sees children being manipulated into creating videos. “It’s typically girls in their bedroom or bathroom. This is a family home setting, and quite often their parents or carers are downstairs. As parents you think your children are safe at home but if they are in their bedrooms on laptops or phones, they may be at risk of being abused. It’s not the parents’ fault but they need to be aware.” The all-party parliamentary group on social media has launched a national inquiry into how to tackle the increase in self-generated child sexual abuse. MP Chris Elmore, chair of the group, said: ‘“During the pandemic there has been increasing use of online platforms and with this we’ve seen a disturbing increase in ‘self-generated indecent images’ of children online, particularly 11-13-year-old girls.” He added: “Our inquiry is not looking at whether it happens – we know it happens. With the Internet Safety Partnership we want to look at how to respond, practical ways to protect children. It will be the first national inquiry into the rise of this content. “Children are being groomed via live streaming, via live chat services, through gaming chat. And some children are being encouraged to insert things into themselves.” He stressed that the term “self generated” does not confer any blame on the victim. “There is no blame on the young people, they are innocent and are being manipulated through deeply dark criminal activity.” The police and National Crime Agency are also seeing a growth in indicators of online abuse. Simon Bailey, the National Police Chiefs’ Council lead for child protection, said: “There have been year-on-year increases in reports of people accessing indecent images of children and as a service, we are searching more properties, arresting more suspects and safeguarding more children than ever before.” The scale of the problem in the UK puts a huge burden on law enforcement, with about 700 arrests and voluntary attendances at police stations every month related to indecent images of children (IIOC) and grooming offences; 900 children are safeguarded every month. In October, one of the IWF’s analysts, Daniel*, helped safeguard a child after seeing her abused in a video anonymously sent to the organisation. The link led to a video of an 11-13-year-old girl in the UK who was engaged in category-B sexual abuse, the second most severe category. The video was “self-generated”, meaning the victim could have been coerced into making the footage herself by an abuser, who appeared to be telling her what to do over the internet. Daniel said: “There was no one directly there who was making her do it, but certainly, from the video itself, it seemed she was being asked to do certain things.” Daniel tracked the video down on an online forum, where he found predators discussing the footage. The criminal material was quickly taken down, and police and social services were able to step in and protect the child. *Names have been changed
Global Dispatch: sign up for a different world view:	Discover our pick of breaking stories and hard-hitting features, uncovered by our correspondents across Africa, Asia, South and Central America and beyond. We bring you the voices and opinions of people living under extraordinary circumstances along with expert analysis of the key issues from the most authoritative voices: the developing world in words, pictures, podcast and video.  See the latest edition here . *** Explore all our newsletters:  whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you *** The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Idi Amin challenged my dad to a wrestling match – then chickened out:	My father, Samson “Sunlight” Okiror, lived an extraordinary life. He was a soldier, a rebel and one of Uganda’s most famous sportsmen. A wrestler and heavyweight lifter, he could lift a car off the ground. He could tie a rope to a Land Rover and stop it from moving when the engine was turned on. He could stretch steel chains and springs. He travelled across east  Africa  and to Europe to train and perform. It wasn’t a profession his family had considered. Samson was born into a farming family in the eastern Ugandan district of Serere. I was told he had a single bone in his forearms. But at 16 he was offered a job that changed the course of his life. He became store keeper for the 4 th  battalion of the British King’s African Rifles. Even as a boy, he was strong, and his strength was noticed in the army. In 1965, the army gave him surgery on his right hand, which had been damaged by burns sustained as a child. To strengthen his arm after the operation, dad started lifting weights. By 1970, he was a second lieutenant in the Ugandan army, and had become a renowned professional heavyweight lifter and wrestler. He was called the “golden rock of Africa”, known for his crowd-pulling stunts – he earned mythical status in April 1975 when he anchored a helicopter, holding it down with chains as it hovered overhead. Two months later, he successfully pulled a ferry in Lake Nalubaale 100 metres to the docking area. In 1977 the Voice of  Uganda  newspaper called “Sunlight” Okiror the country’s greatest athlete. Amin cancelled the match claiming he was too busy but, the whispers went, really fearing humiliation from Africa's leaders His skills reached the attention of Idi Amin, then president, who challenged my father to a wrestling match. The much-anticipated bout was slated for 28 July 1975 in Kampala, during a summit of what is now the African Union. Amin cancelled the match, claiming he was too busy, but, the whispers went, really fearing humiliation before Africa’s leaders. “You see my [honourable] son of the soil, that I have had no good time to practise. The visitors are due to come, we people of Uganda must prepare to welcome them. We don’t need to wrestle now,” Amin told my dad at a meeting at State House. Later, Amin would hire a plane to fly dad to Germany for training and performances. “Our country lacks foreign exchange. While you are there, collect as much [as you can] and send to your country. OK?” Amin instructed him. I was born in 1979 and grew up hearing the stories – the man whom the most brutal military dictator feared to wrestle. He was a great dad. Very tough, but loving. He loved us, his children, and his wives so much. He used to drive us around in his minibus and land cruiser. At the time, we lived both in Serere and Kampala. Our home was the only one in the whole village with a tiled roof. People used to stop him on the street. Some people called him “Power Mike” – in reference to Michael Okpara, the 1970s Nigerian wrestler and former African heavyweight champion. By the time Yoweri Museveni became president in 1986, dad was the Ugandan army’s director of sports. But he grew increasingly frustrated with what he saw as Museveni’s poor governance and in May 1987, he joined the sons of Teso, launching the Uganda People’s Army (UPA) rebellion. He was commander of the UPA’s headquarters brigade when he was killed in March 1991, aged 44. I was at school when I heard the news and joined a group of children in running to the village, where hundreds of people had already gathered, to see if the strongman was really dead. Seeing my dad’s body riddled with bullets and lying in a pool of blood, I broke down and cried: “God be with you, dad, till we meet again.” His death was a rude awakening for a 12-year-old boy whose mother had already left the family, and who had until then lived a privileged life. Our powerful family disintegrated. I had to leave home, as my grandmother couldn’t provide for me. I did odd jobs in people’s homes to make ends meet. At times I slept without a meal. The family has struggled ever since. My dad’s army pension has never been paid nor have we received any compensation for the property and cattle lost during the insurgency in the north of the country. Recently I started thinking about my dad’s legacy and his contribution to sport. I posted some pictures of him on Facebook and  Twitter  and began to hear, once again, stories about the “golden rock”. “I actually watched one of his shows in Lira town during Idi Amin’s time,” commented one person, Djegeti Omara, on one of my Facebook posts. “It was very entertaining. I watched him hold a vehicle and it couldn’t move. I still remember that episode,” he said. “Yes, he was a great man,” wrote Lawrence Okae, national chairman for the opposition party, Uganda People’s Congress. “As he parked [his vehicle] … a towering, well-built, seemingly tough-looking, confident man came out,” he said. “It’s at this moment we got to know it belongs to ‘Power Mike’ – Okiror, a man who could pull down an aeroplane.” People still remember my father fondly. Perhaps it is not a surprise that the Ugandan government has never considered his legacy. On the 30th anniversary of his death next year, I would like that to change. I would like my father’s achievements to be honoured – for a sports arena or an annual tournament to bear his name.  “Sunlight” Okiror lifted the country’s flag high through his sport. For that I believe he now deserves some recognition. Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
‘I felt like I was born again’: first non-binary person granted UK refugee status:	Refugee status has been granted over a person’s non-binary status for the first time in a UK court, following a  landmark ruling . The judgment,  in the upper tribunal , was decided in the case of Arthur Britney Joestar from El Salvador after concluding that they would face persecution for their identity if they returned to their home country. In July activists had welcomed the “landmark ruling” when a judge in San Salvador  found three police officers guilty  of the 2019 murder of Camila Díaz Córdova and sentenced each to  20 years in prison  as pivotal, it was the first conviction for a hate crime against a transgender woman in the country.  The UN has repeatedly called for more to be done to tackle the violence there. The UK ruling states that Joestar would be likely to face specific threats, including physical and sexual violence, if they returned to  El Salvador . Joestar, 29, now settled in Liverpool, came to the UK in October 2017 to escape daily abuse in their home country. “When I walked along the streets, people threw rubbish at me from their windows – once, someone threw a plastic bag full of urine at me,” they said. “In El Salvador, non-binary people are in so much danger – I’ve seen corpses. Anything could have happened to me. I could have been tortured, raped, shot, killed.” In one incident, in the capital San Salvador, Joestar was stopped by police. “One of the policemen started asking about my hair, telling me I wasn’t normal, that they wanted to teach me how to be a man. Then they punched me on the chest and pushed me to the floor. “I’m not sure what was worse – the attack or when I was just left there and no one came to help me. I had a lot of bruises, my arms were bleeding and I was crying. But no one cared. It was really terrifying,” they said. Joestar had previously been refused asylum in the UK. The first claim, in November 2018, was dismissed by the first-tier tribunal which said the police brutality “amounted to no more than discrimination” and occurred only once. The second, in February 2020, on the basis of non-binary identity was initially refused but upheld on appeal. “The way the judge handled the case: she just understood me – all the tiny details … she saw the whole picture,” they said. “At the end, she turned to look at me and started speaking to me in Spanish,to tell me she granted me the right to stay in this country and the right to be who I want to be. I just started to cry. I felt like I was born again.” At the appeal hearing, Judge Bruce criticised the previous decision that the Salvadorian police attack was not persecution. “It was a physical assault, by the police, motivated by nothing other than homophobia,” she said. “Five minutes is a long time to be beaten. I do not doubt that it was for the appellant a terrifying experience. “Having had regard to the country background evidence,” she added, “and the evidence personally relating to the appellant … It follows that the appeal must be allowed.” The judge said previous hearings had been wrong to use the pronoun “he”.  Activists welcomed the judgment. Nancy Kelley, chief executive at Stonewall, said: “We’re incredibly pleased for Mx Joestar, whose landmark case is likely to make it easier for non-binary people to seek asylum in the UK. No one should be subject to attacks and violence simply because of who they are, and it is vital that the UK offers refuge to those for whom their own country is not safe.” Joestar hopes the case will help others. “All the injustice I suffered, maybe it’s worth it, to show people there is something positive to take from all the suffering. I just hope that soon people can see us and we can finally say we’re not invisible.” •  This article was amended on 31 December 2020 to remove an insufficiently confirmed statistic relating to life expectancy of transgender women in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Gender conversion 'therapy' made me suicidal. I fear for other young Nigerians:	W hen I was nine, my parents took me to a traditional healer. He used a razor to make three incisions on the insteps of my feet, my wrists, my elbows, my forehead and on the back of my neck. As blood started to flow, the healer rubbed a concoction of herbs into the incisions and gave me a potion to drink. He took alligator pepper and rubbed it on various parts of my body. There was a rooster, into which he cast the “demon” inside me. The rooster was slaughtered and thrown into the river, supposedly taking my sexuality with it. In boarding school, I met a boy who I would say was my first love. We talked about everything and liked to take long walks. But he struggled. I watched him struggle to accept his sexuality. He felt there was something wrong with him but I didn’t know how to help him. For me it was different. It wasn’t just about sexuality; it was also about gender. I was born male but I have never felt like a man. When I was 22, in university, I met a transgender woman. She was a lot more open, more cosmopolitan, more upfront about what she wanted. I’d never met anyone like her. We had a sisterhood –– fun, graceful, pure. It was as if the scales fell from my eyes. What part of me has been lost in the effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form? My family was not happy about our friendship. They said I was bringing shame to the family. They took me to a Catholic priest to cast away the stubborn spirit that made me different. The priest told me that God had intended a great path for me, but some negative force had diverted me from it. He made me believe I could change. For a year, I fasted, I went to mass and took communion. I recited all the prayers as though my life depended on it. And it felt as if it did, you see, with the way everyone treated me. But I was all right. I always was. The main issue with conversion therapy is that victims don’t talk about it. It tends to make something that is so wrong look right. The worst part is when they are able to convince you that change can happen, that there is indeed something wrong with you, that you are a mistake of nature, an anomaly. It messes you up.  The encounter with the healer was many years ago, but the memory is still harrowing. What part of me has been lost in an effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form? I’m 43 now. Still gay, still a trans woman. Still looking over my shoulder fearing that someone might want to hurt me. I’m much more scared than the average person. And I’m not the only one. Exposure to gender identity conversion efforts can have  severe adverse  effects on mental health. There are thousands of young people in Nigeria being subjected to these dangerous practices in a bid to “cure” them. There are no structures in Nigeria to deal with these psychological scars. That’s why we need our community. We need to have conversations about safety and security, especially with regard to familial relationships and dating. We need to openly talk about the devastating impact of conversion therapy. I have contemplated suicide several times. I attempted it once; relieved that it failed.  I’ve noticed that when people have a personal experience –– they find out their partner or friend or child is LGBTQ+ –– they become less aggressive. I think my mother always knew, even as she went through the motions of trying to convert me. At some point she realised it wasn’t something she could struggle against. My father never accepted my reality, even until he died. He didn’t know how to deal with it. People need to realise that the world is not black and white; it’s in colour.  Many people, like my friend in university, left for other countries where they thought they could live freely. But nowhere is safe. Brazil, Ecuador, Taiwan, Malta and  Germany  are the only countries in the world that have banned conversion therapy. Nigeria is a hostile place. The  Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act  makes our existences illegal. I have not been able to undergo surgery here because there’s no access to medical care to support transitioning.  I know that if I look after myself, I will be fine. I’m concerned about the younger ones. The  Commonwealth Equality Network  is working towards decriminalisation of homosexuality in Commonwealth countries. I look forward to freedom. It may not be in my time. But we must keep fighting. Just so future generations will not live through the same things I have lived through. •  The author, from  Nigeria , wished to remain anonymous to protect her safety In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email  jo@samaritans.org  or  jo@samaritans.ie . In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is  1-800-273-8255 . In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at  www.befrienders.org . Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
New-sprung: the project turning PPE offcuts into Covid patient mattresses:	A t the height of the pandemic in the Indian state of Kerala, fashion designer Lakshmi Menon, 46, heard that every new Covid care centre had to have 50 beds. Mattresses were in short supply. Every time a patient was discharged, the mattress had to be incinerated. “I thought: that’s a lot of mattresses and a lot of burning,” says Menon. Menon’s solution was to collect the mountains of plastic pieces from factories that make PPE – all the little bits left over after cutting. Women then braid the bits into rope-like plaits 6ft long. The braids are laid out in a zigzag and the ends tied together. The result is a light, soft, washable, hygienic mattress for just 300 rupees (£3) – half the price of a normal one. The women of Arayankav near Kochi, where Menon lives on a rubber plantation, get jobs, the environment is protected and Covid clinics get mattresses – “ shayya ” in Sanskrit. The idea of using waste scraps came to her when she was driving to Kochi in February and saw children sleeping on the road. A few days later, she visited a friend who runs a fashion house and saw heaps of waste fabric of different sizes. “That’s when I thought I could use braiding to make mattresses for the homeless. Braiding allows you to use every single bit of fabric of different sizes. Even the tiniest bit can be incorporated and everyone knows how to tie a plait,” she says. In March, she made 20 mattresses and handed them out to homeless families. Then lockdown happened. Her friends in  design and fashion lost business overnight . Workers were laid off and things looked grim. Menon forgot about the fabric mattresses, until she went to a friend’s tailoring unit in July and saw that he had started making PPE. In the corner lay a mountain of plastic pieces. Menon’s eyes gleamed. “I picked them up and found they were cleaner, softer and more dust-free than fabric scraps. It was the best material I could have wished for,” she says. Her friend was delighted when Menon took the scrap pieces. He had been struggling with how to dispose of them because burning was out of the question. At the same time Kerala, overwhelmed by the pandemic, ordered the setting up of 50-bed Covid centres across the state and village councils scrambled to find enough mattresses. Apart from the Covid centres that have bought them, Menon is working with NGOs to provide  shayyas  to homeless shelters and rough sleepers on the principle that “everyone deserves a good night’s sleep”. India’s 1.7 million homeless people normally sleep on the ground, usually on a thin mat. Students in India who are part of  Enactus , the international not-for-profit organisation set up by accountancy firm KPMG, are working on making the mattress widely available. “We also feel that yoga centres might be interested in buying them as they are soft and light and easily rolled up,” says Ishartek Pabla, operations head of Enactus at Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies.  Menon is unlikely to meet a shortage of raw material.  India  has become the world’s second-largest PPE manufacturer, with more than 1,000 manufacturers producing 4.5m pieces a day, the country’s textile ministry announced this week. Menon’s  shayya  has been taken up by UN staff who will include it in a list of Covid innovative ideas that can be easily replicated. Several Indian corporations have also contacted her. “These big companies have to fulfil their corporate social responsibility objectives and the mattress provides a good way of proving income for rural women in a sustainable way with no need for any equipment. Nothing really. Just a bit of space,” says Menon. Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Congolese people have been brutalised since 1996. Why isn’t the west helping?:	On New Year’s Eve, a gang of militia left its jungle base and swept across Beni, a forested north-eastern corner of the  Democratic Republic of the Congo , looking for Nande people to kill. Locals alerted the Congolese army but they were ignored. In small farms in Tingwe, a few kilometres from a DRC army base, the gang found 25 people – men, women and children – out harvesting food. One by one they hacked them to death with machetes and axes. Rarely over the past six years has a month passed that I have not received gruesome images of people killed in Beni.  Almost 300 people were killed  – most of them women and children – in just three months in November 2019–January 2020.  Forty were killed in May . In July, the  UN said that  793 civilians have been killed, 176 wounded and 717 others abducted in attacks in the preceding 18 months, which UN investigators said may amount to crimes against humanity and war crimes. Dozens more were killed in  September ,  October  and  November . Massacres on this scale usually prompt a strong response from the US, EU and UK, as they should. UN peacekeepers are sent to the region; communiques are issued; the government opens an investigation. In DRC’s case, none of this has happened. Since 1996, we Congolese have been killed in a multitude of ways: by our former president, Joseph Kabila, and his generals. By the use of rape as a weapon of war to punish, displace, destroy and humiliate Congolese women and their families and communities ( an estimated 1,200 women are raped every day  and this has been going on since 1996). By Rwandan and Ugandan armies. By famine and disease. Now we are being killed by mortars and machetes. The first massacre in Beni happened in 2014; exactly a year after Congolese and UN  forces defeated the M23  – a militia gang in DRC allegedly  supported  by Rwandan president Paul Kagame. We have now entered the seventh year of these massacres.  Yet an indifferent international community has allowed the killings to go on, claiming more and more lives each week. How many more must die before action is taken? The government in Kinshasa blames the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) rebel group for the deaths; a theory believed by few Congolese. Besides, a  UN security council report  has accused General Muhindo Akili Mundos of financing and supplying militia to do the killings. Another report  found the recruits were allegedly promised up to $250 for each kill. Instead of facing justice, our new president, Félix Tshisekedi, has instead  promoted Mundos  to the rank of deputy army inspector, leaving Beni’s Nande population to their fate. They are now on the brink of being wiped out because of their land. The US and EU have denounced the violence – their ambassadors in Kinshasa often tweet their revulsion and sympathy – but that’s it; giving the world the false impression that something is being done to stop the killings, as if they are shielding someone from justice. This might be why the US has been blocking the creation of an international criminal tribunal for DRC to end the impunity fuelling the violence in Beni and elsewhere in the country, while six million more Congolese people are now in displacement camps, unable to return to their homes because of violence and starvation. When I heard about the latest massacre I wrote to Joe Biden, pleading with him to send in UN lawyers. Peacekeepers are clearly failing – a  UN report  has already documented more than 600 war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. Yet not a single one of those the UN named has been brought to justice. However, I cannot shake the feeling that nothing will change, that the Congolese people have been abandoned. The death and destruction we have suffered –  the more than 5.4 million killed  between 1998 and 2008 – half of whom were children under 5, the wholesale wasting of villages, towns and communities, the relentless use of rape and machetes and axes in Beni and elsewhere in DRC seem not to matter. But this is not a humanitarian appeal: it is a call for solidarity and compassion. I believe what is happening in Beni in eastern DRC is genocidal – and the UK, US and EU stance on the impunity fuelling these killings is shameful. Even complicit.  •  Vava Tampa is a community organiser, a freelance writer focusing on Africa’s great lakes, decolonisation and culture, and a social worker in London
Kenya faces $62bn bill to mitigate climate-linked hunger, drought and conflict:	Kenya needs $62bn (£46bn) to mitigate and adapt to the climate crisis in the next 10 years, according to a government document sent to the UN framework convention on climate change. It equates to almost 67% of Kenya’s  GDP . The  report  illustrates the scale of the challenge as the country aims to cut greenhouse gases by 32% within the next decade. It will rely on international sources to fund close to 90% of the expenditure. Securing such a colossal amount of often contentious climate financing from rich countries yet to honour their commitments to the $100bn target pledged during the 2015  Paris agreement  will be a tall order. Kenya accounts for less than 0.1% of global greenhouse gas emissions and has a per capita emission of less than half the global average. But low-emitting countries such as  Kenya  are suffering the most from the effects of climate change, and are poorly equipped to effectively respond or build resilience to key hazards such as drought and flooding. For example, a 2011  drought  in Kenya caused damage estimated at $11bn, while another in 2014-18 left 3.4 million people in food insecurity and half a million lacking access to water. In 2018, floods displaced 230,000 people in Kenya, including 150,000 children, drowned 20,000 livestock and led to the closure of 700 schools. The country also lost 8,500 hectares (21,000 acres) of crops in a country where 84% of the land is “arid and semi-arid, with poor infrastructure and other developmental challenges, leaving less than 16% of the land to support over 80% of the population”. Such losses, the document says, continue to knock about 3-5% off the country’s GDP. Food security, warns the report, will worsen because Kenyan farmers are almost entirely weather-dependent. In addition, major rivers are seeing reduced flow as glaciers on the country’s biggest water tower, Mount Kenya, shrink. They are already down to 17% of their original size and will disappear in 30 years, the report says. Erratic rainfall has hampered hydroelectric generation and forced Kenya to look at exploiting 400m tonnes of coal reserves with proposals to build two power plants: one using local coal and the other imported coal. Providing cheap fuel will come with negative environmental and social impacts. The report says: “The use of coal is accompanied by strong environmental impacts, such as high emissions of sulphur dioxide, heavy metals and harmful greenhouse gases. The country is therefore faced with choosing between the exploitation of her fossil fuel resources to realise her development objectives and forgoing their exploitation for environmental reasons. To forgo all the benefits of exploiting the fossil fuel resources, Kenya will need significant international support.” The climate crisis is also having an impact on national security with the scramble for meagre natural resources leading to violent conflicts. The report says: “Increased intensities and magnitudes of climate-related risks in Kenya aggravate conflicts, mostly over natural resources. This has frequently forced the country to reallocate development resources to address climate-related emergencies.” Research  by Imperial College Business School and Soas University of London for the UN in 2018 showed how developing countries lack the resources required to stem the tide of climate crisis, with the lack of resilience and mitigation measures driving them into unsustainable debt.  “For every 10 dollars paid in interest by developing countries, an additional dollar will be spent due to climate vulnerability. This financial burden exacerbates the present-day economic challenges of poorer countries. The magnitude of this burden will at least double over the next decade,” the research findings state. Kenya, a member of the  Climate Vulnerable Forum , has in recent years seen debt at critical levels with a November  economic update  from the World Bank showing debt to GDP rising from 62.4% of GDP in June 2019 to 65.6% in June 2020. Without affordable climate financing, the convention on climate change says any  investments  in these counties will have to factor risks from climate vulnerability with corresponding increased debt repayments.
Virginity tests for female rape survivors outlawed by Pakistani court:	A Pakistani court has outlawed the practice of subjecting female rape survivors to a virginity test in an unprecedented ruling. Lahore’s high court ruled on Monday that the virginity test has no legal basis and “offends the personal dignity of the female victim”. Making the judgment, Justice Ayesha Malik said: “Virginity testing is highly invasive, having no scientific or medical requirement, yet carried out in the name of medical protocols in sexual violence cases. “It is a humiliating practice, which is used to cast suspicion on the victim, as opposed to focusing on the accused and the incident of sexual violence.” In a 2018  report , the UN said that virginity tests, a medically dubious internal examination of a woman’s hymen, still take place in 20 countries, and can be conducted with or without consent in rape cases or when a woman is accused of a “moral” crime such as premarital sex or running away.  Premarital sex remains a crime in  Pakistan  for men and women and carries a five-year prison sentence. “The verdict is the culmination of a history of activism and built on the hard work that the feminist movement has been engaging in for decades. The test is part of a larger structure of patriarchy that hinges victimhood on women’s characters and perpetuates the myth of the ‘perfect victim’,” Nighat Dad, a lawyer and rights activist told the Guardian. “The barriers in place for women to report cases of rape are insurmountable, but this historic verdict will go a long way in dismantling those barriers,” she said. In October Human Rights Watch  said  virginity examinations had long been a routine part of criminal proceedings in Pakistan, based on a misogynistic assumption that a woman “habituated to sexual intercourse” is less likely to have been raped. Police and prosecutors have used the results to accuse rape victims of illegal sexual intercourse and to treat them as criminals. Pakistan’s minister for human rights, Shireen Mazari, lauded the judgment, which will apply only in the state of Punjab, on  Twitter .
Garment workers going hungry as fallout from cancelled orders takes toll – report:	The catastrophic fallout of the fashion industry’s decision to cancel billions of pounds of clothing orders at the start of the pandemic has left garment workers across the world facing chronic food shortages as wages plunge and factories close. Interviews with nearly 400 garment workers  in Myanmar, India, Indonesia, Lesotho, Haiti, Ethiopia, El Salvador, Cambodia and Bangladesh conducted by human rights group Worker Rights Consortium (WRC), found that almost 80% of workers, many making clothes for some of the world’s largest fashion brands, are going hungry. Almost a quarter of those surveyed said that they were facing daily food shortages. The majority (60%) of those interviewed were still employed in clothing factories supplying overseas brands. The report found that across all nine countries, workers had experienced an average 21% drop in wages since the beginning of the year, leading to many being unable to cover basic living costs. Others had lost their jobs when their factories closed or sacked or suspended workers after brands cancelled orders or pulled their business at the beginning of the pandemic. “Brands bear substantial responsibility for the destitution garment workers are facing,” said Penelope Kyritsis, director of strategic research at WRC. “The fashion industry has made its overseas workers exquisitely vulnerable to this crisis by paying them chronically low wages, leaving workers unprotected and unable to absorb the pandemic’s economic shocks. And the industry’s response to the crisis has often made matters worse. Unless something is done to help them we are likely to see tremendous suffering across global supply chains.” One Cambodian garment worker who spoke to the Guardian lost her job in April when her factory closed after brands pulled their business and cancelled orders. She said she has not been paid her salary and is owed more than £1,500. She has been forced to take out loans and is now eating only one meal a day to make sure her 3-year-old daughter gets enough food. “Before I lost my job I could just about make the money stretch, but when the factory closed I was left with nothing.” she said. “Now my husband and I are just eating rice so my daughter doesn’t go too hungry. I don’t know how to make the factory give me the money they owe me.” In order to continue feeding their children, 75% of workers said they had taken out loans or gone into debt since the beginning of the pandemic. Another garment worker from Indonesia said that her factory went bankrupt in September due to order cancellations from its foreign buyers. She is now surviving on the charity of her neighbours and is unable to make her loan repayments. “There is no other work here but the garment factories,” she said. “I am now 40 and every time I try to get a job they say I’m too old. I don’t know how to pay the money I owe.” Prof Genevieve LeBaron, a professor of politics at Sheffield University and a co-author of the report, said the debt workers were running up was one of the most alarming aspects of the research. She said that “75% of the 400 workers we talked to said they were borrowing money to buy food, and almost half of these workers are still working at the same factory that employed them before the pandemic, which means that even those who have managed to keep their jobs are taking on debt to cope with falling income. “What is most significant is that garment workers from nine countries with very different worker and industry demographics are all experiencing the same difficulties … This is a system where the workers at the bottom are taking all the risk and paying the price when things go wrong.” Fashion brands cancelled an estimated $15bn of orders when the global lockdown closed retail outlets earlier this year. Clothing companies  used  force majeure  clauses in their contracts  with overseas suppliers to cancel existing orders. Many of these orders had already been completed but brands refused to accept shipment, leaving suppliers stranded with millions of pounds of unsold stock. Factories were also forced to shut because of Covid, and the refusal of foreign buyers to continue to pay workers’ wages while business was suspended has, the report said, led to mass redundancies and hours and pay being slashed. Worker Rights Consortium said that although some retailers have subsequently agreed to pay for cancelled orders in full, others  are still refusing . A recent analysis of government import data for US and European markets  identified a $16bn hole in clothing imports for 2020 , largely due to cancelled orders. “What is most concerning is that brands are now seemingly exploiting their suppliers’ desperation for orders by demanding lower prices and slower payment schedules, increasing the downward pressure on wages and making more job losses inevitable,” said Kyritsis. The report says that the fashion industry should provide cash support to overseas workers throughout the Covid-19 crisis and ensure that workers are getting legally mandated severance and termination pay.
'Sex for sanitary pads': how Kenya's lockdown led to a rise in teenage pregnancy:	Thousands of girls in  Kenya  will not be going back to school when classes start again in January, because they became pregnant during the Covid 19-lockdown. The  African Institute for Development Policy  puts the number of teenage girls who became pregnant in the country between January and May at more than 150,000, with Nairobi recording nearly 12,000 pregnancies. Anecdotal evidence from healthcare workers across the Kenyan capital suggest the true figures could be higher, as many pregnant teenagers are not coming to clinics. Parents were unable to provide basic hygiene requirements such as clean water, soap and sanitary pads after schools in Kenya closed in March, says Mercy Chege, programme director at Plan International Kenya, and there were cases of young women being preyed on by older men with spare cash. “It is a shadow pandemic,” says Chege. “Out of school, the girls had much free, unsupervised hours where the allure of sex for pads was irresistible. The government used to give sanitary pads to girls while in school but failed to extend the services to their homes when schools closed, leaving the girls at the mercy of ‘friends with benefits’. “Sometimes sex was in exchange for as little as the 15 Kenyan shillings (10p) required to pay for a daily shower in a public bathroom. Many would go for days without taking a bath and could do anything to appease someone who promised them such small luxuries.” She adds: “A few girls were lured into child pornography. Perpetrators told them it was not wrong since they did not have to practise what they saw, but they didn’t know they were being sexually abused.” In the sprawling Dandora suburb in Nairobi, girls share stories about their disrupted lives. Jackie is sitting pensively on a bench outside a makeshift provision store. She should be chatting with her friends, or preparing to go back to school after almost a year. But at 16, she is six months pregnant. She’s tired and finds it difficult to sustain a long conversation. Worries about her life and that of her unborn child are written all over her face. Jackie came to Nairobi from the lakeside city of Kisumu in 2018, where she lived with her mother. Her father died when she was small. “My aunt in Nairobi promised to educate me since my mother was incapable of doing that. Then she chased me away when I got pregnant in July,” she says. Getting pregnant was the last thing Jackie wanted when she met her equally young boyfriend in Dandora. Teenage girls in Nairobi, she felt, seemed to enjoy life more than in her village. “We were just having fun. He [the boyfriend] seemed to care and would give me 50 shillings to buy [sanitary] pads. He did not use any protection before we had sex. Nobody thought what we did would result in pregnancy,” says Jackie, shaking her head in despair. “I wish I could go back in time and do things differently. It is too late now.” Jackie broke the news of her pregnancy to her boyfriend who beat her, accusing her of recklessness. Alone and with no job or family nearby, she dreads the arrival of the baby. According to the  UN Population Fund , six months of sustained global lockdown is expected to “leave 47 million women in low- and middle-income countries unable to use modern contraceptives, leading to a projected seven million additional unintended pregnancies”. Kenya already had a high pregnancy rate among teenagers, with more than  13,000 girls dropping out of school every year  to have babies.  In Dandora, Jackie shares her tin-walled, one-room house with Liz, who was thrown out by her landlord after defaulting on rent payments for more than three months. Liz is 17. In Kenya, anyone below the age of 18 is considered a minor who should be under the care of a parent or guardian. But Liz has to work to provide for her newborn baby girl. The country’s Covid-19 lockdown happened just as she was about to start the first year of high school after a delay due to lack of fees. “Schools closed and then I met this boy. I am not even sure if I loved him. He ran away when I told him I am pregnant,” Liz says. Her baby is not feeding properly. “The baby is not getting anything at all. I have not been eating well. There is no milk.” Three weeks after giving birth, Liz went around the neighbourhood looking for menial jobs like washing clothes. “Then I started bleeding because the scars had not healed. I would faint often. Then people would not hire me any more,” she says. Lack of adequate sex and reproductive health education among young people has been a hindrance in preventing teenage pregnancies. A recent  report  from Homa Bay in western Kenya, where a third of all girls aged between 15 and 19 fall pregnant every year, says parents and teenagers are uncomfortable discussing sexual matters with one other. Young fathers, for instance, said they knew little about conception and were surprised to learn of their girlfriends’ pregnancies. Karis, 17, is a new father. News that his girlfriend was pregnant seemed like a joke to him at first. “She came and told me that she had missed her periods. ‘What does that have to do with me?’ I asked her. I thought she needed pads,” he says. “Then she removed what I learned was a pregnancy kit and showed me two lines that indicated she was pregnant. I did not believe her until months later.” For young women and girls, seeking medical attention has been difficult. Covid-19 disrupted services, and even in the best of times healthcare is sporadic or inadequate in Nairobi’s informal settlements such as Kibera, Mathare, Mukuru and Kawangware, where  75% of the city’s population lives . Liz is yet to have her 10-week baby immunised against tetanus, pneumonia or rotavirus while Jackie, six-months pregnant, is yet to visit a prenatal clinic. However, it is the thought of going back to school that scares them the most. Earlier this year, the education ministry outlined  regulations  that will allow girls who have babies to continue their schooling without discrimination. But many are afraid of going back to school for fear of ridicule or being judged by their peers and teachers. Chege says: “Despite the school re-entry policy, the school environment is hostile for the young mothers because of ridicule and abuse. Recently, a teacher told a class to consult a teenage mother on the issue of sex as she ‘is an expert on this topic’, yet she was a rape victim. Already, some of the girls fear venturing out, as people refer to them as mothers to ‘Covid babies’.” Names have been changed
Zimbabwe enters Covid lockdown amid fears over crowded new year parties:	Parties and new year celebrations that attracted thousands of revellers with little social distancing or mask wearing have triggered panic and a strict 30-day national lockdown in Zimbabwe’s capital, Harare. On New Year’s Eve thousands of people gathered at Matapi, Mbare, one of Zimbabwe’s oldest townships for a dancehall concert, while thousands of others held parties across the city despite a police ban. Video footage  and photographs showing huge crowds partying with no regard to Covid-19 regulations prompted an outcry on social media, with Zimbabweans questioning why the police had failed to shut down the concert. The Mbare event, which attracted top artists, was held less than a kilometre from Matapi police station. Police have since arrested people involved in organising the unsanctioned concert, for breaking lockdown rules that ban gatherings of more than 50 people. “So far, 52 people have been arrested … for openly defying the government’s Covid-19 measures on health, safety and security,” police said in a statement. On the same night, other late-night venues dotted about the city were also crowded with revellers. Across the country, 2,321 people were arrested on New Year’s Day for breaking lockdown measures, including 200 teenagers at a  house party  in Westgate, Harare.  “It appears members of the public are taking the Covid-19 pandemic for granted and are no longer taking precautionary measures,” the police said. The events flouting regulations have triggered panic, with Zimbabweans fearing another wave of the virus. On Sunday Zimbabwe recorded 774 Covid cases, with 571 new infections in Harare. As of 3 January,  Zimbabwe  had recorded 15,265 cases and 380 deaths. However, testing is not widespread and cases have been rising rapidly since Christmas as Zimbabweans who work in South  Africa  returned home for the holidays. Health experts have warned of a rapid rise in new infections, especially in the most populous suburbs where social distancing is impossible, while a government official said Zimbabwe could be “overrun by the virus”. “We hear UK beds are overwhelmed by Covid-19. Well, that’s them. They say in South Africa that hospital admission thresholds are now quite high – that’s them. But, let me tell you about our own situation: don’t catch the virus if you can avoid it. We are being overwhelmed and overrun by this virus,” the information secretary, Nick Mangwana, said in a  tweet . Zimbabweans with relatives suffering from Covid-19 have pleaded for ventilators as private hospitals continue to charge high rates. With a fragile health system, where there has been insufficient testing and a lack of preparedness to deal with the virus, health experts have warned of an impending health catastrophe. In response to the rising cases, the government on Saturday ordered a strict 30-day national lockdown. The vice-president, Constantino Chiwenga, said Zimbabwe had recorded 1,342 cases and 29 deaths in the past week, “the highest number recorded so far”. He ordered that funerals be limited to 30 people while gatherings such as weddings and church services have been banned for 30 days. The reopening of schools has been postponed indefinitely, while restaurants and bars have been shut down. A 6pm-6am curfew has been introduced. However, airports will remain open, while intercity travel has been banned withborders open only to commercial cargo and vehicles transiting to other countries. The lockdown also bans any form of informal trading, which is the mainstay of the economy and how millions of people earn get their livelihood. Zimbabweans who spoke to the Guardian in Harare said the strict rules would plunge families into hunger. “I used up all my money when I travelled for the Christmas holidays, how do I survive for the next 30 days without selling my wares? These decisions are being made with little regard to how poor people like us are going to survive,” said Esther Marimbire, a vendor from Budiriro, a suburb of southwest Harare. The 40-year-old said that despite the government’s promises to give struggling families relief during the first lockdown in March last year, her family is yet to benefit. “I was part of the thousands here who registered for relief last year but up to now nothing has come our way. This means the government does not care about our welfare,” she said. Zimbabwe has nearly  8 million people in need of food aid , according to humanitarian organisations, but recent rains have triggered hope of a better harvest following successive years of drought. Glen Mutasa, 30, of Glen View in Harare, said his small business would suffer under the lockdown. “From the experience of last year’s lockdown that went on for months, hunger is knocking on my door. I cannot risk running battles with the police and soldiers so I will stay at home, but it’s tough.”
‘I am not afraid to fight’: the female Afghan colonel who survived the Taliban's assassins:	I t was just after 7am when the car carrying Colonel Saba Sahar, one of Afghanistan’s most senior female police officers, came under fire from armed insurgents. In the back seat, Sahar’s four-year-old daughter began screaming as bullets shattered the windscreen and ripped into the upholstery. As she pushed her child under the seat in front of her, Sahar saw three men carrying AK-47 assault rifles, firing as they approached the car. In the front of the car her bodyguard and driver had both been hit and were badly injured and unconscious. Looking down, Sahar saw blood seeping through her clothing. “It took me another moment to realise I’d been shot too,” she says. She knew that she only had minutes to try to save her daughter. “They were five or six metres away, and they were moving closer to the car, still firing. They would have killed my child,” she says. Bleeding heavily from five shots to her stomach, Sahar reached forward, grabbed the gun from her slumped bodyguard and started returning fire. Meanwhile, a few blocks away, Sahar’s husband, Emal Zaki, was getting their older children ready for school when he heard the gunfire. Wondering whether she could see what was happening on the road ahead, he dialled his wife’s number while he helped his children tie their school shoes. “When she picked up the phone she was still firing at the insurgents,” he says. Through the sound of cracking bullets, Sahar screamed that she was injured and told him to call for help. By the time he reached her car a few minutes later, the gunmen had fled. He found his wife clutching the gun in one hand and their daughter in the other. “I have never seen so much blood in my life,” he says. Dragging the bodyguard and driver into the family car, they sped through the streets to the hospital. “My wife stayed conscious until she was sure our daughter was safe and then she passed out,” says Zaki. Sahar knows she is lucky to be alive. In September, just a few weeks after the attack, the US embassy in Kabul warned that Afghan women in public roles were at increasing risk of being targeted by extremist groups, particularly women working for the government and armed forces. This year eight policewomen have been targeted in similar attacks. Six have died. In a country where men are so dominant, the more women we have in the police, the more other women will be able to seek justice In July, 23-year-old Fatima Faizi, a police officer with the anti-narcotics squad, was kidnapped by armed insurgents. Her mutilated body was found on the streets weeks later. Just weeks before the attack on Sahar, another female police officer was killed in Kunduz province by armed men who dragged her out of her house and murdered her in front of her neighbours. Speaking from her hospital bed, Sahar says she was not surprised she had become a target. Also famous as an actor and documentary filmmaker, in recent years she has risen to become one of the most high-profile women in Afghanistan’s police force, responsible for coordinating special units combating terrorism, drug trafficking and criminal networks. “I am a very visible woman in public life and I have dedicated my life to working on women’s rights and encouraging other women to join the security forces,” she says. “Yet even now I am not afraid.  Afghanistan  has changed, and those attacking and trying to silence us have to accept this.” Since the fall of the  Taliban  two decades ago, Afghanistan’s police forces have become a focus of national and international efforts to create more visible public roles for women. Yet few of the 4,080 women in Afghanistan’s security services have risen up through the ranks. Many remain in backroom jobs, and those who are out on the streets face harassment, abuse and discrimination. Sahar believes the recent attacks on women in the security services are part of a wider campaign to silence progressive voices and undermine the precarious peace talks between the Afghan government and the Taliban under way in Qatar. In early December, the Afghan government and the Taliban agreed  framework rules  for peace talks after more than two months of discussions, allowing negotiations on ending a nearly 20-year civil war to finally begin. Yet in Afghanistan, there has been a wave of bloodshed that has seen targeted killings of journalists, human rights workers and activists. According to Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,  533 civilians were killed and 412 others wounded  in attacks in the first six months of 2020. Against this backdrop, women in the security forces are an obvious target. “[The armed groups] want to stop women from going for these jobs,” says Sahar. “Every Afghan must be represented in the security services. In a country where men are so dominant over every aspect of our lives, the more women we have in the police, the more other women will be able to seek justice, protection and support. We must resist.” She is aware that staying in Afghanistan might mean further attempts on her life. “Leaving my country has not even crossed my mind,” she says. “Why would I leave when my struggle is here with my people? If I stay I can help work towards a peace with the Taliban or I can fight as a solider of Afghanistan. I do not fear another attack from them but I pray they come to us in peace. I am not afraid to fight them again.”
Iran bans importation of Covid vaccines from the US and UK:	Vaccines produced by the US and UK will be banned from entering  Iran , its supreme leader has said, even though his country has suffered the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East. “Imports of US and British vaccines into the country are forbidden ... They’re completely untrustworthy,” Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said in a live televised speech. “It’s not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations. “Given our experience with France’s HIV-tainted blood supplies, French vaccines aren’t trustworthy either,” he added, referring to France’s contaminated blood scandal of the 1980s and 1990s. Khamenei’s comments reflected the tense relations between Iran and the west, which have not abated in the waning days of Donald Trump’s presidency. In his speech, Khamenei mocked American democracy and human rights in the wake of  the riot at Capitol Hill in Washington , and said Iran was in no hurry to negotiate with the incoming Biden administration. But he said if the US lifted sanctions, Iran would respond. He said the issue of compensation for sanctions could be pursued at a later date. His remarks came as Iran prepared to discuss a plan to purchase medical supplies by unlocking as much as $1bn (£735m) of $7bn in frozen assets held in two South Korean banks. The plan will be discussed when the South Korean vice-foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, travels to Tehran in an effort to secure the release of a   South Korean vessel  seized by the Iranian navy earlier this week . Some of the South Korean delegation reached Tehran on Friday. Iran’s central bank governor said Iranian oil revenues had fallen to $20bn, a drop of more than half, as a result of US sanctions. The Iranian foreign ministry claimed the diplomat’s visit was totally focused on the unlocking of Iranian assets, insisting it had been arranged before the ship seizure, although the official Iranian press has been reporting the US block on Iranian assets in Korea ever since the ship was stopped for allegedly polluting the marine environment. Tehran has been in lengthy negotiations with  South Korea  on how to access the assets held in South Korean banks without falling foul of US extraterritorial sanctions, something that is likely to happen if dollar transactions are involved. In the past Iran has exported oil and natural gas to South Korea using settlement accounts based on Korean currency. Owing to the imposition of US sanctions, Tehran has been unable to access its money, even though it insists the money could be transferred in South Korea currency and used exclusively for the purchase of sanction-exempt food and medicines. Seoul claims it has not received the necessary US Treasury assurances that the payments would not lead to fines. More recently, Iran has suggested the money would be used to buy vaccines using the UN-approved  Covax facility . Any payment via a dollar transaction might give the US Treasury leverage to fine the banks involved, and Seoul has said there is no safe way to transfer the money. In relation to the coronavirus, Iranian officials have previously said that importing the Pfizer vaccine, which must be shipped and stored at -70C (-94F), poses major logistical challenges for Iran. The country has struggled to stem the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East, which has infected nearly 1.3 million people and killed nearly 56,000. Iran launched human trials of its first domestic Covid vaccine candidate late last month.
