Share a story with the Guardian	Get in touch with your news tips and stories by filling in our encrypted form below. Click here for other ways to contact the Guardian securely.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here.We will contact you if one of our journalists is interested in following up on your story.
Tell us about your return to the UK from countries on the quarantine list	We would like to hear from people about their experiences arriving at UK airports, ports and train stations from countries on the quarantine list, such as Croatia, France, Spain and Luxembourg.Were you required to fill out a test and trace form? Was your temperature taken? Were you given a QR code for scanning? Did anyone check your passport? Was there any information indicating you needed to isolate for 14 days? We are also interested in hearing from people who have been contacted to ensure they have been quarantining.You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
Tell us: what do you think of the Brexit deal?	The UK and the EU have struck an agreement on the UK’s future trading and security relationship with the European Union on Christmas Eve, four and half years after the country voted to leave the European Union, and just over a week before the end of the Brexit transition period.As the country leaves the single market and customs union on 31 December, new arrangements allowing for tariff-free trade in goods and close police and judicial cooperation will come into force.We’d like to hear what people think of the deal and how it might affect them.You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
'Stand back and stand by': how Trumpism led to the Capitol siege	The storming of the US Capitol by a pro-Trump mob on Wednesday was the culmination of a year of white nationalist and anti-democratic violence that steadily intensified and featured the direct incitement of the US president.Last February, the FBI director, Christopher Wray, issued a direct warning to Congress that “racially and ethnically motivated violent extremists” had become the primary source of domestic terrorist threats and killings. His fears were supercharged as 2020 progressed by the confluence of the pandemic and the brazen actions of Donald Trump who exploited public anxieties over mask ordinances and Covid-19 lockdowns to whip up his base into a frenzy.“LIBERATE MICHIGAN!” he cried in April after the Democratic governor of the state, Gretchen Whitmer, imposed stay-at-home orders to combat soaring coronavirus infection rates.His loyal followers dutifully responded – rioters bearing Trump insignia and semi-automatic rifles stormed the state capitol in Lansing in scenes which now look like a mini test-run for Wednesday’s mayhem in Washington DC.Trump’s enabling of mass displays of armed protest on the streets of American cities was not lost on the far-right extremist groups that Wray had warned about. White supremacist outfits including the Proud Boys, the Three Percenters and Patriot Prayer were quick to jump on the anti-lockdown message that the president was inflaming.When Black Lives Matter protests erupted across the US in the wake of the police killing of George Floyd in May the extremist groups turned their attention in that direction. Counter-protests ensued, climaxing in some instances in bloodshed.In August, two protesters were killed and a third injured by Kyle Rittenhouse, a 17-year-old who answered a vigilante appeal posted on Facebook and turned up in Kenosha, Wisconsin, carrying an AR-15-style rifle. The teenager, who has been charged with first-degree homicide, became an instant star among far-right media while Trump himself could not bring himself to condemn the killings.That pattern of Trump’s implicit condoning of the rise of rightwing extremism and violence carried seamlessly through to the 2020 election season. Continuing a theme that can be traced back to his 2017 remark that there were “very fine people on both sides” at the Charlottesville Unite the Right rally that ended with one person being killed and 19 injured, Trump was similarly unable to condemn the neo-fascist Proud Boys during his presidential debate with Joe Biden in September.“Stand back and stand by,” he said. That refrain also now takes on a chilling new resonance in the wake of the scenes of carnage at the US Capitol.If there was any ever doubt about the danger of Trump’s constant goading of extremist elements among his base then it was extinguished in October when the FBI arrested 13 people and charged six with allegedly plotting to kidnap Whitmer. The Michigan governor had become a favorite target of Trump’s invective, beginning with his “liberate” tweet and growing more menacing from there.As the presidential election grew closer, the focus of the president’s incendiary rhetoric switched from issues relating to the pandemic to his baseless claim that his second term in the White House had been stolen from him. Even before election day he indicated he might not accept the results of the count – a posture that he clung to even while armed rioters were attempting to break their way into the House chamber on Wednesday.In a by-now familiar display of call and response, Trump’s increasingly shrill attacks on election officials in key swing states were answered by his supporters and the far-right extremist groups among them. Armed protests erupted at presidential election counts in Arizona and Michigan.Georgia bore much of the brunt of the hurricane of anger that Trump unleashed about what he claimed, without evidence, was a fraudulent election. Death threats became so ubiquitous against the state’s election officials – Republicans every one of them – that it forced them to appeal to the president to stand his people down.“Mr President, this must stop,” Gabriel Sterling, a Republican election official from Georgia pleaded in remarks that quickly went viral. “Stop inspiring people to commit potential acts of violence. Someone is going to get shot, someone is going to get killed. And it’s not right.”Trump did not stop and on Wednesday someone was shot inside the inner sanctum of America’s besieged democracy.
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus	Lost on the frontline is a project by the Guardian and Kaiser Health News that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project here .If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story.We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to:DoctorsNursesParamedics and EMTsMedical techniciansPharmacistsHome health aidesNursing home staffRespiratory therapistsMental health workersMedical administratorsEnvironmental services staffFood service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilitiesPorters who transport patientsWhile we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can.You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News please click here instead). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care.One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details.If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
Top UK bosses are paid 115 times more than average worker, analysis finds	Bosses of top British companies will have made more money by teatime on Wednesday than the average UK worker will earn in the entire year, according to an independent analysis of the vast gap in pay between chief executives and everyone else.The chief executives of FTSE 100 companies are paid a median average of £3.6m a year, which works out at 115 times the £31,461 collected by full-time UK workers on average, according to research by the High Pay Centre thinktank.On an hourly basis the bosses will have earned more by 5.30pm on Wednesday 6 January than the average worker will pick up across the whole of 2021.Warren Kenny, acting general secretary of the GMB union which represents more than 600,000 workers, said: “These repugnant figures expose the sheer scale of inequality and exploitation in the workplace.“The workers who have made heroic sacrifices to keep society together during the [coronavirus] outbreak deserve better – it is time for corporate leaders, shareholders and politicians to wake up and take action.”Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said the fact that bosses had earned so much money already “tells you everything you need to know about how unfair our economy is”.“Our army of minimum wage workers – carers, shop assistants and delivery drivers – have kept the country going through the pandemic. Not these CEO’s at the top raking in far more than their share,” she said. “ If the government is serious about levelling up Britain, it needs to start by levelling up pay and conditions for those we most rely on, and stop the threat to freeze key workers’ pay.”Luke Hildyard, the director of the High Pay Centre, which campaigns for executive pay restraint, said: “Pay for top CEOs today is about 120 times that of the typical UK worker. Estimates suggest it was around 50 times at the turn of the millennium or 20 times in the early 1980s.”The online supermarket Ocado has been singled out as having the biggest pay gap between those at the top and those on the shop floor.Its chief executive, Tim Steiner, was paid £58.7m in 2019 , which works out at 2,605 times the £22,500 paid to the online grocery delivery company’s staff on average. It means Steiner was paid about 10 times as much as the average Ocado worker’s annual salary for just one day’s work.The High Pay Centre estimates that chief executive pay levels remained essentially flat in their analysis over the past year, while pay for UK workers had increased slightly. It means that CEOs have to work 34 hours of the year to surpass median earnings, rather than just 33 hours in 2020.The thinktank’s calculations assume “a highly demanding workload” for CEOs of 320 12-hour days of work a year. This equates to hourly pay of £941 an hour.It would take a worker on the full minimum wage rate of £8.72 an hour 212 years to earn the same as the average CEO earns in a year.
‘It has hit my dignity’: women fight for equal treatment from Indian army	Nidhi Rao* has 13 years’ experience serving in the communications wing of the Indian army. Now she is looking for work online and doesn’t know where to start. “I am jobless in the middle of a pandemic, with no financial security.”When Rao joined the army, female officers were contracted for five years, after which time they might get an extension of five more years. Unlike men, they were not offered a permanent job. Later, the initial commission period was changed to 10 years, which could be extended a further four years.While men retired with pensions and other benefits, women could never reach the pensionable service length of 20 years, and remained out of the senior ranks.In 2010, after a group of female officers took their case to court, a ruling was made to put women on a par with men, but the Indian government challenged the order and refused to implement it. After a decade-long legal battle, in February last year India’s supreme court ruled the situation discriminatory and granted the women permanent status and entitlement to army pensions.The authorities set up a board, dividing women into categories. Those with 14 or more years’ service were given either a permanent commission (PC) or the option to retire with a pension. Those with 10-14 years’ service were selected for a permanent position or released from the army without a pension.In November, the army declared that 422 women out of 615 had been picked for permanent jobs. Rao was not among them. She says there were 68 such women from her service bracket who would be leaving without a pension.“Most of us are past our mid-30s and are married and have children. Some are expecting a baby; some could not plan it due to the job uncertainty,” she says. “After serving the institution for more than a decade, they are asking us to go and restart our careers, at this age, in the Covid-hit market. Who will hire us? Where do we go?”Anjali Sinha*, another affected soldier, says: “When I was pregnant, they asked me to run 5km and I did. When I gave birth, I rejoined within a week for fear of being relegated. I have worked in some of the most difficult terrains of the country, all while dealing with an unsupportive husband and family. And all this for what?”Sinha is in the 11th year of her service. She says: “I was deemed fit till a few months ago. But now when I am demanding PC, I have been declared unfit. More than anything, it has hit my dignity. I am questioning my worth every single day.”The female officers claim a lack of transparency in the selection process and say the true number granted PC may be lower than the army claims.What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth?Prakash Patil, an army veteran, says women undergo the same military training as men but while most of the male officers are absorbed into permanent roles and offered career progression opportunities, most of the women have to drop out.“When women were first inducted into the army in 1992, they were eulogised,” he says. “Newspapers published their interviews and compared them to female warriors of the past. But this antagonised many within the army, who simply could not bear the arrival of women. Hence, at every stage, women were made to prove themselves.”Rao says that once she lived with her baby in a tent in the desert, and on another occasion faced extreme pressure from her seniors to move to another location even though she was in the later stages of a high-riskpregnancy.Sinha says: “Men taunt us over maternity leave all the time. And, ironically, the same men then go on to take two-year-long breaks for specialised courses.”When male officers opt for permanent roles they can choose to study advanced technical courses, Patil says. But women miss out on the opportunity to take such degrees, reducing their chances of getting back into the job market.In September, Patil wrote to India’s president, Ram Nath Kovind, asking that the authorities grant permanency or pension to the 68 women, or help them get an advanced degree. He hasn’t received a reply. “What organisation in the world takes 14 years to judge a person’s worth?” he says. “You cannot just leave out the women in their twilight years.”Lawyer Rakesh Kumar represents some of the 68 affected. “These women have been subjected to the policy’s gender bias. Further, there is no reasonable basis to distinguish them from those who have completed 14 years,” she says. “They should be at least allowed to serve 20 years.”Rao and Sinha believe it is a deliberate ploy to keep women out of uniform. There are about 1,500 women in the Indian army, less than 4% of the total strength. They are still banned from combat roles.“Most of the meritorious women in our batch have been chucked out,” Sinha says. “Most are absolutely fit and have no disciplinary cases against us. We have international shooters, bikers, and mountaineers who have represented India abroad and won medals for their work. Were they so afraid of us eating up command posts in future?”*Names have been changed.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Trump auctions Arctic refuge to oil drillers in last strike against US wilderness	In one of its last strikes against the American wilderness, Donald Trump’s administration will on Wednesday auction off portions of the Arctic national wildlife refuge to oil drillers.The lease sales are the climax to one of the nation’s highest-profile environmental battles. The lands on the northern coastal plain of Alaska are home to denning polar bears and migrating herds of Porcupine caribou that indigenous communities depend on and consider sacred. But the oil industry has long suspected that the ground beneath the plain holds billions of barrels of petroleum.Once the leases in the refuge, known as ANWR, are sold to energy companies, they would be difficult to claw back. The incoming president, Joe Biden, could, however, discourage development in the refuge by putting regulatory hurdles in the way of drillers.  The refuge has become central to America’s debate over how quickly to stop drilling for and burning fossil fuels as the climate crisis accelerates. Climate experts say there should be no new oil and gas extraction, as the world is already more than 1C hotter than pre-industrial times. Even if humans stopped using fossil fuels today, the planet would continue to heat.Oil from drilling west of the refuge, at Prudhoe Bay, has fueled the economic development the state has depended on to fill its coffers and write annual revenue checks to residents. That extraction also led to the most damaging oil spill in history, when the Exxon Valdez tanker spewed millions of barrels off Alaska’s southern coast in 1989.Prudhoe Bay “was the largest oil field ever discovered in North America. Since then we have had more than 1,500 sq miles of oil and gas development in the Alaskan Arctic … but [ANWR] has been off limits,” said Adam Kolton, executive director of the Alaska Wilderness League.“For us, it symbolizes just what’s at stake here. If you can’t draw a line at the tundra and keep this one area of the Arctic off limits, then the question is, where can you draw the line and what protected part or wildlife refuge in the United States will remain off limits?”President Dwight Eisenhower designated the Arctic refuge in 1960, and in the ensuing decades, the industry and Republicans pushed for drilling there, while the US was trying to reduce its reliance on suppliers in the Middle East. That push continues even though oil is now plentiful, and a fracking boom has made the US a net exporter rather than importer.Republicans in the US Congress and in Alaska achieved their goal in 2017, when they inserted a provision authorizing drilling into Trump’s landmark tax bill.Trump and congressional Republicans argued that the government’s earnings from drilling in the refuge could help pay for the proposed tax cuts, which favored corporations and wealthier Americans. They said development would generate $900m, although an analysis by the non-partisan watchdog group Taxpayers for Common Sense, based on historical bid data, found that it would bring in just a fraction of that amount – no more than $27.6m. That would be split between the federal government and the state of Alaska.“The fact that this was being offered as an offset was definitely insincere at best, and we thought that was just kind of a joke,” said Autumn Hanna, vice-president of the group. Taxpayers for Common Sense has argued the government should not be leasing any public land to oil and gas drilling now, while prices for the commodities are low and supplies are high worldwide. During the pandemic, oil demand has plunged as businesses have been shut down and people have driven less.“We’re not opposed to oil and gas drilling, but we’re opposed to short-changing taxpayers,” Hanna said.Industry interest in developing new oilfields is so low that some have suggested there might not be any bids for some tracts of land on the coastal plain. The former governors Frank Murkowski and Bill Walker have encouraged the state to bid on any unwanted tracts itself, and last week a state-owned economic development corporation voted to authorize bidding up to $20m. “If there are no bidders on the lease sales at all, Alaska will likely never be able to develop our oil and gas potential from ANWR,” Murkowski said in an opinion piece in the Anchorage Daily News, where he also noted the oil and gas industry had historically contributed 70% of the state’s revenue.On Monday, the Trump administration also dramatically expanded the area where the government can lease public land for oil drilling to the west of ANWR.The plan would allow drilling in 82% of the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska, an area bigger than the state of West Virginia, according to environmental groups, though the Biden administration could reverse that decision more easily than it could hold off drilling in ANWR.Native groups in Alaska have fought ANWR drilling proposals with lawsuits. For the Gwich’in, indigenous Alaskans who have migrated alongside the caribou and relied upon them as a food source, the fight is personal. They formed the Gwich’in Steering Committee in 1988 to oppose drilling in the coastal plain, which they call the Sacred Place Where Life Begins.“We come from some of the strongest people that ever walked this earth. They survived some of the coldest, harshest winters so that we can be here,” Bernadette Demientieff, executive director of the committee, said during an AM radio segment last week. “I feel like this is my responsibility as a Gwich’in, to protect the caribou.”Polar bear advocates say the habitat is also critical to a population in dire straits from development and rising temperatures that are melting sea ice. The Arctic is heating at a much faster pace than the rest of the world. Polar bear numbers in Alaska and western Canada declined 40% from 2001 to 2010, said Steven Amstrup, chief scientist for Polar Bears International.“If we want to have the best chance possible of maintaining that population until the time that we stabilize greenhouse gas emissions, we need to protect them on the ground as best we can,” Amstrup said.Ken Whitten, a former caribou biologist for the state of Alaska, said drilling was likely to displace wildlife. “It’s the core of the Porcupine caribou herd calving area. It’s the major onshore denning place for polar bears in the Beaufort Sea, which is becoming more and more important as the sea ice disappears.”The plain is a narrow band of land between mountains and the coast, so animals do not have many options when they are forced to relocate, he said. Much of the surrounding area is already being drilled.“We are a wealthy nation,” Whitten said. “We can afford to leave some areas alone.”
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater inequality.The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds – had been hit hardest by the crisis.Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.”Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a five-year study of inequality headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked.The report noted that:Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations.The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%.Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September.Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs.The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.”The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse.The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by Bank of England action to support the economy, making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth.Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a British Empire Medal (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response.Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in Vanuatu – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions.“Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.”The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people.“Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good.“My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.”With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure.“These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world.“It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.”In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands was hit by a cyclone that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages.“The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.”To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions.“Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
London population set to decline for first time since 1988 – report	London’s population is set to decline for the first time in more than 30 years, driven by the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic and people reassessing where they live during the crisis, according to a report.The accountancy firm PwC said the number of people living in the capital could fall by more than 300,000 this year, from a record level of about 9 million in 2020, to as low as 8.7 million. This would end decades of growth with the first annual drop since 1988.The forecast comes as city-dwellers rethink their living situations during lockdown and a boom in home working during the pandemic encourages growing numbers of people to consider moving elsewhere.Other drivers include a smaller number of graduates moving to London, fewer job opportunities in the capital and lower international migration to the city as a result of the pandemic and Brexit. Net EU migration to the UK as a whole has fallen since the 2016 Brexit vote, and could turn negative in 2021 – meaning more people leave the UK for the EU than arrive from it – for the first time since the early 1990s, according to PwC forecasts.The accountancy firm also said the UK could record a “baby bust” in 2021, with the annual birth rate dipping to the lowest level since records began more than a century ago.Although it will take time before official population figures are published, PwC said there were early signs that London was on track to shrink for the first time this century. It said an August 2020 survey by the London Assembly found that 4.5% of Londoners – or 416,000 people – said they would definitely move out of the city within the next 12 months.Official figures show UK unemployment is rising fastest in London boroughs, as the country grapples with the deepest recession for 300 years. Job postings have fallen by the most among Europe’s biggest capital cities. According to economists, London’s jobs woes are a reflection of the city’s density and typical opportunities for work during normal times – such as in hospitality, leisure, retail and travel – which have been hit hardest by the pandemic.Londoners are also more likely to work from home than anywhere else in the UK – due to a higher proportion of professional, IT and finance jobs in the City – meaning more people could move to other parts of the country if remote-working practices are sustained beyond the crisis.A decline in London’s population would represent a return to the years in the middle of the 20th century when London’s population collapsed after the second world war, as people moved away from the bombed-out and blitzed city for a life in the leafier home counties or other parts of the country, dropping from 8.6 million in 1939 to 6.8 million in the 1980s.Population growth returned in the late 1980s, fuelled by London’s growth as a global financial centre, epitomised by the redevelopment of Canary Wharf in the London Docklands. In a reversal of the mid 20th-century trend, international migration helped lift the population to its pre-war peak by 2015, and was on track to hit 10 million.Hannah Audino, an economist at PwC, said a sustained decline in London’s population would have wide-ranging consequences for the capital’s economy, house prices and transport network, but that it was too early to know for certain whether Covid and Brexit would have a long-term impact.“It depends on the extent to which remote working truly does become the new normal into the long term. A lot of people really miss the office environment, so once social distancing measures are fully history, infive to 10 years’ time, maybe people will go back more to city living,” she said.A spokesman for Sadiq Khan said the Mayor of London was confident that the city would emerge stronger from the Covid crisis. “The pandemic has had a profound effect on London and Londoners, but Sadiq is determined that the capital will recover to become cleaner, greener and fairer, with thriving neighbourhoods, improved wellbeing and a strengthened healthcare system.”
I won’t make the same mistakes again: Milan mayor on his green Covid recovery plan	Milan’s mayor, Beppe Sala, admits he made mistakes. In late February 2020, a week after the first locally transmitted coronavirus case was confirmed in Italy, he shared a promotional video on his Facebook page with the slogan “Milan does not stop”.The clip contained images of people hugging, eating in restaurants, walking in parks and waiting at train stations. It was not Sala’s finest hour.The city was not under lockdown at the time but it had quickly come to a standstill as tourists fled and commuters began working from home. Sala was not alone in his assessment of the risk of the virus and several scientists and politicians were giving mixed messages, but by the time the wider Lombardy region went into lockdown on 8 March, he was rigorously urging citizens to stay at home.He says he has learned from his experiences.“At the beginning of the pandemic, and even still a little bit today, the scientific world was really divided,” Sala said in an interview with the Guardian. “In Milan, two health experts in February gave different opinions. One said coronavirus was only a little bit worse than the flu and the other said it was really serious.“One thing I have learned is that faced with an unexpected and unusual situation, it’s OK to try to interpret things with good sense. But you also need to be more formal, turn to the government and ask for formal instructions on how to manage the situation. This is an error I made, as did many others, and that I wouldn’t make again.”Other than lessons learned, Sala said the experience reconfirmed the city’s generosity and values to him. Many young people joined Milan Helps, a vast network that has assisted people over 65 and those at high risk of infection at home, and an emergency fund collected €14m (£13m) within a few weeks.Navigating a city with a population of 1.4 million through a pandemic is no easy task. Milan and its wider province were at the centre of Italy’s second wave. The city is also Italy’s economic engine. It hosts every sector from finance to fashion, and responsibility for the country’s recovery rests largely on its shoulders.So as he continues to manage the pandemic, Sala is also charting Milan’s future. He leads the C40, a taskforce of mayors from cities around the world formed in May to coordinate efforts to support a low-carbon, sustainable recovery from the pandemic.“It’s not a rhetorical organisation, but a true one in which we meet a lot and spend a lot of time defining a common strategy,” he said. “Faced with this pandemic, we should take the opportunity to speed up [sustainable] policies.”Sala, a politician with the centre-left Democratic party who was elected mayor in 2016, has made some bold moves to cope with the city’s high pollution. In early 2019, the authorities introduced Area B, a restricted traffic zone that covers 70% of the city. Heavily polluting cars are barred from entering Italy’s largest low-emission zone between 7.30am and 7.30pm from Monday to Friday. Other plans include a ban on diesel heating systems in public and private office buildings from October 2023 – the same year by which all petrol stations will have to have charging stations for electric cars – and having a full fleet of electric buses within the next eight years.Working out how people could move around safely was one of the biggest challenges the city’s authorities had to tackle early in the pandemic, but it was also an opportunity to promote cycling. There are 51 cars for every 100 inhabitants in Milan. “Cities that are really advanced have managed to get to 40 for every 100 inhabitants,” Sala said.One of the city’s most ambitious initiatives is the gradual creation of 300km (185 miles) of cycle paths. During the spring lockdown, 35km of streets were transformed for cycling and walking as part of the initial phase. “It’s true that this has created some division, not everyone is in favour, but this is the direction all cities are going in,” he said. “Milan is not a massive city, and it is flat.”A proportion of the €209bn that Italy is poised to receive from the European recovery fund is expected to be invested in the green economy. Green policies adopted in Milan had also created jobs, Sala said, and startups that incorporate sustainable elements, especially those in areas beyond the city centre, had been given incentives.Before the pandemic, there were enough bars, restaurants and taxis in central Milan to support a population that included many thousands of tourists and commuters a day as well as its inhabitants. Now with people still working from home and tourism not expected to recover for some time, the city has to adapt.In this respect, Covid-19 has given impetus to the “15-minute city”, a concept first unveiled by Parisian authorities in February whereby everything a resident needs – be it shops, schools or gyms – can be reached within 15 minutes of their homes by foot, bike or public transport. The concept is one of the strategies Sala and his C40 counterparts are developing as they visualise their post-Covid cities, and he is determined that Milan will set the example.“There are cities in Italy that are more beautiful,” he said. “But Milan is the only city that offers a lot of history and also a window into the future.”
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how	The pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies.But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable.Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the European Green Deal. And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport.Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt non-polluting modes of transport and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen.Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our “superblock” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the Eixample district, first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation.The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something Barcelona has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures.Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown.Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind.Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start.• Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic	By now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government.Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent comparative study of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic.In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s alarmist appeals to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the hardest-hit province, Lombardy.Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans.By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”.The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error.Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave.So, did the pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition.It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern Europe, the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region.In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition.More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe.• Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit	Ioannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water.But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across Europe, seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight.From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure.In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration.Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips.With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe.And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily.Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative.Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage.In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name.Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin.The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration.But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU.Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back.The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau.But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet.In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle.Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years.Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk.• This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said.Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law	As European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and Hungary. The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights.The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has been derailed by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on upholding democratic values.This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in Poland and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems.The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by making it impossible for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists.As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company, has just bought Polska Press, a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country.It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major survey of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”.I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the European Union in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends.Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of polling finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country.At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in Europe was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”.These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki.EU leaders face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans.We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share.• Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
What's the furthest from goal a player has seen red for a professional foul?	“What is the furthest away from goal someone has been sent off for a professional foul?” muses Robert Davies.Our thoughts immediately settled on Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s gloriously cynical scything down of Newcastle’s Rob Lee at Old Trafford in 1998 but by the time the Norwegian actually made contact with Lee’s shins, he was only around 30 yards from goal. How about this shocking decision from the 1991 League Cup quarter-finals then, when Southampton’s Jimmy Case was sent for an early bath after hauling down Bryan Robson – hardly known for his blistering pace – a good 40 yards from goal with two covering defenders for company? At the beginning of the season referees had been instructed to tighten up punishment for fouls that denied a clear goalscoring opportunity and, on this evidence, they had a loose understanding of what that meant.Another example from September 2018, in which Aberdeen’s Michael Devlin was given his marching orders for a foul around 45 yards from goal, suggested officials were still struggling many years later.Aberdeen fail to overturn Michael Devlin's red card against Kilmarnock.Your thoughts?➡️ https://t.co/Bsp8HyvWfS pic.twitter.com/EeyiaKm9GsSimon Kaplan has a potential winner. “I’d suggest Gary Cahill playing for Bolton against Tottenham in December 2011,” he writes. “He got a red card (rescinded on appeal) for denying Scott Parker a ‘clear goalscoring opportunity’ by taking him out about five yards inside the Bolton half.” Owen Coyle measured it for us in his post-match rant:If you understand the terminology it has to be a clear goalscoring opportunity. Now, Scott Parker is a fantastic player but he took a touch with his left foot, went out to the wing, 50 yards from goal. We had Zat Knight in the middle and other defenders coming back.However, if this video evidence is anything to go by, we reckon Mikel Arteta can match those 50 yards after bundling over Marouane Chamakh at Crystal Palace in 2013. “He was far from goal, it was an accidental foul, he was not the last man,” protested Arsène Wenger. Arsenal didn’t appeal, so the red card stood.“Has any club scored as many goals in the Champions League group stages as Manchester United this year (15) and not qualified for the knockouts?” wonders Tim Leehan.While we’ve been polishing off the last few Quality Street, Yorben Geerinckx has done the hard yards for us. “If I’m correct, this only happened twice,” he suggests. “The first time was in 2012-13 when Chelsea scored 16 and amassed 10 points, as many as Shakhtar Donetsk. The Ukrainian side went through because they scored more away goals in the games between the two, with later-to-be-Chelsea player Willian scoring twice at Stamford Bridge in a 3-2 loss, which would prove sufficient to progress after a 2-1 home win. Juventus topped that group and Chelsea would go on to win the Europa League.“The second time was last season. RB Salzburg introduced Erling Braut Haaland to the world and also scored 16. Liverpool won that group and Salzburg finished five points behind runners-up Napoli, progressing to the Europa League, where they were eliminated by Eintracht Frankfurt in last 32.”Paul Moran unearthed the same examples and came up with some new ones. “In poring over 27 years of Champions League group stages, I found that Group D of the 2005-06 competition surprisingly only featured 12 goals across the 12 games. Two 2-1 results were the highest-scoring fixtures and, incredibly, Lille managed to secure six points and third place (transferring to the Uefa Cup) despite only scoring once – they were helped by an impressive defence which conceded just two goals.” Perhaps Jorge Valdano was right about that particular era of European football. Anyway, back to Paul. “Has any other group stage in a competition (or even a whole competition) featured a goals-per-game figure of less than one? Or has any team in a group stage/competition had a lower figure of goals-per-game (scored + conceded) than Lille’s 0.5?”Send your answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.“Portsmouth won 2-0 at Hull with only one shot on target and it didn’t come from Pompey (there were two own goals),” writes Eddy Reynolds. “Is this a record?”Nope. Burnley have gone one (none? – Knowledge Ed) better. “I watched Fulham lose 2-1 at Burnley in January 2019,” writes Jon Gundry. “That Fulham lost was not a surprise. We haven’t won at Turf Moor since 1951. Even in a desperately poor season ending in relegation from the Premier League, it was a surprise to lose when Burnley did not have a shot on target. Fulham conceded two own goals by Joe Bryan and Denis Odoi. André Schürrle scored a cracker at the right end.”Worthy of note is this from Mike Dunford, who recalls Southampton’s 6-0 smash-and-grab win at Wolves in 2007. “Memory serves that we had five shots on target. Mick McCarthy’s team were so unfortunate – and I speak as a Saints fan who saw it – that the home supporters applauded their team off. Has that ever happened in a bigger home defeat? And has anyone ever won by more goals in which every shot on target went in?”Patrick Brennan has one, at least. “Luton beat Blackburn 3-2 on the last day of the 2019-20 season with one shot on target (a penalty) and two own goals,” he tweets. “If they hadn’t won they’d have gone down.”“Arsenal have been beaten home and away by Manchester United and Chelsea,” noted Paul Brazier in March 2010. “Has any side become champions of England despite losing all four games against the teams in second and third place?”In short, no. There have been a few examples of the champions losing three and drawing one, the most recent being Aston Villa in the 1980-81 season. They drew 1-1 at home to third-placed Arsenal, losing 2-0 at Highbury (the day they clinched the title), and lost both fixtures to second-placed Ipswich: 2-1 at Villa Park in mid-April and 1-0 at Portman Road.“Wikipedia reliably informs me there are five clubs that Sam Allardyce has played for and managed: Limerick, Preston, Bolton, Sunderland and West Brom. Can any manager beat that?” asks David Skinner.Has any other manager recovered from a huge loss (yes the 9-0!) and some as well as Hasenhuttl has?Or simply not been sacked. It’s an astonishing turnaround.@blzzrd @OptaJoe @guardian_sport might know#SaintsFC #Hasenhuttl“In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,” reports Alex Crane. “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?”@TheKnowledge_GU Do you know the long and short of this question? https://t.co/wLRqy70wXf“After an FA Cup tie on 1 February 1913, Burnley, then riding high in the Second Division, beat Midland League Gainsborough Trinity 4-1,” begins John Spooner. Trinity led until the last half hour, largely due to the efforts of goalkeeper Ronnie Sewell and his full-backs Cliff Jones and Sam Gunton. At full-time, Burnley made a bid to buy the trio en bloc. The deal was sealed by 6.20pm that evening. Has a similar instance of players being signed by the opposition at the final whistle happened since?” Or similar bulk buys?@TheKnowledge_GU Excluding one off huge wins, what's the highest goals-per-game ratio in a cup run? For example, Newport County's 1988-89 Conference Cup involved 27 goals over three matches, ending in a 6-5 AET defeat. Barking. pic.twitter.com/dSRdHmwzFP• Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.
How one umpire's war on throwing hounded a bowler out via 16 no-balls	It was in this week in 1898 that Ernest Jones became the first bowler in Test history to be no-balled for throwing, an early skirmish in a one-man war waged by James, Jim or Jem Phillips, Anglo-Australian cricketer, umpire and fighter against the crooked elbow, who once went two full decades without experiencing a winter only to break that run in the most emphatic way possible by giving up cricket and moving to Canada.After his retirement Athletic News called Phillips a “zealot for purity” who “suffered from distorted vision, the result of prejudice and passion”. The Observer, however, described the no-ball call against Jones as “a courageous action [that] reverberated over two hemispheres”, and when news broke of his death in 1930 the Guardian wrote that he was “a man of fine physique, tall, broad, and powerful, most intelligent and fearless, as his career would suggest”. He was “the umpire who assisted so largely in stamping out throwing in first-class cricket” and “accomplished a really great work for the game”.The call had been coming, and not just because the same umpire had no-balled the same bowler during a tour match a couple of months earlier. “Did I go much over the line, Jim?” Jones had asked, upon hearing the call. “You delivered the ball more than a foot behind the crease,” answered the umpire, pointedly.“The law prohibiting no-balling was becoming obsolete,” WG Grace wrote of the late 1890s, “and the time had come when the interests of cricket demanded drastic measures to suppress throwing and discountenance anything like dubious delivery.” Those drastic measures took human form in the shape of Phillips, once a decent bowler for Victoria and for Middlesex, who was once described as “a big, thick-set Colonial, with red hair and red moustache, the incarnation of imperturbable obstinacy”, and later as a “self-constituted authority upon the art of fair bowling and maker of controversies”.A year before England’s second Test in Melbourne and Phillips’s infamous call, Fred Spofforth – the Australian fast bowler who had settled in England – wrote an article for Sporting Life in which he wondered if the MCC was “going to legalise throwing” altogether. “There is scarcely a first-class county which does not include a thrower amongst its cricketers,” he wrote, naming the Australian spinner Tom McKibbin and England’s Bobby Peel as notable chuckers (Grace was among those who had already cast doubt on Peel’s action).The article proved incendiary, nudging the debate forward a notch or two and preparing the ground for Phillips (perhaps ironically, given that when Jones’s action had been questioned during Australia’s tour of England in 1896 Spofforth had pointedly spoken out in his defence, going so far as to bet £50 that he could “strap Jones’s arm from the wrist to below the shoulder and he’ll bowl as fast as ever”, an offer which nobody took him up on).Overdue as it probably was, cricketers and journalists in Australia were outraged by the call, given that Jones had toured England without issue – even though Phillips had umpired some of his games there – and that several high-profile Englishmen had gone unpunished despite actions widely considered to be suspect – in addition to Peel, CB Fry, Dick Attewell and Arthur Mold were mentioned. They needn’t have worried: Phillips would come on to them.That summer Phillips no-balled Fry twice, two other umpires called the same player, and the English magazine Cricket reported on “the obvious determination of umpires to make themselves heard on the question of throwing”. This determination was not exactly unanimous – there was one match in which Somerset’s Ted Tyler was twice no-balled by Phillips from square leg only for the other official to disagree so vehemently he refused to allow extra balls to be bowled – but Phillips continued, and in 1901 his campaign reached an apotheosis when he got the chance to make an example of Mold.In December 1900 the county captains met to discuss the issue of throwing, and between them compiled a list of players who would not be allowed to bowl the following summer, with Mold and Fry among them. Lancashire’s captain, AN “Monkey” Hornby – who once scored an all-run 10 off a single ball – spoke out in his player’s defence. “If I can have my way,” he said, “we shall play Mold and let the umpires no-ball him if his delivery does not satisfy them of its fairness.” And after the blacklisted players were eventually reprieved, that is precisely what happened.There is no doubt that Arthur Mold was hounded out of first-class cricketFor many months Lancashire kept Phillips and Mold apart, giving the bowler time off whenever the Australian officiated their matches, but for a match against Somerset at Old Trafford they included him in their team. In Lancashire’s first innings Phillips stood several yards behind his normal position when Mold was bowling, “to devote my whole attention to his delivery”, but did not see anything bad enough to force him to act. When the home side batted again he said: “It became apparent to me that there was a marked change in some deliveries, and as the innings proceeded this change became more pronounced and frequent.” Eventually he felt he had to intervene, and he called Mold for throwing. Then he did it again, and again, and again.By the time the innings ended Mold had been no-balled 16 times, and at the age of 38 it all but ended his career. The bowler protested his innocence, and that “it will be a bad day for English cricket if expert opinion is to come from the bush of Australia”, but the reputational damage had been done. “There is no doubt that he was hounded out of first-class cricket,” Athletic News wrote on his death in 1921, noting that Phillips’s intervention “was akin to kicking a man when he was about to depart this life”, coming “after 12 years during which no umpire had called him and no one had impugned his action to his face.” Perhaps, but they had impugned it pretty much everywhere else, and the age of the career chucker was at an end.That December the MCC wrote to the counties, informing them of their “hope that the county cricket executives will, in future, decline to play bowlers with doubtful deliveries”. The scourge of throwing had been calmed, and a battle that opened with Phillips’ call in January 1898 was over.This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.
Football transfer rumours: Mesut Özil to expand his brand at DC United?	It always appeared that it would take an extraordinary offer from a potential suitor to drag Mesut Özil away from his £350,000-a-week job keeping fit at the north London health club known as Arsenal FC. And it seems DC United, who gave Wayne Rooney a late-career platform to do whatever it was he was still able to do, have made the German wake up and smell the coffee. The MLS side have reportedly offered the German what every creative footballer could ever want: a chance to expand their brand.Yes, Özil has been told to overlook the fact that DC United are the second worst eastern conference team and instead focus on what really matters: breaking his 39 Steps Coffee company in the United States. The 32-year-old will apparently be allowed to flog his beans at the club’s Audi Field stadium, a grand if somewhat pointless gesture if fans can’t attend, and will also be given a platform to push his M10 eSports brand by making him the face of the club. The Mill feels this might not be enough, though. They should probably offer to buy Gunnersaurus too. If you’re going to make it big as a mascot – America’s the place to do it.Norwich’s Emi Buendía is desperate to play in the Premier League again and would be Arsenal’s preferred choice to add a bit of pizazz to their midfield. The 24-year-old has been flapping his gums on Radio Residencias about how much he loves the English top flight’s “history” “perfect organisation” and all the usual cliches. “It is the best league in the world, it is the one that makes the difference at all levels,” he gushed. The problem is, Arsenal may not be able to afford him.Manchester United and Manchester City would like to fight over more than the right to face Tottenham in the Carabao Cup final. How about the signature of the Bayern Munich winger Kingsley Coman then? It says here that both clubs have expressed an interest in the France international, who has a ridiculous record of having won nine league titles in consecutive seasons with PSG, Juventus and Bayern. He’s 24. “Knowing that good teams are interested in me is good, it gives me additional confidence,” he told Bild, as he happily bathed in silverware.West Ham haven’t got the cash to match the wage demands of former striker and footballing mercenary Marko Arnautović so they will target Bournemouth’s Josh King instead. The 28-year-old former Manchester United target has barely got a kick at the Cherries this season and will be cheap as chips, which is why Wolves and West Brom are also sniffing around. If that deal is a non-starter then David Moyes will see if 35-year-old Graziano Pellè, who’s at Shandong Luneng, can still party like it’s 2015.Brentford are going to bounce back from their Carabao Cup disappointment with a bit of retail therapy. The 26-year-old Preston North End midfielder Ben Pearson looks nice in the shop window at Deepdale and should be available at a bargain price given that his contract expires this summer. West Brom and Celtic are also sniffing around.And James Beattie is the red-hot favourite to replace Joey Barton as Fleetwood Town manager.
Football transfer rumours: Liverpool keen on Real Madrid's Sergio Ramos?	Having done his best to wrench Mohamed Salah’s arm clean out of its socket during the 2018 Champions League final, Real Madrid central defender and red-card magnet Sergio Ramos could be about to renew acquaintances with his Egyptian chum. According to Spanish TV show El Chiringuito de Jugones, Ramos is ready to leave Madrid if they don’t improve their offer of a new two-year deal and with just six months left on his contract could move to Liverpool for £15m.Ajax have identified an opening for a sullen, pouting, perennially resentful striker in their squad and have decided Sébastien Haller is the perfect candidate to fill the role. Despite paying £45m to bring the 26-year-old Ivory Coast international in from Eintracht Frankfurt in the summer of 2019, West Ham are ready to cut their losses and let him go for a little over half that amount.Elsewhere in the West Ham departures lounge, Robert Snodgrass is on the verge of a move that could scarcely be more “Robert Snodgrass” if it grew a beard, spoke in a thick Scottish accent and said: “Hi, my name is Robert Snodgrass.” Surplus to requirements at the London Stadium and with his contract due to expire in the summer, the 33-year-old winger is in advanced talks with West Brom regarding a permanent deal.Speculation over the next move of Arsenal outcast Mesut Özil rumbles on and on, with speculation linking him with a move to MLS franchise DC United being contradicted by reports from Turkey suggesting he has agreed to join Fenerbahce. His agent, meanwhile, claims his future remains completely up in the air. “There is a possibility in the next seven to 10 days, things will become far more clear,” said Dr Erkut Sögüt, in conversation with Sky Sports. “There has been no direct contact from any club regarding Özil.”Struggling in front of goal following the loss of Raúl Jiménez through injury, Wolves are considering the recall of striker Patrick Cutrone from his loan spell at Fiorentina. The 23-year-old has had a torrid time in Italy, failing to score in 13 appearances for a Serie A side who no longer want him. If Wolves decide he’s not the man to fill Jiménez’s big boots, they might ship him out to Marseille instead. “Patrick is 22 and wants to find space to continue his growth,” said Fiorentina director of sport Daniele Pradè to Corriere dello Sport. “We can’t guarantee it, therefore we need to be good at finding a solution together, Wolverhampton included.”Having made just two appearances for Tottenham Hotspur this season, both in the Europa League, Jack Clarke could be sent out on loan to get some playing time under his belt. A raft of Championship sides including Coventry City, Middlesbrough, Stoke City and Swansea City are all reported to be interested in the 20-year-old winger who joined Spurs from Leeds United in the summer of 2019. Bombed out at Tottenham, Danny Rose is in dire need of a move and could be off to Trabzonspor, while third-choice goalkeeper Paulo Gazzaniga is also looking for alternative employment.Meanwhile in Ecuador, Independiente del Valle have denied talk that they have been contacted by representatives from Manchester United, who want to sign midfielder Moisés Caicedo. The first player born this century to score a goal in the South American World Cup qualifiers, the 19-year-old from Santo Domingo is also believed to be the subject of interest from Chelsea and Everton, and has been described as “the real deal” by no less an expert than the BBC’s South American football correspondent Tim Vickery.And finally, Everton are ready to duke it out with Serie A side Roma, in the battle for Lille’s Turkish right-back Zeki Çelik, while the Merseyside club’s 18-year-old centre-back Jarrad Branthwaite looks likely to head out on loan to Blackburn Rovers, Sheffeild Wednesday or Preston.
Arsenal take out £120m Bank of England loan to ease Covid-19 cashflow worries	Arsenal have taken out a £120m loan from the Bank of England in an effort to ease cashflow issues that have mounted during the Covid-19 pandemic.The loan, which must be paid back by the end of May along with an undisclosed sum of interest, is designed to cover losses and will not have any impact on Mikel Arteta’s winter transfer plans. It has been provided by the bank’s Covid corporate financing facility, which assists organisations that meet highly specific investment criteria and are deemed to make significant contributions to the economy. Tottenham Hotspur and the Football Association are the only other football institutions to have made use of the scheme.Arsenal’s matchday income, in particular, has taken a huge hit during the pandemic. In 2018-19 it constituted a quarter of their revenue, a proportion unmatched across the top flight, and amounted to about £96m. The return of 2,000 supporters for recent games against Rapid Vienna and Burnley was scant compensation.Research from the Arsenal Supporters’ Trust last April projected the club could lose £144m over the subsequent 12 months if fans remained absent, and commercial revenue streams are also expected to have taken a hit without a pre-season tour. Although the short-term nature of the bank’s loan may raise eyebrows, the club expect no issues paying it back.The owner, Kroenke Sports & Entertainment, has played a part in shoring up the club’s finances by providing a loan in July that redeemed the fixed-rate bonds issued when building the Emirates Stadium.It comes as a welcome boost at a time when Arsenal are looking to rid themselves of financial millstones. One of them, the exiled playmaker Mesut Özil, will see his future decided “in the next few days”, according to Mikel Arteta, although the Arsenal manager admits he does not know how or when the saga around him will end.There is little doubt Özil, whose contract expires in the summer, has played his final game for the club and all parties are keen to move on from a soured relationship that has cast an expensive shadow. Özil has been linked with Fenerbahce and DC United in this transfer window although his agent, Erkut Sogut, said on Wednesday that the player’s “priority is to stay” until the end of the season.“I’m saying we will decide what’s happening in the next few days,” Arteta said when asked whether Özil could remain at the club. “I don’t know what is going to happen. Obviously now he’s free to negotiate with other clubs. We will discuss internally what the best solution for him is for the near future, obviously with the player and agent too, and try to find the best solution for everyone.”The logistics around Özil departing this month are likely to be complicated given none of his suitors would be able to match his £350,000 weekly wage. A simpler option might be for the former Germany international to commit to moving after his deal ends, but that would mean Arsenal have to retain a player omitted from Arteta’s Premier League and Europa League squads in October.“If something was sorted this month, it’s because it is good for both parties, it is good for Mesut and his future, and it’s good for the club,” Arteta said. “If that’s the case, we will move forward. If it’s not the case, the player will stay here.”Özil is available for the FA Cup third-round tie with Newcastle on Saturday, although his involvement seems unthinkable. Thomas Partey could return from the thigh injury that has kept him out for all bar 45 minutes of the past two months’ action, although Arteta suggested he could be kept fresh for the Premier League meeting with Crystal Palace on Thursday.Whereas Özil’s fate is a relatively short-term issue for Arteta, the manager is increasingly anxious about the prospects of Folarin Balogun, a highly rated striker, committing his future to Arsenal. Balogun’s deal is up in July and a number of clubs are understood to be making inquiries about taking him on. Arteta suggested any stumbling block lay at the feet of the player’s representatives.“You need three parties to make a deal,” he said. “For sure the club wants to make a deal, the manager wants to make a deal, the player wants to stay and I’m not sure about the agent.”
Kane's gang carved from same New Zealand granite as their No 1 batsman	It’s not clear exactly how much mind Christina Rossetti paid to the ins and outs of the New Zealand club cricket scene, but when the old sports journalist Sir Terry McLean wrote his short history of the sport in the country he still opened it with a quote from one of her poems. “Does the road wind uphill all the way? Yes, to the very end.”It was, McLean reckoned, “an exact and prophetic statement” about the way the game has been played in New Zealand, where they spent 90 years fighting for the right to play Test cricket, another 26 waiting for the first win, and 13 more for their first series victory. Now, another 51 years on, the team have finally made it all the way up to the summit.After beating Pakistan by an innings and 176 runs in the second Test of a series they swept 2-0, New Zealand (a country with the total population around half that of London, and a quarter that of Mumbai) are now the top-ranked Test team in the world. They have made it to the top a week after their captain, Kane Williamson, became the world’s No 1 Test batsman.Anyone who has been paying attention will have found the mornings have begun to feel a little repetitive this winter: roll over, grab the phone, skip through the news to the cricket scores, and find that somewhere over the other side of the world Williamson has rattled off another hundred. In the past five weeks, he has scored 251 in his only Test against West Indies, 129 in the first Test against Pakistan, and 238 in the second. In between all this, he also became a father for the first time, and managed to fit in a spell of paternity leave.The way the International Cricket Council is calculating the standings in the World Test Championship (on the percentage of points earned from those contested, because of the disruption caused by the pandemic), New Zealand are still only third in the running to play in the inaugural final later this year, right behind Australia and India. Which should mean Williamson has been keeping a close eye on what’s going on in their series, only, he says, he’s hardly had the chance to watch any of it because he’s been busy changing nappies. Of course.The batting ranking will not mean much to him, either. Williamson does not just seem uninterested in individual accolades, but genuinely uncomfortable with them. On the odd occasions he has been pressed on how it feels to be the best batsman in the world, his answers have been amusingly awkward and self-effacing. “Really,” he said last week, Smith and Kohli “are the best”, and even though the ICC’s measurements show that he is as good as (or better than) either of them, he’s sure there are other stats out there which show that “year in, year out, in all formats, they’re moving the game forward and we’re all fortunate to be playing against those guys”.Williamson is a twin (his brother works as an accountant), and retains some of a twin’s selflessness. The man he succeeded as captain, Brendon McCullum, was once asked why Williamson seems to get so nervous doing interviews. “He’s not nervous,” McCullum explained, “he just doesn’t understand why people want to talk about him.” He’s always been like that.There is an old (and often-told) story about the time the 12-year-old Williamson saved a game by scoring an unbeaten century, which he reached off the penultimate ball, then waited on the boundary before he walked off the field because he wanted to clap for his partner – who had contributed three not out.Williamson’s mentor, Martin Crowe, once described how this modesty works for him in the middle. “Due to his humility and lack of ego, it is harder for bowlers and captains to get ramped up about the absolute necessity to remove him. His passive body language gives very little to feed off.”Watching Williamson squirm while he is being asked to talk about his own success, you wonder whether the opposition bowlers ought to tell him just how good everyone thinks he is. At this point it feels like a well-timed compliment has got more chance of unsettling him at the crease than anything else they might try.It is hard not to be charmed by him. Kohli is a ferocious batsman, Smith a bewitchingly eccentric one, but Williamson’s cricket is marked by its quiet and unassuming competence, a resourcefulness born of immense technical expertise. And, of course, he has gathered quite a side around him.He is blessed with a battery of fine fast bowlers – Tim Southee and Trent Boult, with almost 600 Test wickets between them, the irrepressible Neil Wagner and now Kyle Jamieson, 6ft 8in tall and on a tear that’s seen him pick up 36 wickets at 13 runs each in his first six Test matches. There is enough batting there to get by, too, between Tom Latham, Ross Taylor, Henry Nicholls and BJ Watling. Between them they have won their past six Tests and, more impressively, only lost one series in the past four years, away against Australia in 2019-20.It’s not just what they’ve done, though, but the way they’ve done it: modest, hard-working, undemonstrative, and that’s down to Williamson’s influence.
Guardiola's caution helps Stones shine and get back on England radar	The Carabao kings march on. During Pep Guardiola’s four years at Manchester City much energy has been expended arguing over how much the great midfield-fetishist, the don of keep-ball, has changed English football. Who knew English football would end up changing Pep too?City took the lead in this League Cup semi-final with a set-piece goal on 50 minutes, bundled in by a 6ft 4in English centre-half.They sealed a 2-0 defeat of an energetic Manchester United with a long range shot from a defensive midfielder, three minutes after bringing on a second defensive midfielder to help draw further down some well-maintained defensive shutters.The opening goal was reward for a fine delivery from the left. Stones made the right run at the right moment and deflected the ball in off what may or may not have been his “inner thigh”, as the TV commentator insisted. Stones indeed.It was a moment to be savoured in itself, only the fifth time Stones has scored a goal in England. His last one was February 2017. The one before was for Everton nearly six years ago. Before that it’s Barnsley at Rochdale in 2012.Above all the moment was a nice little bonus, something extra in the stocking for Stones, who has emerged as a stately and unruffled figure in this improved Manchester City defence.Much has been made of the numbers, the signs of solidity while Stones has been in the team. City have only conceded two goals with him on the pitch this season.It would be facile to attribute this simply to that long-striding sense of cool, his settled form, the heartening absence of errors. In reality City’s tightness at the back has also been systemic, fruits of Guardiola’s more cautiously mannered approach.But Stones has taken his chance. He was again a hugely impressive figure at Old Trafford, rarely hurried or forced to break his stride. He completed 96% of his passes: often a meaningless number, but a reflection here of ease on the ball, sound positioning, and the solidity offered by a toughened midfield screen.For Stones there has been some talk of a renewed focus. But this has been a good time to be a Manchester City centre-back, in part because the team has seemed more committed to the basic idea of defending, and part because he gets to stand next to the hugely impressive Ruben Dias.At times in this Carabao Cup semi-final there were even glimpses of something unexpected – not just solid Pep, but safety-first Pep, a Pep who wants his team to launch the diagonal, to eschew what might still be known as “fannying-about”; to play, of all things, the percentages.To call this a direct English style is of course a huge overstatement. Guardiola still lined his team up with Kevin De Bruyne as a nominal false nine, and seven career midfielders – one converted – in the starting outfield 10.City still dominated possession, taking 70% of the ball by the 40-minute mark. But for a while in the first half as United pressed hard and high City were happy to launch long passes into the United half, 16 of them from defence in the opening 35 minutes, taking the safe option, refusing to over commit.The recent spike in form has been centred on locking down, shoring up that old vulnerability to counterattack, with a two-man defensive midfield and less cavalry-charge overlapping.Here Fernandinho returned to the team and produced a stately masterclass in unhurried defensive playmaking, as City took the air out of a United’s fast start.This City tend to reel their opponents in rather than win games in the opening 10 minutes, as they did in the early-Pep peak years. Steadily they found their little eddies of influence down the side of the United full-backs. An overlapping run from Raheem Sterling opened space for De Bruyne to clunk a shot against the post.The false-nine system has arrived out of necessity, Guardiola having lost both his centre-forwards. It helped in other ways at Old Trafford, flooding the midfield and encouraging City to play real rather than inverted wingers to maintain the width – a shift that led to the barbecuing of Chelsea’s full-backs on Sunday afternoon, neither of whom were prepared for a series of old-school foot races to the byline.The second half brought goals, greater control, and more forward thrust as City still dominated the ball and kept their guard high. Stones and Dias defended brilliantly at times. At one point Dias produced an astonishing full body slide-block as Rashford shot at goal, and he was superbly assured and strong throughout.There is a naturally reassuring chemistry between the two – and Stones has only ever really needed to find this composure in his game.He will always pass nicely and carry the ball well. This is one of those players who just needs to do less, to work on his vices while his strengths take care of themselves. After dropping off the radar he looks arguably the most assured centre half in the league right now and a sure thing for an England return.
Manchester United sign Amad Diallo as Cavani ban reasons revealed	Manchester United have completed the signing of the Atalanta teenager Amad Diallo on a deal until 2025 with the option of a further year.United reached an agreement with the Serie A club for the 18-year-old player on 5 October, subject to a medical, work permit and medical terms. United have confirmed those steps have been completed and an application has been made for a visa, which once issued will allow Diallo to travel to Manchester and join Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s side.The initial fee for Diallo is understood to be €21m(£18.7m), with an additional €20m possible in add-ons.Solskjær said: “As a club, we have followed Amad for a number of years and, having watched him myself, I believe he is one of the most exciting young prospects in the game. Manchester United has such a proud history of developing young players and everything is in place to enable Amad to reach his potential here.“It will take time for him to adapt but his speed, vision and fantastic dribbling ability will stand him in good stead to make the transition. He is a player with all of the raw attributes that are needed to be an important player for Manchester United in the years to come.”Diallo, whose shirt number has yet to be revealed, said: “After waiting since the summer, it is finally a dream come true to complete my move to Manchester United. I am hugely ambitious and there is so much that I want to achieve in the game; when I spoke to the manager I knew that I had joined the perfect club.“This is a really exciting squad with so many great players, I can promise that I will work hard every day to learn from them and give everything to develop my game. The coaches have been fantastic since I signed, we have been in touch regularly and they have already given me a lot of great advice.“I have had time to prepare for this move, both physically and mentally, and I have worked really hard to be ready to make the step up to this amazing club.”The commission which imposed a three-match ban on Diallo’s new teammate Edinson Cavani for use of a racial term on social media has expressed “surprise” that he had received no media training from the club.The three-man independent regulatory commission accepted Cavani had not intended to cause offence when using the word “negrito” in an Instagram post on 29 November, and imposed the minimum possible sanction. The post was in reply to a friend, Pablo Fernández, who told the commission “negrito” is his lifelong nickname.The decision to sanction Cavani has been criticised by the South American football confederation, Conmebol, among others, who point out it can be used as a term of affection on the continent.The Uruguayan deleted the post immediately and apologised for any offence caused, but there was shock from the commission that United had not at that stage given the player media training, given the size of Cavani’s Instagram following.“In light of the player’s high profile in the game, his inability to speak English and the fact that he had approaching eight million Instagram followers, the commission were surprised that no such ‘training’ had been specifically put in place for the player by his club,” it stated in its written reasons for issuing the ban.
'Is this still the first set?' Abu Dhabi heat tests WTA's tennis stars on return	Deep into her first match of the new season, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova came to the slow realisation that she did not actually have the faintest idea of the score. After holding serve for 6-5 against Ons Jabeur, the Russian tennis player was preparing to serve again when the umpire noted that the game was over. As Pavlyuchenkova moved back towards her chair, she gasped: “Are we still in the first set? I’m completely lost. Oh my God!”She had fair reason to be confused. Like so many of her colleagues, Pavlyuchenkova has simply not played many matches in recent times. Tuesday marked her return to competition for the first time since her departure from Roland Garros on 2 October. Since she opted not to travel to the US Open in August and the WTA’s autumn swing, which is mostly held in China, was scuppered once the country decided that it would not authorise international sporting events in 2020, she has competed in only four tournaments over the past 13 months.It is in this context that the WTA Abu Dhabi tournament, a new event that has acquired a tournament licence for only one year, was created. Its stated existence is simply to allow WTA players the opportunity to compete, earn money and execute their jobs before they fly to Australia for the delayed first slam of the year. There are no crowds to energise competitors and the prize money of $565,530 is significantly less than a total purse of $1,434,900 boasted by the Brisbane tournament this time last year.As in other sports that have seen all frills stripped down during the pandemic, the spectacle of only the athletes is a sight in itself. Their competitiveness and desire has endured, a reminder that they play only for themselves.The first victor of the 2021 season was Daria Kasatkina, a talented 23-year-old Russian who broke through at the same time as Naomi Osaka when they met in the 2018 Indian Wells final. As Osaka rose to stratospheric heights, Kasatkina’s ranking has nosedived. Over the past six months, it has been difficult to maintain any rhythm as she tries to return towards the top of the sport.“Honestly, I was a bit disappointed that we had just very few tournaments at the end of the season because I started to feel really good,” she said. “I was trying to do my best not to lose this feeling through this quite long pre-season again.”The challenges for Europeans, who often spend their pre-season on warmer shores, also became clear as they have to immediately adjust to the warm conditions ahead after months of training at home in winter. “It’s a little bit difficult,” said Anett Kontaveit of Estonia. “We’ve been practising for so long and then suddenly we’re here and we have a few days to get used to it. I was practising in Estonia indoors for two, three months. It’s definitely different going outside and you have a few days then straight into competition.”After spending her long pre-season in Tallinn, where temperatures average -2°C in December, her hand was soon blistered in Abu Dhabi. “The air here is so dry and I’ve been in Estonia for so long that my skin just wasn’t used to it in the beginning,” she said. It did not help her as the world No 23 fell to Veronika Kudermetova, ranked 46th.Between the small and large obstacles in this current normal, the most successful male and female players of this unique period will be those who are flexible enough to adapt to all the challenges ahead and to energise themselves now that they can no longer rely on crowds to spark them into life.They are trying. Asked if it still feels like she is playing in an Arab country without the usual Arab crowds roaring her name, Jabeur noted her futile wish that fans would be allowed to enter by the end of the tournament. Then the Tunisian shrugged. “I see Abu Dhabi on [the court]. So I remember that I’m here in Abu Dhabi.” That should be enough.
Manchester City purring again after stumbling upon winning formula	Football feels at times almost wilfully contrarian, as though it delights in confounding those who try to plot a rational course through it. You can plan and plan and plan. You can have a manager who is famous for his attention to detail. You can study all the data, watch all the videos, think and plot and cogitate, formulate your grand strategy, then it turns out the answer all along was John Stones.Manchester City needed a right-sided central defender, everybody said. They had Aymeric Laporte, who was probably alongside Virgil van Dijk the best central defender in the league, but he prefers the left side, so City’s job in the summer was to find somebody to play alongside him. In that area, it was widely agreed, their recruitment had gone a little awry.They signed Nathan Aké from Bournemouth for £41m, the first senior central defender City had signed since Laporte in January 2018. But one who plays on the left. A squad player, then: cover, back-up for Laporte. Aké played in the first two games of the season, in the second of which City let in five against Leicester. He has started only three league games since, and given the last two of those were against West Brom and Newcastle United, two of the five lowest-scoring sides in the division, it’s fair to say his role is to be used against less threatening opponents to rest the frontline.But then City pounced. Rúben Dias, for £61.5m plus Nicolás Otamendi. A right-sided central defender, the first senior player City had bought in that position since Stones in August 2016. This, then, was the future: Dias and Laporte, the rock on which Pep Guardiola’s new cathedral would be built.And Dias has excelled this season. Few central defenders have adapted quite so unobtrusively into the Premier League, with all its long diags and elbows and second balls. His unruffled authority, the galvanising effect he has had, has drawn comparison to Van Dijk, which may be premature but is not unreasonable. The difference between City now and the porousness of the Leicester game is profound.But he hasn’t done it on the right of central defensive pairing; he’s done it on the left and alongside him is Stones. The solution, it turns out, was there all along.Stones is one of those unfortunate players who has become a cipher for a wider debate. It’s never just about him or his form: conversations always end up in debates about the nature of defending and how central defenders should behave. As soon as Everton signed him from Barnsley, he became the icon of a new age: an angular, slightly gawky figure more notable for his reading of the game and his passing than for the more traditional defensive arts of heading, tackling and marking.It’s a concept with which English football has never been entirely comfortable. Stones made errors, as all young defenders will, as all defenders will, particular those asked to play in the proactive way he is, and each one felt like a blow on the whole concept of defending he represents. The nadir perhaps came in England’s defeat against the Netherlands in the Nations League semi-final in 2019. However many mistakes could be tolerated for the benefits brought by his willingness to pass out from the back, this was too many.Form and confidence disintegrated. Last season he started only 12 league games. He played only one of the first nine this season. At 26, he felt like yesterday’s man. But then he came into the team against Burnley at the end of November. Since then, when he has been on the pitch, the only goal City have conceded is Callum Hudson-Odoi’s largely inconsequential late strike for Chelsea on Sunday.Against Manchester United on Wednesday, the Stones-Dias partnership was exceptional again, and Stones’s goal a welcome bonus. United didn’t play badly in a high-quality game, but the threat they offered was restricted largely to a couple of long-range efforts, a handful of set plays and some extremely optimistic appeals for penalties. Fernandinho was superb, not only in his goal, but in the way he protected the space in front of Stones and Dias, stifling Bruno Fernandes.City this season have been scratchy. They’ve lacked their usual flow. When they drew at home with West Brom, it seemed reasonable to wonder whether this might be the worst side of which Guardiola had ever been in charge. But against Chelsea and then again on Wednesday, there was a zip to their football. In 12 games since the defeat at Tottenham, they’ve conceded only three times.The question was how well the new partnership would stand up against a strong counterattacking side. Here, perhaps, was the beginning of an answer. United beat City three times last season, each time by sitting deep and playing on the break. In the league meeting last month, Guardiola was so concerned by United’s counter he had his side sit off and essentially accept a 0-0. There was no such caution on Wednesday.City in spells looked back to their fluent best, and that is part down to the sense of security the defence gives them. In Stones’s resurgence, perhaps, there is a reminder that players are not mere bundles of attributes and statistics. They have lives beyond the pitch. Form and confidence can fluctuate. A few bad games, a few bad months, shouldn’t mean a player is written off for ever. They are human and therefore unpredictable. Planning can only ever go so far. This may be a formula that has been stumbled upon, but City are starting to look hugely impressive.
In 2021, football needs to turn words into action when it comes to discrimination	The turn of a year is traditionally a period of reflection and resolution. This year, lockdown has amplified that feeling as we consider a seismic 12 months and catch glimmers of hope.Last Christmas, I wrote about the need to make 2020 a year of teamwork across football as we fight racism and discrimination. Nobody could have anticipated what transpired. The Covid pandemic and the death of George Floyd have changed us. Initially, Covid created a resurgence of community spirit most vividly symbolised by the weekly clap for carers ritual. That spirit has frayed over time with frustration and individualism rising. But football has consistently demonstrated real leadership with clubs’ continued work in the community exemplified by Marcus Rashford’s stellar work on child food poverty.The death of George Floyd has returned racial inequality to the front of public discourse. Again, football showed great leadership, players symbolically taking a knee to call for action. The Football Leadership Diversity Code has now been adopted by 48 clubs setting gender and ethnicity recruitment targets for coaches and senior leaders. Long term, this is potentially a game-changer.What should we expect in 2021 and beyond? As the Nobel laureate Niels Bohr said: “Prediction is very difficult, especially if it’s about the future.”Football does not exist in a vacuum. It is affected by broader social and economic trends. These send conflicting signals but two major themes are likely to dominate as we enter a post-Covid and a post-Brexit world. The end of the first world war and the Spanish flu pandemic presaged an age of hedonism in the roaring 20s and there are predictions that our current forced contemplation of mortality may trigger a similar era once the shackles are off. Happier people tend to hate less.It is tempting to believe that now Brexit is done, social divisions will heal. I am sceptical. I tend to think of Brexit as more symptom than cause – it reflected divisions that have been percolating for years. The usual backlash against rising demands for racial equality has commenced – look at some of the responses to players taking a knee. We await more detail on the government’s new equalities policy but initial noises worryingly resemble a dog whistle.But there is reason to hope that football can rise above the noise. I sense a real mood to turn words into action and football has an opportunity to lead. We need to focus on three key areas in 2021: using data to monitor change, tackling online hate and aligning on education.By committing to the Football Leadership Diversity Code, the game has made commitments to better reflect society. Over the next few years, we need to help football meet those commitments with talent programmes and hold the game to those promises using data to track progress. We intend to use our partnership with Sky with its global technology capabilities and broadcast platform to play our part in doing this.Social media is the battleground of hate. It is partly a technological and partly a behavioural problem so we will need technological and behavioural solutions. That needs to involve Twitter, Facebook, the government, law enforcement, football clubs and governing bodies. The government can play its part by accelerating the Online Harms bill, regulating big tech, creating a duty of care on social media providers and creating rules around transparency. But we cannot just wait for that. There are things we must do now.Clubs and players have enormous followings which can be a force for good (ask Rashford). But with great power comes great responsibility to take care. The vicious trolling of Karen Carney was grimly predictable in the febrile tribal culture of social media that rapidly escalates to misogyny, racism and other forms of hate. It was completely avoidable.The recent abuse of QPR’s Bright Osayi-Samuel and Bournemouth’s Junior Stanislas led to more calls for the removal of anonymity. But anonymity at which level? Anonymity on the face of social media can serve a vital protective purpose (for example, if you are gay in a country where homosexuality is illegal). The real issue is how quickly account verification information is revealed to law enforcement and action taken once that anonymity is abused. This is the heart of the problem.There are gaps in the system between football, law enforcement and social media which contribute to the culture of impunity. Current processes are largely reliant on complaints and targeting high-profile prosecutions. But the culture of social media is set by the repeat offenders who spread hate little and often. We need to be proactive. We need to go trawling, not whale hunting. We monitored social media posts in the summer with the PFA and an AI company called Signify. I believe that football needs to invest in monitoring solutions to identify and pursue the serial and serious offenders.What if we could identify the top 10 offenders every week and create an accelerated evidence pathway to law enforcement? The question is who pays for this kind of monitoring. Last summer, several clubs balked at the cost of a pilot scheme. The cost for an entire season across the leagues is likely to be in the region of 0.5% of the aggregate transfer fees spent during the pandemic. This is a question of priorities. Football needs to invest in real solutions or the players will continue to pay the price.Finally, it is a truism and a refrain that education is key to countering discrimination. But educating whom, about what and when? Most people know that hate is bad but they may not realise the impact it has. There are many education providers across the football ecosystem. It is time we got aligned and focused on driving measurable outcomes.The financial success of English football over the last 30 years has been built partly on slick marketing. But players and fans are now cynical of the PR machine. Above all else, in 2021 football needs to build on the statements of intent from 2020 and commit time, energy and resources to convert that intent into action.
England's Zak Crawley plans opening moves like Queen's Gambit star	It presumably doesn’t involve pharmacological assistance but, like Beth Harmon, the protagonist in The Queen’s Gambit, Zak Crawley is someone who lies in bed, stares at the ceiling and maps how he intends to construct a match-winning performance.Crawley has been doing plenty of this since England landed in Hambantota on Sunday and went straight to their rooms to quarantine, not least with him being slated to open again in the series against Sri Lanka. On Wednesday, however, he was among those who trotted out for their first net after clearing the latest Covid tests.Only Moeen Ali, who tested positive for Covid-19 upon arrival and is undergoing 10 days of isolation in a separate wing of the Shangri-La hotel, and Chris Woakes, negative but forced to do seven himself as a close contact of Moeen, were missing from a session in which the players worked in small groups ahead of further tests on Thursday.For Crawley, still only 22 and reporting no issues with the bubble lifestyle that has dominated his first 12 months in international cricket, excitement about this return to action was tempered by knowing that two mates are still stuck inside watching Netflix.“They are doing well but I feel for them. It’s massively frustrating,” Crawley said, after England trained at Hambantota’s MRIC Stadium. “It’s one of those viruses where people like us, who are young and fit, don’t know we have it until we’re tested. Mo didn’t know until he was. I’m sure they’ll be good when they come out the other side.“I was very excited to get out of England, come over here and play some cricket. We’re very lucky to be able to do that at this time, when other people can’t do a lot.“It’s going to be a good challenge. Sri Lanka are very good in their home conditions and if we don’t play well they’ll be all over us. It’s something I’ve put a lot of thought into, so hopefully I’m mentally prepared.”Asked to expand on this, Crawley revealed himself to be a batsman who puts plenty of stock in visualisation. “When you’re going to bed and before you shut your eyes you’re sitting there looking at the ceiling and thinking about how you want to play,” he said. “I do quite a lot of that. And when you’re just daydreaming you’re thinking about it.“I find that if you think about it before you practise, it really helps. I’ve also done a fair bit of work in the bubble at Loughborough during the winter. I feel I’ve got a decent gameplan that I’m going to practise in the nets here and hopefully use in the games.”There are good memories to call upon here too. As well as August’s maiden Test century – a remarkable 267 against Pakistan that announced his arrival on the world stage – a previous visit to Sri Lanka last March saw him chalk up a century in England’s second warm-up match, only for the global shutdown to see the tour postponed mid-game and his innings lose its first-class status.While his preferred spot remains No 3, paternity leave for Rory Burns during this tour means Crawley will rejoin Dom Sibley in facing the new ball. Along with last year’s 105 in Colombo, the right-hander will draw upon his experience from two trips to India with the Kent academy. In his mind, and perhaps understandably so for a player who is 6ft 5in, this is a case of tightening his defence for the immediate challenge of facing spin.He said: “I’ve thought about that a lot. Because the ball doesn’t spin as much in England – and maybe spins differently – our defences aren’t quite as tight as they need to be naturally. That’s something we need to build into our games. A strong defence gives you a chance to attack later down the line.”Such a mature outlook is why so many believe Crawley to be the next big thing; in Sri Lanka, and the tour of India that follows, he appears well placed to demonstrate that last summer’s breakthrough showing in Southampton was merely an opening gambit.
Premiership bans players from face-to-face try celebrations to combat Covid	Premiership players have been banned from celebrating tries “face to face” as part of a series of stricter Covid-19 protocols introduced amid the rising number of cancelled matches with persistent offenders facing disciplinary action from the Rugby Football Union.Players are also forbidden from taking ice baths and meetings must take place outdoors or virtually with PRL and the RFU clamping down after Northampton’s match against Leicester on Saturday became the fifth match in just over two weeks to be cancelled.The Guardian understands a twice-a-week testing programme is also under strong consideration amid the sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in England. Premiership Rugby will announce this week’s test results on Thursday but already this is the third consecutive round to feature cancellations and fears are growing over the integrity of the competition.A similar warning was issued over try celebrations before last season’s restart in August and while it was effectively ignored, it is understood the RFU has since created a role specifically designed to ensure compliance with protocols and will consider action against anyone consistently flouting them.Other measures designed to keep clubs Covid safe include players being banned from eating at their training bases or stadiums, and non-playing squad members can no longer attend matches. Also warm-ups will be filmed to help identify close contacts should an outbreak take place.Asked if he believed the protocols needed to be strengthened, the Exeter director of rugby, Rob Baxter, said: “The problem is while the rugby club is probably the safest place there is, you can’t allow for what happens outside. It’s impossible for me to say that a strengthening of the rules within the club environment would stop more Covid outbreaks because none of us are in complete control of what we do outside the club.“A revitalisation and focus on everything around professional sport is good but for me to say changing the rules will make an improvement, I don’t think anyone can say that because we just don’t know.”Northampton confirmed their match against Leicester was the latest to be cancelled on Wednesday after a number of positive cases led to more players having to self-isolate.Northampton are set to be awarded two match points and Leicester four, which means the Saints have now been awarded six points from two matches that have not taken place after last week’s trip to London Irish was scratched.Amid concerns that so many cancelled matches are skewing the Premiership table, there are growing calls among the clubs to do away with relegation this season.“We are incredibly disappointed and frustrated that we are unable to proceed with such an important fixture for the club,” the Northampton director of rugby, Chris Boyd, said. “It’s also a big blow to have back-to-back matches cancelled, as we had hoped to pick up some momentum again following an important win on Boxing Day.“The club has been absolutely rigorous in how we have followed the protocols laid out for us. We are following the advice we have been given, which was not to play the game and to close our training facility until next week.”Baxter also revealed that Exeter had an undisclosed number of positive cases this week but he remains confident Saturday’s top-of-the-table clash with Bristol will go ahead, with the Chiefs taking it upon themselves to introduce another round of testing this week.Baxter has previously told of the benefits of twice-weekly testing and at the behest of the Top 14 clubs, Premiership clubs are set to do so in European weeks, starting with the forthcoming double header later this month. It is understood that what happens beyond that remains under discussion.“We’re certainly going to have another round of testing later this week just to ensure that nobody’s slipped through the net, nobody’s become viral later in the week,” added Baxter. ”That will just ensure that when we take the field we can go with that 100% confidence, we’re not risking transmitting anything to Bristol.”
Leisure facilities face £90m a week loss under UK winter Covid-19 lockdown	The winter lockdown will cost Britain’s gyms, swimming pools and leisure facilities a combined £90m a week in lost revenue, according to new analysis from ukactive, which is calling for urgent government help to protect jobs and keep the sector afloat.January is a vital month for the leisure industry, with many people renewing gym or pool memberships or committing to a new exercise programme. But with most sports banned for another six weeks – and possibly longer – ukactive, which represents more than 4,000 gyms and leisure facilities, said the industry was in deep trouble.“The government must protect this sector as a priority, before it becomes too late,” the ukactive chief executive, Huw Edwards, said. “January and February represent a vital period for gyms, pools, and leisure facilities to trade but they currently have zero income, unlike other sectors.”Last autumn the government announced a £100m fund across the sector while on Monday the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, revealed one-off grants of £9,000 for small businesses would also be made available. But ukactive says that help is nowhere near enough.“The top-up grants and funding announced by the Chancellor, while welcome, will be no more than a sticking plaster for the financial challenges being faced,” Edwards said. “Both public and private fitness and leisure operators will require additional, tailored financial and regulatory support for their recovery.”Meanwhile new research from 4Global, which provides data analysis to governments and sporting bodies, has found the November lockdown restrictions on the sports industry cost Britain £29m in terms of social value – a figured based on the sector’s contribution to the reduction, through exercise, of health conditions such as depression, diabetes and breast and colon cancer.This, said Edwards, showed the closure of gyms, leisure centres and swimming pools during January and February did not only present a “major threat to thousands of facilities and jobs, but also our nation’s health, and resilience to conditions including Covid-19, obesity and some cancers”.Edwards also pointed to evidence from the first lockdown in England, which showed anxiety levels doubled compared with the 2019 average – with an extra 3.2 million people classed as inactive, undertaking less than 30 minutes of exercise a week, as further evidence for more government support.The government has also been urged by the Youth Sports Trust to do more to help young people to stay active. Meanwhile the sports scientist Greg Whyte has told the Guardian that Britain is heading for a “perfect storm” in which a reduction in activity levels during the winter lockdown has a disastrous effect on physical and mental health.Whyte has also called on the government to use the 400,000 people who work in the fitness sector but are on furlough to get the population more active.
Blackett's Wasps and Ford's spiral bombs light up the Premiership	Lee Blackett is a head coach going somewhere and Leicester are on an upward spiral. Two thoughts after last weekend’s Premiership round, another to be affected by Covid cancellations, now with Saturday’s east Midlands derby at Franklin’s Gardens a fifth victim.The manner in which Wasps defeated Exeter in a repeat of last October’s Premiership final was impressive. The Chiefs were below full strength – although not as much as they were at Ashton Gate last August when they showed Bristol how far they had to go – but such was the systematic way they were picked apart, it influenced the margin rather than the outcome.The following day, Leicester were locked in another struggle, this time at home to Bath. George Ford, who returned to Welford Road after the West Country club had sacked his father Mike as head coach, took it out on his former employers by employing a high kick with a difference.The Bath full-back Anthony Watson has seen many a Ford kick as an England colleague as well as a club opponent, but the spirals the fly-half sent into the air were precisely measured and had the maximum impact, fading as Watson went to catch the ball and making a knock-on more likely than a catch.The first thought was that if it caught on, it would lead to an increase in kicking at a time when there is a surfeit of it in the professional game, but it is not designed to result in a bout of kick tennis. It is an attacking option which usually gained Leicester possession as well as territory and left Watson wondering where to position himself.Fly-halves used to employ the spiral kick to find touch, but its tendency to fade on its downward path contained an element of risk that kicking coaches in the professional age snuffed out by employing a technique from Aussie Rules in which distance is traded in for accuracy. The spiral bomb has taken a long time to emerge from the laboratory, and it carries the danger of sliding off the side of the kicker’s boot and leaving their team exposed defensively, but Ford turned it into a long form of the kick-pass.The pity is Ford will have little time to develop it before the Six Nations. Leicester are not playing this weekend while their next scheduled match, against Bayonne in the European Challenge Cup, is in doubt after the Top 14 club unilaterally pulled out of the tournament after a number of positive Covid-19 tests. They may be ordered to reconsider, but with the Tigers having their own virus problems in recent weeks, will any of their number be comfortable travelling there?Wasps are due in Montpellier next week, armed with four successive victories after an uncertain start to the season when they were well beaten at Gloucester and lost at home to Newcastle. It is 11 months since Blackett became head coach, at first in an interim capacity, after the departure of the long-serving director of rugby Dai Young.His appointment appeared to be based on finance rather than ambition. The heady days after 2014, when Wasps abandoned High Wycombe for Coventry and signed players like Willie le Roux and Kurtley Beale to complement Danny Cipriani, Elliot Daly, Jimmy Gopperth and Christian Wade, had long faded. The club had pressing concerns before the pandemic and the squad had lost much of its glitter: only six of the side that started the 2017 Premiership final against Exeter were around for the return three years later.It has proved an inspired choice. Shortly after he was appointed full time, Blackett stated he did not want anyone, players or coaches, to change. “I want them to be who they are,” he said. “We were in a hole, but the players had the belief that we could turn it around.”Wasps have won 17 of the 21 matches Blackett has taken charge of. His player management has been exceptional: before he took over, having been attack coach since 2015, they had been one of the Premiership’s more adventurous sides but they had become increasingly brittle. He looked to add rather than take away and the manner in which they took on Exeter, at the strongest points of the Chiefs – scrum, lineout, maul and gainline – while still moving the ball when it was on showed what he had developed in a short time.He is the second youngest coach in the Premiership and has yet to be touted as a contender to succeed Eddie Jones with England, but that looks a matter of time given the way he is proving himself as a selector and a tactician: Wasps have become multidimensional. He chose the second-row James Gaskell in the back row against Exeter rather than the turnover specialist Thomas Young. It was a selection tailored for the opposition which had a telling impact on the game, and not because Gaskell scored two tries. He gave Wasps added height in the lineout against a side that kicks penalties into touch, rather than at goal, and he helped counter the Chiefs’ rolling maul.The week before, at Sale, Blackett had rested his England contingent and fielded young half-backs, Charlie Atkinson and Will Porter. Atkinson scored an individual try which brought to mind a young Cipriani while Porter resembled Dan Robson in his speed of thought and action. Blackett is not afraid to promote academy players and Alfie Barbeary was making headlines until an ankle injury forced him out until February or March.Saracens may not be around, but Exeter will not have it their own way this season. On Friday night Wasps are at Bath, whose forwards failed to deliver at Leicester, and in Blackett they are meeting someone who is not taking a spiral staircase to the top.• This is an extract from our weekly rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.
Chiesa imitates his father in sinking Milan to drag Juve back into title race	Did Federico Chiesa take some tips from his father before Juventus’s visit to Milan? Enrico scored goals everywhere he went in his career, but lining up against the Rossoneri always seemed to draw out something extra: the red-and-black flag to his bull.He punctured them 17 times in 24 encounters across Serie A and the Coppa Italia, more than he managed against any other club. Not bad when you consider the names of some of the defenders sent against him: Baresi, Costacurta, Maldini, Nesta and Stam.The back four that started for Milan on Wednesday was not quite in that category. Alessio Romagnoli and Simon Kjær have formed an encouraging partnership at centre-back, but a feeling persists that the Italian has not yet realised his full potential, while his partner’s lack of pace can be exposed. On the right side of defence, Diogo Dalot made only his third Serie A start.Theo Hernández, one of Milan’s best signings in years, still has a way to go before being considered in such illustrious company. And this would turn out to be one of the left-back’s worst games for some time.There were not 20 minutes played when Chiesa left Hernández in his wake for the first time, shimmying in from the right-hand touchline, cutting the ball square for Paulo Dybala and accelerating towards the penalty box. The ball came back to him via the Argentinian’s masterful heel-flick, and Chiesa buried it into the far corner.It was a breathtaking start to a game that would keep its audience gasping. Chiesa had already struck the woodwork, slamming a half-volley into the right-hand upright, after Wojciech Szczesny produced an important near-post stop to thwart Samu Castillejo at the other end.Brilliant from Juve! ⚫⚪Chiesa and Dybala combine magnificently and the winger scores the opener 🔥 pic.twitter.com/4kU2VQInqVThe stakes were as high as they could be at such an early stage of a campaign. Milan, unbeaten in 28 league games, had an opportunity to move four points clear at the top following Inter’s defeat to Sampdoria earlier on Wednesday. More significant still, a win would have left Juventus – champions of the past nine Serie A seasons – 13 points adrift.Both teams were missing key players. Milan have been without Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Ismaël Bennacer since mid-December, but a suspension to Sandro Tonali, coupled with positive Covid tests for Rade Krunic and Ante Rebic left them so short that manager Stefano Pioli was compelled to draft right-back Davide Calabria into central midfield.Juventus had to do without Álvaro Morata up front – the only player besides Cristiano Ronaldo in their squad who had scored more than twice in this league season. Both of their own starting full-backs, Alex Sandro and Juan Cuadrado, were out after testing positive for Covid as well.Neither side, though, seemed willing to let such setbacks discourage them from trying to play on the front foot. Opportunities came thick and fast throughout the first 45 minutes. It was a Bentancur backheel inside his own penalty box that set up that early chance for Castillejo, and Aaron Ramsey was every bit as careless with a pass across the face the area that went straight to Milan’s Jens Petter Hauge.The Rossoneri equalised in the 41st minute, Calabria placing a gorgeous first-time finish into the top corner from the edge of the box. A 1-1 scoreline was a fair reflection of the balance of play, but it was a surprise not to see VAR intervene after Hakan Calhanoglu had appeared to foul Adrien Rabiot at the start of the move.Chiesa, though, was not finished. One month earlier, after Juventus’s win over Dinamo Kyiv, a journalist had asked him whether there were any traits he would like to steal from his dad. Federico did not mention Milan, back then, but instead replied: “his ability to shoot off either foot. He had phenomenal co-ordination.”Perhaps he has inherited more than he knows. Having scored the opener with his right boot, Chiesa put Juventus back in front with the left, running straight at Hernández to put the defender off balance before picking out the bottom corner, giving Gianluigi Donnarumma no chance even from 20 yards out.Chiesa does it AGAIN! 😱The 23-year-old came off with what looked like a knock immediately after the goal, but what a performance he's put in! 🙌 pic.twitter.com/w1X9vEY9LLIt was the turning point. Milan did not yield but, for the first time in almost a year, Pioli’s young and overachieving team had come up against a domestic opponent they simply did not have answers for. When Chiesa limped out of the game after scoring his second, Andrea Pirlo sent on Dejan Kulusevski – a €35m signing – to replace him.The second-half substitutions spoke to the realities of both teams. Juventus went on to introduce Weston McKennie, Arthur and Federico Bernardeschi from the bench. Milan had Pierre Kalulu, a 20-year-old centre-back, together with teenage academy graduates Daniel Maldini and Lorenzo Colombo.It was McKennie who made it 3-1 to Juventus, from a Kulsevski assist. A greater vindication of Juventus’s summer transfer strategy was hard to imagine. On a night where Cristiano Ronaldo failed to sparkle, three young players who arrived together this summer had taken over the most important game of the league season to date, dragging their team back into the title picture.Chiesa, though, was the greatest gamble. He was the last to arrive, this October, and there were many who considered his signing to be superfluous for a club that already seemed to have too many options to deploy in support of Ronaldo – from Kulusevski, Dybala, Bernardeschi and Ramsey through to the newly-returned Morata. Was it really necessary to add Chiesa – whose deal is structured as a loan with obligation to buy, but could eventually cost them €60m in transfer fees – on top?If he can continue as he has started in 2021, there will be no doubts. He had already scored, and sparkled, in the 4-1 rout of Udinese at the weekend, and on Wednesday Pirlo was specific in highlighting the different options Chiesa gives to the team as a player who could dominate one-on-ones in the final 30 metres of the pitch.Milan 1-3 Juventus, Atalanta 3-0 Parma, Bologna 2-2 Udinese, Cagliari 1-2 Benevento, Crotone 1-3 Roma, Lazio 2-1 Fiorentina, Napoli 1-2 Spezia, Sampdoria 2-1 Internazionale, Sassuolo 2-1 Genoa, Torino 1-1 Hellas VeronaThe player himself preferred to deflect the praise, crediting the manager for encouraging him to attack the penalty box more, and his Juventus teammates for showing him new tricks. “At the end of training we get together with Cristiano [Ronaldo] and Paulo [Dybala],” he said. “The younger players – me and Kulusevski – watch them and try to steal something.”After all those years observing his father, he has grown into a most accomplished thief.
Mickey Arthur has faith in 'streetwise' Sri Lanka to trouble England	Sri Lanka’s cricketers fly home on Friday after a chastening 2-0 defeat in South Africa but with revenge now squarely on their minds when it comes to their upcoming series against England.Joe Root’s side won 3-0 on the island in late 2018 thanks to a dynamic fast-scoring gameplan with the bat in which the sweep and reverse sweep were deployed aggressively against the spinners and the home side rather wilted in response.According to Mickey Arthur, Sri Lanka’s head coach since late 2019, that experience had a profound impact on the players and though his injury-ridden side could not cope with the pace and bounce of South Africa’s quicks on the Highveld recently, he fancies it will be a different story in the first Test, which starts in Galle next Thursday.“I think Sri Lanka were hit hard by the 3-0 defeat to England two years ago,” Arthur told the Guardian. “They didn’t expect it. But this time around we will certainly be prepared for any kind of repeat. We know we will have to box clever too.“I am comfortable that our guys in those conditions are technically a lot more streetwise than they are against the fast bouncing ball. They grow a leg when they come back into their own conditions: they become taller, bigger, stronger. They know what to do.”For all this positivity from Arthur – typical of a coach who lived and breathed every moment when in charge of his native South Africa, as well as Australia and Pakistan – Sri Lanka have played only one home series since England’s last visit: a 1-1 draw with New Zealand in 2019 when the tourists levelled matters with an innings victory in Colombo.Arthur is coy about the strategy this time around but it is not hard to deduce that Root’s side will likely face an attack that has the finger-spinners Lasith Embuldeniya and Dilruwan Perera challenging either side of the bat, and Sri Lanka’s highly-rated new wrist-spinner Wanindu Hasaranga offering a touch of mystery.“I suspect it is going to turn a bit, in fact I know it will,” said Arthur, who along with the in-form captain, Dimuth Karunaratne, plans to meet Galle’s head groundsman once Sri Lanka’s players and support staff have cleared their Covid-19 tests upon arrival.“We will have to play their spinners well though. Dom Bess debuted against Pakistan in 2018 when I was with them and has come on strongly since. I have watched Jack Leach a lot too – my past teams seemed to always play warm-ups against Somerset – and he’s a very fine bowler. It will be typically Sri Lankan conditions.”Sri Lanka were not without bright moments in South Africa, recovering from 54 for three in the first Test to putpost 396 on the board and inducing a collapse of nine for 84 with the ball in the second. Confidence also comes with returns for the seasoned batsmen Dinesh Chandimal and Angelo Mathews followingafter respective groin and hamstring injuries.England have also lost Moeen Ali to Covid-19 – the all-rounder was their joint-leading wicket-taker alongside Jack Leach with 18 victims two years ago – and, along with Rory Burns missing out due to paternity leave and Ollie Pope not yet fit after shoulder surgery, they have also rested both Ben Stokes and Jofra Archer in advance of the India tour that follows.Arthur said: “I don’t think England would ever take us lightly. Rest and rotation is just the way of the world. You wouldn’t want to break Jofra’s back in Galle and Stokes has come off a tough time [following the death of his father]. I know [the head coach] Chris Silverwood well and they will not be underprepared.”Another familiar face for Arthur in the England setup is theEngland’s batting consultant Jacques Kallis, with whom he spent five years while in charge of South Africa.“I didn’t think I’d be facing Mark Boucher [South Africa’s head coach] and Jacques within a week of each other! Jacques has a wealth of experience to tap into and when he talks, guys listen. Each England batsman will get something out of him, for sure.”Can the presence of Kallis unlock some form for Root, following the captain’s first calendar year in international cricket without a century? “He’s still one hell of a cricketer,” Arthur replied. “I’m sure the runs are going to come … but only once they get to India.”
Design Review: get the newsletter for the way we live now	‘Design’ is a word used to describe architecture and products, ideas and visual arts. Design makes your sofa comfortable, but it can also save the planet if you’re developing innovative building materials. In this age, every aspect of design is considered by the switched-on reader, so the Design Review newsletter focuses on thinking and process as much as products to buy.The way we think about lifestyle is changing. As our focus turns to sustainability and away from the short fix of fashion and trends, we have updated our lifestyle journalism to reflect this. Following on from the Observer’s quarterly Design magazine, our monthly newsletter to bring you more of these features and stories.***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties.Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Sign up for Word of Mouth: the best of Guardian Food every week	Each week we’ll keep you up-to-date with all the food coverage from the Guardian and the Observer. We’ll send you the latest recipes from Yotam Ottolenghi, Nigel Slater, Meera Sodha and all our star cooks, stand-out food features and seasonal eating inspiration, plus restaurant reviews from Grace Dent and Jay Rayner.Sign up below to start receiving the best of our culinary journalism in one mouth-watering weekly email.Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football or travel, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Where to buy reusable face masks in Australia – and how to make your own	On 4 January 2021, wearing face masks or face coverings became mandatory in some indoor public spaces across greater Sydney. Wearing face masks in indoor public spaces was also made mandatory again in Victoria on 31 December.While face masks are in far greater supply than they were when Victoria first enacted mask laws in July 2020, finding a high-quality reusable face mask can still be a challenge, especially with many businesses closed over the holiday period.Fortunately, if you cannot buy a mask, making your own is relatively simple. In July, The Social Studio, a Melbourne-based social enterprise and fashion training program, partnered with the Victorian government to make an instructional video and pattern for creating your own mask.“Essentially there are three different types of fabric that need to be included,” Aleksandra Nedeljkovic, chief operating officer of The Social Studio told Guardian Australia in July 2020. “One is an outer layer which needs to be water repellant, then there’s an … interfacing layer that helps keep nasty particles out, then the inner layer is a breathable fabric, like 100% cotton. It’s those three combined that make a mask effective.”While three-layer masks are not mandated, both the Victorian and New South Wales guidelines stipulate that masks with at least three layers will be the most effective form of protection.Nedeljkovic says that, provided you can get the right fabric – “which shouldn’t be too tricky” – anyone can make their own mask. If finding cloth is difficult, you can even take a leaf out of The Social Studio’s manufacturing playbook and repurpose fabric from existing garments you no longer use, or even a reusable shopping bag (for the outer layer of the mask).If you bought an anti-pollution face mask before the Covid-19 pandemic, it may also be suitable to wear now, but the Victorian guidelines advise against wearing masks that feature holes or a valve, as “this can result in breathing out the virus if you have coronavirus”.It is also worth noting that a mask will only be effective if it covers your nose and mouth – wearing a mask with your nose peaking out over the top will not protect you, or anyone else.For those who would prefer to buy, rather than make their own mask, Guardian Australia has compiled a list of suppliers of reusable face masks, all with at least three layers, to suit a range of tastes and budgets.Please note that while stocks of all masks were available at the time of writing, some may have sold out or gone on back order subsequently.Clothing the Gap reversible four-layer face mask, $20Featuring artwork by Gunditjmara woman Laura Thompson on one side and plain black on the other, this reversible mask from social enterprise Clothing the Gap comes in two sizes, with adjustable elastic ear loops and nose wire.Hey Reflect’o reusable face mask, $29Adelaide-based Lisa Penney has added face masks to her Australian made and eco-friendly hi-vis arsenal – the masks come in a variety of colours and prints, all with a cheeky reflective Sars-CoV-2 print. Also available in four packs.The Social Outfit ‘B1-G1’ printed reusable mask, $33 Australian not-for-profit retailer and manufacturer The Social Outfit is no stranger to employing fashion as a cause for change. Its day-to-day operations provide work and training in the fashion industry for refugees and new migrant communities.Each mask sold contributes to a buy-one give-one model, supplying a mask to a person in need. The masks have adjustable nose wire and are made of remnant fabric, so the pattern you get will be a lucky dip-style surprise.Yarli Collective three-layer masksYorta Yorta, Dja Dja Wurrung and Gamilaroi artist Maddy Connors has painted six designs to adorn the masks she creates for her printmaking and apparel business Yarli Collective.Tirion origami face masks, $18Crafted by theatre costume maker Tirion Rodwell, these machine-washable, foldable face masks come in a variety of prints and colourways. The pleated structure of the masks makes them – from personal experience – the most comfortable style we’ve tried so far.Nobody Denim three-layer face masks, $25Made in Melbourne, Nobody’s face masks are Ethical Clothing Australia-accredited, reversible and allow you to embrace a fondness for double denim, right on your face. Nobody Denim has also repurposed some of its manufacturing facilities to make scrubs for frontline workers.Sara Sidari linen face masks $32For days when getting out of bed feels like a challenge, illustrator Sara Sidari’s three-layer printed face mask lets you take your sheets with you – the outer layer is 100% linen, with a cotton middle layer and soft jersey lining. They are screen printed and manufactured in Australia.The Ark three-pack summer printed masks, $40Ethical clothing manufacturer The Ark’s three-packs of paisley and gingham printed masks bring a touch of cottagecore to personal protection.Merino Country three-layer mask $30For wool fans, Merino Country makes a three-layer mask from Australian merino, with rubber straps that tie around the back of the head. It is made in Australia and available in several colourways.Natalie Begg washable silk face mask, with filter pocket, $39.95Melbourne-based lingerie designer Natalie Begg has brought her soft touch to face masks, with a range of washable silk masks in three sizes and multiple colours. They come with a filter pocket and PM2.5 disposable filter, for days you want protection from pollution as well as the pandemic.Unhinged Labs beard face mask, $29.85For hirsute fellows, this filter-compatible, 100% cotton mask from US-based manufacturer Unhinged Labs accommodates a lot of extra hair. Because it is coming from overseas, shipping will take a little longer, and filters are sold separately. Locally, Fella Hamilton also make a beard-compatible face mask, but it is two-ply. Vic Health advises “wearing a mask with less layers will still give you some protection”.Redee drink-friendly mask and straw, $32.99 USUS-brand Redee has designed a filter-compatible, two-ply mask that is meant to make it easier to drink through a straw, without removing or touching your mask. The mask fits snugly around the face, but has a covered flap to allow a straw through the bottom of the mask, while leaving your nose and mouth covered.With a filter inserted, this mask appears to meet Vic Health and NSW Health recommendations, but accidentally touching the straw to the front of the mask could be an issue with day-to-day use. Vic Health does advise against masks which rely on valve openings, several of which are currently available from retailers internationally, and are also marketed as “straw friendly”.
Hear Here podcast recommendations: sign up for unexpected audio pleasures	Hear Here hunts out the best podcasts every week. Sign up and we’ll send you an email filled with shows you’re unlikely to see featured on the major podcatchers but that are instead hidden gems whose listeners are desperate for the rest of the world to tune in. See the latest edition of Hear Here ... here.No sign-up button? Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault. Please click here to reload the page on theguardian.com which should correct the problem.***More emails from our culture team:Sleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekFilm Today: get the day’s insider news and our latest reviewsBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sArt Weekly: the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitions***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Art Weekly: sign up to start the weekend with a splash of colour	Art Weekly is your one-stop shop for all your arty needs. Jonathan Jones handpicks the best ideas and things to see and delivers the week’s must-read news, so you won’t miss a thing. See the latest edition here.***More emails from our culture team:Film Today: get the day’s insider news and our latest reviewsSleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sHear Here: podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
The Guide: Staying In – sign up for our home entertainment tips	Who needs to go out when there’s so much to do indoors? If you’re looking for inspiration, let The Guide – The Guardian’s Saturday arts and entertainment supplement – help you out. Every week, we’ll send you some hot picks, guaranteed to keep you entertained.Expect the best of everything available to watch, play, hear or read. You won’t have time to be bored.No sign-up button? Users viewing this page via Google Amp may experience a technical fault. Please click here to reload the page which should correct the problem.***More emails from our culture team:Hear Here: podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readersSleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekFilm Today: get the day’s insider news and our latest reviewsBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sArt Weekly: the art world low-down, along with in-depth articles***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Sign up to our Film Today email	Every weekday we bring you the latest movie news, blogs, big name interviews, reviews and more.We’ll also point you towards Peter Bradshaw’s film of the week, and a host of quizzes, features and festival coverage.You can also also follow us on Twitter @guardianfilm or like us on Facebook. You need never miss a film story again.***Want more film? Try this:Guardian Documentaries: be the first to find out about our new documentary films, created by top international filmmakers and following unseen global storiesMore emails from our culture team:Sleeve Notes: music news, bold reviews and unexpected extras – every genre, every era, every weekBookmarks: discover new books with our expert reviews, author interviews and literary top 10sArt Weekly: the art world low-down, with in-depth articles and tips for the UK’s top exhibitionsHear Here: podcast recommendations every week from our writers and readers***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Dr Dre 'doing great' after hospitalisation for reported brain aneurysm	Billionaire rapper and producer Dr Dre says he will be “back home soon” after receiving medical treatment at a Los Angeles hospital for a reported brain aneurysm.The six-time Grammy award winner said in a social media post on Tuesday night that he was thankful for well wishes from friends, family and fans. TMZ reported that he had a brain aneurysm on Monday and was recovering at Cedars-Sinai Medical Centre. Dre did not give a reason for his hospitalisation.“I’m doing great and getting excellent care from my medical team,” he said. “I will be out of the hospital and back home soon. Shout out to all the great medical professionals at Cedars. One Love!!”His representative has not immediately responded to an email.Dre, whose real name is Andre Young, has produced hits for Tupac, Snoop Dogg, Eminem and more. He’s won six Grammys.Born in the Southern California city of Compton, he broke out on the music scene as a co-founding member of NWA, producing the group’s groundbreaking 1988 debut album, Straight Outta Compton.Dre produced his own hits and multiplatinum albums, along with crafting music for many others including Kendrick Lamar, 50 Cent, Jay-Z, Nas, Busta Rhymes, the Game and Anderson .Paak. He also found success outside beyond the rap genre, producing pop hits for Gwen Stefani and Mary J Blige.Dre founded Beats Electronics in 2008 with Jimmy Iovine and six years later they launched a streaming subscription service, Beats Music. Apple acquired both in a $3bn deal in 2014.
UK touring musicians hit by ‘double whammy’ of Brexit and Covid	British musicians are being hit by a “double whammy” of Covid-19 restrictions and costly post-Brexit bureaucracy that could decimate European touring, according to industry figures and artists who are calling for changes to trade agreement with the EU.Under the Brexit deal British musicians planning to play in Europe will now have to secure work permits for each individual country on a tour and face further red tape when it comes to transporting equipment and crew.Naomi Pohl, the deputy general secretary of the Musicians’ Union, said work permits were going to be a particular problem when touring with larger classical groups. “When you’re dealing with an orchestra, you’re talking about 70 musicians needing to get a work permit. So it’s a massive issue,” she said.There have already been high-profile online petitions calling for the government to negotiate a free culture work permit for UK performers in the EU, with backers including Dawn French, KT Tunstall, Ronan Keating and Gary Kemp.Pohl says there are several other points of ambiguity in the current agreement, such as whether a carnet, also known as “a passport for goods” such as instruments, will be required for musicians from other parts of the UK travelling to Northern Ireland.Kathryn McDowell, managing director of the London Symphony Orchestra, who organises for the group that plays over 120 concerts in a typical year, says the new agreement means British orchestras may choose to reduce the number of European countries they visit to cut down on administrative costs.She said: “I imagine that the actual approach that we need to take to our activities on continental Europe will have to change. We could go to places for a longer time. So, if you’re going for a week-long residency, then it’s one lot of paperwork.”Income from all foreign tours for orchestras brought in revenue of £14.4m in 2019, according to a report from the Association of British Orchestras. More than half of that was generated from tours of EU countries, with Europe being the most visited region by British orchestras, accounting for three quarters of foreign gigs.Matthew Swann, chief executive of the City of London Sinfonia, said that for smaller ensembles looking to bring European artists into the UK, there would be a new financial burden. “Getting someone across at very short notice was often difficult, but I think now it’s going to be even more complicated,” he said.Other musicians who are going to be hit hard include freelance orchestral artists, who may have picked up casual work in the EU, and touring bands – especially those at the start of their careers who used international gigs as a way to build a fanbase.Black Country, New Road are a group about to release their debut album in February. The group’s saxophonist, Lewis Evans, said touring Europe as a seven-piece before Brexit shaped the band and put them in a position to be signed.He expressed fears groups trying to do the same in the future would not be able to deal with the administrative burden. “We’re in a lucky position but the bands that may be one year behind us, in terms of their trajectory, that’s the really heartbreaking thing. It’s the people who have so much to say, and aren’t going to be able to,” he said.Stephanie Phillips of punk trio Big Joanie said losing European gigs would be a huge financial blow. “Before Covid-19 we were getting quite a lot of offers from different festivals around Europe, now we don’t really know how that will work out,” she said.“Also why would they book a British band when they can just book someone a lot easier and a lot cheaper from a European country? It doesn’t really make sense.”The Department for Digital Media, Culture and Sport said the UK pushed for a more “ambitious agreement with the EU” on the temporary movement of business travellers, which would have covered musicians, but its proposals were not accepted.“We recognise that there could be some additional processes for those working in creative industries, but we have ensured that the visa application processes for longer-term business travel will be transparent to provide certainty and clarity,” a DCMS spokesperson added.
Squatters issue death threats to archaeologist who discovered oldest city in the Americas	Illegal squatters have invaded the ruins of the oldest city in the Americas, and made death threats against Ruth Shady, the celebrated Peruvian archaeologist who discovered the 5,000-year-old civilization.The threats came via telephone calls and messages to various workers at the archeological site at the height of Peru’s Covid-19 pandemic. They followed reports to the police and prosecutors about the invasions of the ancient ruins of Caral.“They called the site’s lawyer and said if he continued to protect me they would kill him, along with me, and bury us five metres below the ground,” said Shady, 73.“Then they killed our dog as a warning. They poisoned her, as if to say, look at what will happen to you,” she said.It is not the first time Shady has been threatened or attacked. In 2003, she was shot in the chest during an assault on the 626-hectare (1,546-acre) archaeological complex which was declared a Unesco world heritage site in 2009.After nine invasions of the sacred city during the pandemic period, Shady and her team repeatedly asked the authorities to intervene.“There is a feeling that there is no authority dedicated to the protection and defence of our heritage. It’s a huge worry,” she said.In July, squatters using a heavy digger knocked down adobe walls and tore up the ground destroying ancient ceramics, tombs containing mummies, textiles and household remains, before police and the site’s staff were able to stop them.As a result of Shady’s pleas, a police car now patrols the archeological site day and night but nothing has been done to punish or evict the land invaders.The squatters are believed to belong to a single extended family, and claim the land was given to them in the 1970s during Peru’s controversial agrarian land reform which was pushed through by a leftist military dictatorship.Shady denies the claim: “They do not have a single land title. The owner of the land is the Peruvian state.”A planned eviction of one of the squatters was thwarted in December when a local prosecutor and official failed to give the order to proceed despite having the support of police officers, Shady said.Land prices in the area have risen from around $5,000 per hectare to as much as $50,000 per hectare, as outsiders rush to buy land around the prestigious archaeological site which is surrounded by a 56 sq mile buffer zone.Shady, who was named on the BBC’s 100 Women list last year, first visited Caral in 1978. But it was not until 1994 that she discovered the ancient city and began to properly excavate the site, which is situated on a dry desert terrace overlooking the Supe river valley nearly 200km (124 miles) north of Lima.What she uncovered was the “oldest centre of civilization in the Americas” which Unesco describes as “exceptionally well-preserved” with a complex architectural design with “monumental stone and earthen platform mounts and sunken circular courts”. Organic material found at the site has been carbon-dated back to 2627 BCEShady and her team continue to investigate and excavate a dozen former settlements, half of the 24 situated in the Supe valley which form part of the Caral-Supe civilization. Their findings have revealed musical instruments such as flutes made of animal and bird bones and evidence of the cultivation of multi-coloured cotton used in textiles.“We can’t allow archeological sites to continue being invaded and destroyed because it is an unwritten history and we recover that history through our investigation,” said Shady. “If we can’t do that it is like burning a book which no one will ever read.”“I hope we can continue to investigate and continue to recover our history because it has such an interesting message,” she added. “It was a very, very peaceful society. We have not found even a single walled settlement.”“There is message there that we, human beings, should live in harmony between ourselves and nature,” Shady concluded. “We are living through this pandemic, in part, due to our mistreatment of nature.”
	As tennis players around the world make their slow return to competition this week after months away, there is one notable player who will not be joining them for a while. In the final months of last season, Taylor Townsend announced she is pregnant and will give birth in March.Some female players who are mothers would rather their tennis was front and centre in their profession and so her case is to be noted simply because it is a clear reflection of a recent cultural change in women’s tennis. In short, this is becoming a normal career option in women’s tennis for those who choose to do so.“I think that 15 years ago if you were pregnant and you had a kid, it was over,” says Townsend. “The whole dynamic has just changed and I think the sport has evolved and realised that this is part of a woman’s life. This is part of what comes with being a woman. Women get pregnant, they have kids, but it doesn’t stop what you’re doing. And it doesn’t stop the path that you want to be on.”When Townsend announced the news in October, she did so in style. In a social media video the American described in chronological order some of the many times people have doubted her with their toxic words and that she will not be perturbed by her next challenge. Her first example was most shocking: at only four years old she was told to quit tennis. “I was told ‘you’re too fat’, ‘you can’t move’, ‘you need to stop’, ‘she’s not going to make it’, ‘she’s too big’. I got all of that kind of dumb shit. That’s what I’ve heard since I started playing.”This has been a constant theme in Townsend’s career, particularly since 2012 when, despite being junior world No 1, the United States Tennis Association asked her to withdraw from the junior US Open claiming her fitness was insufficient. Even at the US Open last year, while she was pregnant, the comments endured. “I stopped listening to that and was like: ‘I need to be happy with who I am. I have to be OK with me,’” she says. “You’re never gonna look like them, that’s fine. But that’s not stopping me from going out and whooping ass. Whatever the thing that you say is holding me back, I can use that as a way to propel me to move forward.”The obstacles Townsend has faced have only toughened her skin and fuelled her drive. “I’m in a cool space because the things I went through as a kid, starting out, I will never allow that to happen to my child. It has given me an opportunity to learn from the things I went through and to be able to shape and change the path for my child. Because I’ll fight someone if they try to tell my four-year-old that they can’t do something. It’s just insane. Those types of people won’t be around.”Townsend recently revealed she is in a financial dispute with her mother over endorsement funds and says this has had a significant effect on how she carries herself. Her circle is smaller. She is not prepared to trust without being certain it will be reciprocated with trustworthiness. “I’ve gone through a sifting-out process and really got rid of all the garbage. Now I’m in the place that I’m pregnant, I’m having a kid, I’m not playing right now. When I go through that process, I will know and it’s very clear what I expect.”In one of her last prominent appearances before the pandemic, Townsend reached the fourth round of the 2019 US Open after beating Simona Halep 2-6, 6-3, 7-6 (4) in round two. At a time when most players spend their time running away from the net, it was perhaps the greatest net-rushing performance of the generation. She approached the net more than 100 times and in the final set she essentially attempted to serve and volley on every first and second serve.She describes the moment as a “pivotal point” in her career that imbued her with the confidence to know she really can beat top players. Those ambitions are not paused and Townsend is already planning for her return between March and May of 2022 after taking some time to learn the ropes of motherhood. There is more to come.
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations	New South Wales health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious.Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms.Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the NSW Health website.Anyone who attended the following venue at the times listed must immediately get tested and self-isolate until you receive a negative result:Wentworthville: ChemSave Day & Night Pharmacy, Sunday 3 January, 10.40am – 10.50am and 9.30pm – 9.40pmAnyone who attended the following venues at the times listed should monitor for symptoms and, if they occur, get tested immediately and self-isolate until you receive a negative result:Avalon: Woolworths, Saturday 2 January, 3.45pm – 4pm; Sunday 3 January, 12.45pm – 1pm; Monday 4 January, 6.30pm – 6.50pm; Tuesday 5 January, 4.45pm – 5pm; Wednesday 6 January, 12.45pm – 1pmAvalon: Chemist Warehouse, Sunday 3 January, 1pm – 1.15pmAll previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below.If you live in or have visited the following suburbs in the past two weeks, get tested even if you have mild COVID-19 symptoms such as a runny nose or scratchy throat.Suburbs in the Canterbury Local Government AreaAshburyBelfieldCampsieCanterburyClemton ParkCroydon ParkEarlwoodHurlstone ParkCumberland City CouncilNorthern Beaches Local Government AreaWollongong City CouncilLearn more about the restrictions for Greater Sydney (including the Blue Mountains), the Central Coast and Wollongong.Find your local government area (LGA)Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Victoria Covid hotspots: list of Melbourne and regional case locations	Victorian authorities have released a list of public exposure sites visited by a confirmed case of Covid-19.Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at Victoria’s Department of Health and Human Services website.List of public exposure sites in VictoriaIf you have visited any of the locations listed below during the date and time indicated you must get tested immediately and quarantine for 14 days from the exposure.If you have visited any of the locations listed below during the date and time indicated you must get tested immediately and quarantine until you receive a negative result.If you have visited any of the locations listed below you should monitor for symptoms - If symptoms develop, immediately get tested and isolate until you receive a negative result.Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
I rescued a stranded peregrine falcon. Here's how I did it	In Melbourne we’re lucky to have birds of prey breeding in our city. But things can go wrong. On Christmas night a peregrine falcon was in trouble and needed to be saved. The job fell to me.This bird wasn’t just any bird. It was one of three female peregrines that hatched in a nestbox on a ledge 150 metres off the ground, atop a Collins Street office block. Right through our second lockdown, from late August to mid-November, viewers of a livestreamed camera trained on the nest were captivated, as the parents raised them.Interest was huge. There were 2.3m views of the “nestcam”, and tens of thousands of social media views.From damp, piping chicks, to fluffy, begging nestlings, we watched them turn into bolshie young birds, squawking and galumphing up and down the ledge like feathered elephants. They grew before our eyes, being fed pigeons, lorikeets and honeyeaters, including some – distressingly – still alive.The week before they fledged (left the nest), activity ramped up. The young birds had grown to adult size, with streaky brown-and-buff feathers and just a few strands of down. They flapped like crazy, building up muscle. The parents flew back and forth, screeching, luring the young ones into the air.Less kindly, Mum and Dad withheld food, too, so their offspring would lose weight and be better able to take their maiden flight.Then, about 7am on 13 November, it happened. The sisters fledged within a few hours, flying for the first time at just 42 days old.We drank a toast, we laughed and cried. Our nestcam addiction was over; we could go back to the workplaces, classrooms and home offices we’d neglected.For the next month, Melbourne’s central business district was the birds’ home, the parents still providing food until the young learned to hunt. There were sightings of all five; things seemed to be going well.And that’s where this story really starts.I’d brought a cardboard box, a torch and a polar-fleece blanket. And a large measure of excitement and fearOn 18 November, five days after fledging, one of the birds was found outside a Collins Street shoe shop. It was thought she was concussed but, abruptly, she took to the air and landed in a tree. The next day, I was asked to check her.Easily done. The tree she’d been roosting in, on the corner of Collins and Elizabeth streets, had great gobs of bird poo on the pavement below. But she was gone.Then, on Christmas night, news emerged of another drama: a stranded falcon on a Flinders Street apartment balcony. The falcon had come to grief, landed and couldn’t take off.Incredibly, a family of falcon watchers had recognised the young bird. Their message reached a wildlife carer who rang me about 9.30pm.“Would you rescue it? You’re a falcon person,” she said. (I am; I’ve been watching them for years, and this year moderated the live stream chat.)But there are plenty of people more qualified to rescue falcons than me. It just so happened, that night, they were busy – or a little “Christmassy”.I thought for two seconds. If I said no, I’d regret it. If I said yes, how would I do it? What if it slashed me, with its flesh-tearing beak and razor-sharp talons? The clock was ticking; if the falcon struggled long enough, it could die of exhaustion.No pressure, then.As it happens, I’ve rescued a few injured animals. It’s a matter of ambushing, subduing and getting them into a container. You have to catch the critter before any sharp or bitey bits of it catch you.“I’ll be there in 30 minutes,” I said.By 10.15 pm, I was crossing Princes Bridge, packed with crowds viewing the Christmas lights. In the lift to the 28th floor, I’d brought a cardboard box, a torch and a polar-fleece blanket. And a large measure of excitement and fear.The family showed me into a darkened living room that opened on to the balcony. I could see the silhouette of a raven-sized bird facing the clear glass of the balcony corner, overlooking the bright, night-time vista of lit buildings and moving traffic. How small it seemed, for such a legendary bird.The wonderful view was how a bird would see the world from on high. But she couldn’t comprehend the glass that was stopping her.As soon as she sensed us, the falcon struggled against the glass, panicked and flapping. We turned on our torches and opened the door. I crept up, threw the blanket and grasped her with both hands.She fought as I pinned her wings to her body. She worked her head free. Somehow, I got her into the box and closed the flaps but her thrashing made it judder. I stuffed in a towel, hoping it wouldn’t cut off her air. Adrenalin was boiling through me; my hands shook, I was breathless, I was woozy from vertigo and my legs were jelly.But I got the bird to safety.Later, at an animal emergency centre, a vet gave the all-clear. The bird had probably hit the building then exhausted herself trying to escape – although she wasn’t too exhausted to fight my efforts at capture.The wildlife carer took her for observation overnight and the next day all was well. We released her at Treasury Gardens.On social media, the tale of the rescued falcon has been extensively viewed. An outpouring of gratitude continues – because these falcons were not just birds of prey growing up on a ledge.In an extraordinarily stressful year, falcon watchers from dozens of countries wrote about viewing the live stream. The falcons had given them hope, joy, inspiration and entertainment. They helped pass the long lockdown days and brought people together. “I loved every minute,” wrote a fan.Hitting buildings is a major hazard for city peregrines and we must consider measures that deter them from flying into glass. They’re up against the very fabric of the cities we construct.We can make their lives better.As for me, every day, I’m bewitched by the mysterious charm of birds. Peregrine falcons are particularly beguiling. They’re the fastest animal on Earth, diving for prey at 300km/h.Yet, for a moment, I held one in my hands. It was my privilege to enfold her beauty and power; her life force itself, her determination to fly free.• Debbie Lustig is a Melbourne writer, birdwatcher and occasional wildlife rescuer
I've come to the realisation that my passions have to be no more than hobbies	Name: Bethany CastleAge: 17Dreams of: being a psychologist2020 was a year of unexpected change, and as 2021 begins, life as I know it is changing again. I’m moving to the city, to Adelaide, and taking my first steps into university.I’ll be left to my own devices with no more than my savings and my belongings. I know that I should expect some harsh life lessons. But despite the fear I have, I am determined to tackle this chapter head-on. After receiving my Year 12 results, I am eagerly waiting for offers from universities and I’m confident that I will be able to enter the course I want.This week I am in the process of finding accommodation in Adelaide and trying to navigate getting some financial assistance from the government. As I start this new chapter of my life, money is lingering in the back of my mind. Not only the practical day-to-day of paying rent, buying textbooks, food and whatever else; I’m hyper aware of the cost of a university degree itself.Losing my casual job back in March means I have had less time to prepare for my new life financially, and I feel like that places me at a disadvantage. I also feel slightly guilty for seeking Centrelink assistance, as I want to be self-sufficient and truly independent once I leave home.On top of this, I plan to go into a masters course with the goal of becoming a fully qualified psychologist – meaning I have to study for six years. This will leave me in a substantial amount of debt, and I feel apprehensive whenever I consider how long it will take for me to repay these loans.The cost of my psychology studies will actually go down with the changes in university fees, which is lucky for me. It is a bit of a relief. But that being said, I still feel disappointed that humanities and social sciences courses are to become more costly – that the time needed to repay student debts will double for other students starting out with me.I’m a little resentful about the fee spike in humanities-based courses. Just a few months ago I was eager to study political journalism, an area which will see an increase in fees. I had also considered studying creative writing and drama at university before choosing psychology. The fee change was not the determining factor or the main reason for changing career paths – personal issues and changes in my life caused my change of heart. Despite this, it was an aspect I was forced to consider. I spent time comparing course fees and trying to estimate how long it would take me to repay my student loans, which consequently generated more fear regarding my future financial stability.It seems like a whole group of emerging creative leaders are being undermined by our society. As I touched on in my last diary entry, I am an artistic person. I write and play music, I create artworks, I perform spoken word, I act in theatre productions. I live and breathe creativity. But when I look around me I see a very blatant devaluing of the arts and those in it, exemplified by making qualifications more expensive. As a creative person, it feels like my talents and passions are less valued by the government and more importantly, our society. It makes me feel like my talents are disposable and not worthy.We need a thriving arts industry during adverse times like now. The arts have been of great benefit to me, as an escape from the ever-changing world, an emotional outlet – they have allowed me to form new hobbies that helped me grow. I know that despite rising barriers, young people will still passionately pursue creative careers. Creative souls who are torn between society’s expectations during Covid and their own passions should be encouraged to strive for what they want, and should not feel undervalued or unappreciated.I will be continuing my passions while studying psychology this year, but due to the lack of support and security society provides the creative sector, I have come to the unfortunate realisation that my passions are going to have to be no more than hobbies.Right now, I’m still not 100% certain of where I will be studying, so I have created multiple plans, which can at times be confusing and disorientating. Nothing is concrete. I am feeling a lot of unrest and stress as the big move draws closer.However, I know that once I move, I will have a new independence. I am incredibly excited to start my new life, and I am eager to become a functioning member of society.
Australian leaders to meet as threat of UK strain emerges – as it happened	This is where we’ll leave the blog for today. Thanks for reading. Here’s a recap of the day’s main news:Scott Morrison’s announcement of a special national cabinet meeting to discuss the UK strain is particularly interesting given the case of the paramedic in Western Australia who transferred a Covid-19 patient from hotel quarantine to hospital recently.WA health authorities are expected to provide further details later this evening about the paramedic, whose patient had recently arrived from the UK.The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has convened a special meeting of national cabinet for Friday, to discuss a proposal to strengthen procedures regarding international arrivals in light of the threat posed by the new UK strain of Covid-19.The proposal to counter the strain, which is considered far more infectious, has been developed by the chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, according to a post on Morrison’s official Facebook page made in the past half hour or so.The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, revealed yesterday that three people with the UK strain were in hotel quarantine in the state.Here’s Morrison’s post in full:This afternoon I contacted Premiers and Chief Ministers to convene a special meeting of National Cabinet on Friday morning. The meeting is to consider a proposal that I requested through our Chief Medical Officer, Professor Paul Kelly, from our national expert medical panel, the AHPPC. The proposal is to further strengthen the COVID safety of end to end international travel processes (from arrival at Airport of embarkation in the exit country, to final clearance from hotel quarantine in Australia). This is being done particularly in the context of the UK strain. The AHPPC has continued to meet every day during this most recent outbreak, and had an initial discussion of their proposal today. They will discuss the proposal further tomorrow before making a formal submission to National Cabinet. The meeting will also provide an opportunity to further update National Cabinet on the Federal Government’s vaccination programme, where considerable progress is being made over the break.Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, has issued a statement raising concern about the crackdown on pro-democracy figures in Hong Kong.“The Australian government is concerned by reports that more than 50 pro-democracy lawmakers and other pro-democracy figures have been arrested in Hong Kong overnight under the national security law,” she said.In the brief statement, Payne said Australia’s consulate general in Hong Kong was “monitoring these developments closely”.“Australia has consistently expressed concern that the national security law is eroding Hong Kong’s autonomy, democratic principles and rule of law.”For more on this issue, see the story filed by my colleague Helen Davidson:The Victorian Department of Health and Human Services says people can now apply for an exemption to return home from NSW online, via Services Victoria.Border entry permit update: you can now apply for an exemption online via Services Victoria. You can apply for an exemption if you have a valid reason. Find out everything you need to know here: https://t.co/fQMD0iJyyS pic.twitter.com/JWTkG2PqjsNSW Health has issued new Covid-19 advice for venues in the western Sydney suburb of Wentworthville, and updated advice for people who attended May Hill temple and the Merrylands RSL.The Wentworthville advice relates to people who visited a Domino’s Pizza or a (geez not again) BWS during certain times on the night of 27 December. They are considered a casual contact of a confirmed case and should get tested.It is interesting that this gold standard (or diamond standard, depending on who you ask) contact tracing system is getting this information out 10 days after the case visited these venues.The acting NSW premier, John Barilaro, was again particularly bullish about the department’s contact tracing abilities earlier today. The Western Australian fire and emergency services commissioner, Darren Klemm, has been giving an update on the bushfire situation in the state. There have been fires burning near Red Gully, about 130km north of Perth.On the weekend, there were fires south of Perth, and weather conditions are expected to remain dangerous until Sunday.Klemm says he has not seen similar conditions for at least the past three years:In my read of it, I would say the last bushfire seasons for the last three years at least, there hasn’t been that typical strong easterly weather we’ve been experiencing in the past four days and gusts up to 80km/h across this fireground, it makes it incredibly difficult for firefighters.Not only is it not safe to put firefighters at the head of the fire in those types of circumstances, but also it’s incredibly difficult once the fire hops over to be able to get around it and put it out.So those have been the challenges in particular the last two afternoons.Klemm said the fire had spread to around 9,500 hectares with a perimeter of 102km, and that its cause was still being investigated.The Covidsafe app has not proved useful in tracking down cases associated with the Black Rock cluster, or the new mystery case associated with the MCG and Chadstone shopping centre in Victoria.Despite the federal government spending over $5m on the app, and claiming more than 7.22m Australians have downloaded and installed it, the Covidsafe contact tracing app has not identified any additional contacts in the Black Rock Thai restaurant cluster or the new mystery case who visited Chadstone shopping centre on Boxing Day and attended the second day of the Boxing Day Test.The Department of Health and Human Services confirmed since the start of the pandemic Victoria has not been able to identify any close contacts through the app not already found through manual contact tracing methods, but it remains part of the contact tracing process.“Our public health team always asks cases and their close contacts if they have installed the Covidsafe app to their phone,” a spokeswoman said.More than 1,300 primary and secondary contacts have been identified through manual contact tracing methods.The state government’s head of contact tracing Jereon Weimar said on Wednesday that Victoria had “not had to draw on a Covidsafe app” to date.“As to the business case for the Covidsafe app, I’ll leave that to others, my job is to run after the coronavirus here in Victoria.”An update to the app pushed to users late last year now alerts them to open the app to keep it running in the background in order to work.The federal government has refused a number of freedom of information requests that would show how many of the more than seven million people who downloaded the app are still using it.We’ve now got more detail on the shooting death of a prisoner in Wollongong earlier.Sources have told Guardian Australia that the inmate managed to grab a guard’s firearm during a medical transfer in the city south of Sydney. The prisoner subsequently shot himself and died as a result of the injuries. Corrective Services NSW said in a statement it was investigating the circumstances surrounding the inmate’s death. “The 37-year-old man suffered serious self-inflicted injuries during an escort to a medical facility at approximately midday today and died a short time later,” a spokeswoman said.“All deaths in custody are subject to a coronial inquest.”Witnesses told the ABC the man – wearing prison greens – fired at several cars in the street before turning the corrections officer’s weapon on himself.In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.orgThe Western Australian health department and St John Ambulance are set to provide more details later today about a paramedic who had to go into hotel isolation after he transferred a Covid-positive patient to hospital.The paramedic transported the patient, an elderly woman from the UK, to hospital yesterday. She had arrived in Australia on 2 January, was symptomatic on arrival, and later tested positive.The WA premier, Mark McGowan, revealed yesterday that three cases of the new UK-strain of Covid-19, which has been found to be considerably more infectious, had been detected in hotel quarantine.Here is a report on the paramedic case filed earlier by AAP:A paramedic has gone into hotel isolation after transporting a Covid-19 patient from the UK to hospital in Perth while checks are made into whether proper health protocols were followed.The patient, a woman in her 80s, arrived from the UK on 2 January and was symptomatic on arrival and subsequently tested positive.Genomic testing is under way but it is not yet known if she has the more virulent strain of the virus.The woman was initially placed in hotel quarantine, but her condition required her to be transferred to the Royal Perth hospital on Tuesday where she is now considered stable.Premier Mark McGowan said investigations were under way to determine if one of the paramedics involved in the woman’s transfer was wearing the appropriate personal protective equipment at the time.“We’re investigating that as we speak. There have been concerns raised,” the premier told reporters on Wednesday.The Australian government has called on China to allow the entry of World Health Organization experts investigating how the Covid-19 pandemic started, saying visas should be granted “without delay”.Australia’s foreign minister, Marise Payne, issued a cautious statement after months of rocky relations between the two countries. It follows news today that Chinese authorities have blocked the arrival of a WHO team investigating the early cases of Covid-19 in Wuhan. China argued the team’s visas had not yet been approved, even as some members of the group were on their way.This is Payne’s statement in full:Australia has consistently sought transparency in relation to the origins of, and responses to the coronavirus, as have other countries. The WHO-convened scientific study is an important part of this work and we look forward to the findings from the international field mission to China.We hope that the necessary permissions for the WHO team’s travel to China can be issued without delay. During this global pandemic that has affected all countries, international cooperation and partnerships will maximise our ability to respond, and to equip us for the next pandemic.The full story is here:Queensland Health is urging all Queenslanders who visited regional NSW sites linked to the Berala cluster to get tested. A man who did not know he was positive with Covid-19 visited Orange, Nyngan and Broken Hill last week.This just in from Queensland Health:Queenslanders who visited the regional New South Wales towns of Orange, Nyngan and Broken Hill between 2-3 January are being asked to get tested for Covid-19.The alert comes after a positive Covid-19 case from NSW transited through the towns while infectious.Queensland chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young said she is treating this newest threat with an abundance of caution.“We know a person who was positive for Covid-19 has been out and about in these communities very recently,” Young said.“There is every chance this individual has been in contact with holidaying or visiting Queenslanders who were also in these towns during this period.“Everyone who has been in Orange, Nyngan and Broken Hill between 2-3 January should get tested tomorrow or earlier if possible, and quarantine at home until they receive a negative test result.“If we do have any cases connected to this individual, it is absolutely critical we detect them before we see widespread community transmission.“Additionally, I am concerned about the potential spread across regional NSW. Queenslanders who spent time in regional NSW over the holiday period should remain vigilant of their health and get tested if they show any Covid-19 symptoms.”Dr Young also reminded the general community to keep getting tested.“Queenslanders have already performed incredibly well – we’ve have performed tens of thousands of tests in the past few days alone.“But that doesn’t mean we can be complacent – it takes just one undetected case to bring all our progress to an end.”It turns out you also can’t go to the A-League (as well as the cricket) if you’re from some of the identified NSW hot-spots. This was posted earlier this afternoon by the management of the Newcastle stadium, where the Newcastle Jets will face the Western Sydney Wanderers in an A-League round two match on Friday:McDonald Jones Stadium has established rigorous COVID Safety Plans since May 2020 and they have been enhanced for the Newcastle Jets v Western Sydney Wanderers game this Friday, which will be hosted at a maximum 50% capacity. Everyone who attends is strongly encouraged to wear a mask. We review and adjust our protocols and protections in preparation for each event, in consultation with NSW Health and other stakeholders.All patrons from the identified hot spots, including the Northern Zone of the Northern Beaches and selected postcodes in Western Sydney, will not be permitted to attend. Those who have purchased tickets will be refunded.To stay up to date with the latest health advice, visit the NSW Health website here.Event plans may change subject to further advice from the NSW Government. Updated event information will be made available on McDonald Jones Stadium’s website and socials.My colleague Luke Henriques-Gomes has just filed a story with more detail about the Victoria-NSW border closure, including that it appears unlikely to reopen this month:There is some more detail filtering in about bushfires in Western Australia. It is likely the threat there will remain until Sunday. This report from AAP: Firefighters in Western Australia are battling relentless hot, dry and windy conditions as they struggle to bring a major blaze under control.The fire is threatening regional communities north of Perth, with an emergency warning in place for several residential developments including those at Ocean Farms Estate and nearby Seaview Park.The Red Gully fire has already destroyed 9,200 hectares in the shires of Gingin and Dandaragan.There have been no reports of homes being lost, but pine plantations, olive groves and some sheds are believed to have been damaged.About 200 firefighters are battling the blaze with strong aerial support, including two of the large air tankers flown in from Victoria.Another eight major fires across WA were also being fanned by dangerous conditions with the fire and emergency services commissioner, Darren Klemm, warning there was little respite in sight.Klemm said the extreme heat and forecast wind changes over the coming days were a catastrophic combination that could result in small fires quickly getting out of control.“This week’s weather conditions are some of the most challenging firefighting conditions I have seen in many years and, unfortunately, weather conditions are not easing over the coming days, in fact they are only going to get worse,” he said.“These challenging conditions have been seen in Red Gully and surrounding areas where an out-of-control bushfire has been burning since Saturday and temperatures are expected to soar into the 40s from Thursday.“We face the risk of new fires igniting and existing fires escalating, which would put extreme pressure on emergency services.”Emergency WA said conditions around the Red Gully fire were testing containment lines.“Residents of Ocean Farms Estate and Seaview Park need to remain on high alert and enact their bushfire survival plan now,” its warning said.“If you plan to leave, leave now if safe to do so via Indian Ocean Drive in a southerly direction. Your life may be in danger if you stay.”The premier, Mark McGowan, called on everyone in the fire danger zones to remain vigilant.“I urge all Western Australians to understand and acknowledge that this is a dangerous period,” he said.In other areas, a watch and act warning remains for a fire at Mundaring, east of Perth, with that blaze contained but not controlled, and bushfire advice messages are current for fires at Geraldton, north of Perth, and at Nowergup, north of the city.Wednesday’s continuing emergency followed an easing of the danger on Monday after a string of fires threatened various areas to the north and south of Perth, on the state’s south-west coast and in the Goldfields.With very hot weather forecast until at least Sunday, the Department of Fire and Emergency Services deputy commissioner, Craig Waters, said the risk of more fires was high.“Whenever you come into a period of really hot weather coupled with extremely high easterly winds, we’re always going to be in for a world of hurt,” he said.
NSW south coast holiday locations on high alert as state records one new case – as it happened	We’re shutting up shop for the day. Thanks for reading. Here are today’s main developments:You can keep up with the latest developments around the world in our global live blog here:The Queensland hotel quarantine cleaner who tested positive to Covid-19, as confirmed earlier, has contracted the UK strain of the virus.The cleaner was working at a hotel that contained patients with the strain, which has been found to be more infectious than previous strains.The positive case, a woman in her 20s, was infectious from 2 January before testing positive after showing symptoms on Wednesday.Her diagnosis has prompted health authorities to send aged care homes in parts of greater Brisbane in to lockdown.It comes after it was confirmed that a woman in Western Australia who travelled from the UK also has the new virus strain.Well, that was quick. Emergency warning downgraded for that bushfire in Victoria’s high country, near Mount Buller. As you were (fire is still there and people should be cautious, but it’s under control).A watch and act warning, the step down from emergency, has also been issued by VicEmergency for the same region, including Chapel Hill.The Victorian high country is splendid this time of year, and therefore quite busy, so hopefully everyone stays safe.This WATCH & ACT - BUSHFIRE has been issued for Boorolite, Chapel Hill, Howqua Hills, Merrijig.There is a bushfire at Powers Rd, Merrijig (Mount Buller) that is not yet under control. More details at https://t.co/4PMExNRDQxWe’ve got an emergency warning from Victorian authorities for a bushfire in the high country, near Mount Buller. People in Boorolite, Howqua Hills and Merrijig are being told to leave now, before it’s too late.This EMERGENCY WARNING - BUSHFIRE has been issued for Boorolite, Howqua Hills, Merrijig.There is a bushfire at Powers Rd, Merrijig (Mount Buller) that is not yet under control.More details at https://t.co/kGgCmehiu9 pic.twitter.com/v660MxFa63Well, the West Australian premier Mark McGowan is flabbergasted. He’s planning to investigate how, exactly, three separate breaches of wearing personal protective equipment occurred in the state.The breaches occurred when a woman in her 80s from the UK, who had tested positive for Covid-19, was transferred from a quarantine hotel to hospital. The breaches resulted in a paramedic, a nurse, and a third person having to isolate.This from an AAP report on McGowan’s media conference today: “Clearly there is complacency and mistakes are creeping in,” the premier said. “I urge our health workforce, our security workforce, our cleaning workforce [to] continue to adhere to your training, continue to listen to the advice.” McGowan praised frontline workers for their dedication during the pandemic but urged them to not get complacent.“We’ve seen outbreaks occur around Australia and around the world through staff who work in quarantine hotels and those sorts of facilities,” he said. “We don’t want to see that happen here.” McGowan said the health department had given him an “absolute assurance” there was no risk to public health as a result of the breaches. The woman arrived from the UK on 2 January already showing symptoms of the virus and later tested positive.It was confirmed on Thursday she has the UK strain of the virus. She was initially placed in hotel quarantine, but her condition required a transfer on Tuesday to the Royal Perth hospital where she is stable.If you’re thinking about dinner, think about how good a FREE dinner will taste when the NSW government starts handing out vouchers next month to assist businesses impacted by the pandemic. A story on that here by my colleague Josh Taylor:WA department of fire and emergency services’ Sven Anderson, the incident controller for the Red Gully fire, is giving an update on the blaze and the weather conditions.The fire has been burning for almost a week north of Perth.He says the fire has been reasonably stationary for the past day and a half, but firefighters have been working around the clock to keep it within those containment lines.A cool change has just started to arrive at the southern end of the fire which could test containment lines.We’re confident of some of our containment lines, but with a significant wind change coming in today, that will put some pressure on containment lines that we haven’t actually had tested previously.So we’re still saying to people, just be aware, we’re not out of the woods yet. Please don’t become complacent because of the lack of fire activity on that fire specifically.There is still a lot of hotspots ... they could spot at any time and we could be chasing a running fire yet again.Australian biosecurity and infectious disease experts are fairly complimentary of the government’s Covid-19 vaccine plan, released earlier today. Here’s what some of them had to say:Prof Raina MacIntyre, head of the biosecurity program at University of NSW’s Kirby Institute:This is excellent news. The international border is the greatest threat to us, because of new mutations of the virus which may be 50-80% more transmissible than the current strain. One of these strains has become the main strain in the UK, and they are finding that the standard control measures such as social distancing are not working as well. If one of these strains takes off here, it may be more difficult to contain.Prof Julie Leask, from the school of nursing and midwifery at the University of Sydney:“The news that certain priority groups will get the vaccine early should be greeted with cautious welcome.This is a large complex program which requires careful planning, coordination, a well-trained workforce and an informed public. There are important logistical issues to consider. High-quality immunisation service provision is just as important as high-quality vaccines.Dr Andrew S. Flies, senior research fellow at the University of Tasmania:While many countries are in the midst of chaotic responses to widespread Covid-19 infections, Australia is in the enviable position of trying to stamp regional outbreaks and maintain Covid-19 free zones in other areas. Maintaining Covid-19 free zones allows for a more normal life and economic activity. A primary threat to regions that have been Covid-free for many months is the incursion the SARS-CoV-2 virus from international travellers. The best weapons against Covid-19 remain social distancing and masks, but vaccines offer powerful disease prevention tools, particularly for workers at international arrival and quarantine locations. CSIRO’s health and biosecurity director Dr Rob Grenfell:This is a great step towards controlling Covid-19 in Australia. It’s important to note that while the logistics are being sped up, safety is remaining everyone’s top priority. We can be reassured by the approach that Australia’s independent Therapeutic Goods Administration is taking, as one of the most stringent regulatory agencies in the world. NSW Health have added some new locations in Wentworthville and Avalon which were visited by a person with Covid-19 in the past week.If you visited the ChemSave Day and Night Pharmacy in Wentworthville on 3 January between 10.40am – 10.50am or 9.30pm – 9.40pm you should get tested immediately and isolate until receiving a negative result.People who visited the Avalon Woolworths and Chemist Warehouse at various times on 2, 3, 4 January should monitor for symptoms. Full details here.We have heard a fair bit about what Victoria plans to push at national cabinet tomorrow, but South Australian premier Steven Marshall also has something on the agenda: pre-flight Covid-19 testing for all incoming international travellers.Under his plan, if you don’t have a negative test result, you can’t board the flight. Marshall says he first raised this plan during last month’s national cabinet meeting.“We are very concerned with what’s happening with the situation around the rest of the world,” he said, according to a report by the ABC.“I think it’s absolutely critical that we do that pre-flight testing … we’ve been very keen to progress it again tomorrow at national cabinet.”Malcolm Turnbull has criticised his successor, Scott Morrison, for his handling of the crisis in the US.Turnbull told ABC TV:When you look at things other leaders have said [Morrison’s response] does look a bit weak, a bit tepid. But it’s a judgment call, you don’t want to get drawn into a running commentary. But this is pretty special. This is a US president actively seeking to undermine the credibility of a democracy he’s supposed to be leading – this is right out there.Asked if Morrison should return his Legion of Merit, Turnbull said the way such awards work is an inquiry is made as to whether a leader will accept it, and it’s a “pity” Morrison didn’t make a “tactful excuse” to not accept it.“It’s always a bit fraught accepting honours from other countries, it’s a bit questionable.”Turnbull said it would have been better if Morrison could “avoid having received it in the first place” but it seems the better course now is to “do nothing” – not hand the award back.We’ve got some more detail in from Service NSW about the unexpected app outage that impacted on contact tracing throughout the state earlier today. The app is functioning again.A statement from the Department of Customer Service confirmed there was an outage for two hours for some users, but that online check-in was still available via an online form.Here’s the full statement:This afternoon Service NSW App experienced an unexpected outage preventing some customers from checking in with the COVID Safe Check-in tool. The outage lasted for 2 hours and is now resolved.It is vital that customer contact details are still collected digitally. In the event of an outage, customers and businesses are encouraged to use the Service NSW check-in webform for all check-ins.The webform was not impacted by the outage.Customers can access the webform by scanning the QR Code or businesses can display the Check-in webform on their own devices for customers to use.Alternatively the customer record can be in the form of a spreadsheet or any other form of digital entry that can track customer check-ins and protects the privacy of your clientele. If there are unexpected circumstances which prevent the use of electronic methods to collect contact details, any paper records must be entered into an electronic format such as a spreadsheet within 12 hours. Service NSW apologises for any inconvenience caused by the outage and thanks customers for their understanding during this time.The NSW police are more readily dishing out $200 fines for not wearing a mask. There were 12 issued yesterday, including to a bloke who was fined twice and said he wouldn’t be wearing a mask. Another said he wasn’t wearing one because he had a beard and it wouldn’t work.NSW police also said in a statement released earlier this afternoon that more than 50 warnings were issued.A reminder that in Victoria, where far more (and far more expensive) fines were handed out for breaches of Covid-19 restrictions, young people and Sudanese and Aboriginal people were overrepresented.Optimism abounds on the Australian stock exchange, which has been rising all day with the benchmark ASX 200 index up by 1.84%.Shares in major miner Rio Tinto are leading the charge, up by a whopping 7.78% at around 3.20pm, while Lynas Corporation, which digs up the rare earths used in things like smartphones, is up almost 7.6%.The big banks are up by between 2% and 4% but there’s buoyancy across all sectors except technology, which has gone backwards.The buying frenzy appears to be clogging up broker systems, with CBA’s Commsec platform warning it’s “experiencing very high call volumes and wait times are longer than usual”.
South African game reserves face hard times as Covid halts tourism	Impala run through the thorn bush, ibis fly above the lake and lightning forks over the horizon as a storm rolls in from the Drakensberg mountains.The visitors driven across the 10,000 or more hectares of the Nambiti game reserve in South Africa’s KwaZulu-Natal province see what they think is an unchanged, and unchanging natural landscape.Njabulo Hodla, the assistant manager of the reserve, sees something else: thickening undergrowth that someone must cut back, tracks which need clearing, fences to repair and animals that may have to be sold eventually. “It’s tough, really tough. I’ve never seen a season like it,” said the 31-year-old, who has worked at Nambiti since 2008.Across the continent Covid has hit South Africa the hardest with more than a million confirmed cases and 29,000 deaths according to official figures. As elsewhere in Africa, the pandemic has wreaked massive economic damage, with thousands of businesses failing and tens of millions unable to earn a living. The economy shed 2.2m jobs in the second quarter of 2020.The huge tourist industry – which employs around one in every 20 workers and provides just under 3% of GDP – has been devastated.Once the December holiday season meant tens of thousands of foreign visitors spending hundreds, even thousands, of dollars every day. Now, with the rate of new infections in the country soaring as authorities struggle to check a second wave, no one expects the tourists to come back soon.South Africa’s 500 or so private game reserves are often in more remote and impoverished parts of the country. They spend considerable amounts each month to feed and care for the animals. Many have been forced to close permanently, lay off staff and sell, or even shoot, animals. Other have survived – just.“Reserves like ours went from quite a nice income supporting 300 jobs and a massive conservation project to literally nothing. We fell off a wall,” said Clarke Smith, chairman of Nambiti. “We are still feeling the pain … and the impact on the region is very marked.”Nambiti is a community-owned project, unlike many, so a substantial proportion of profits and an annual lease are paid to local villages. This year, these revenues are much reduced and, with many employees of the reserve still on reduced hours or at home, the coming months will be very difficult.“Instead of an end-of-year bonus, people are taking home only half a salary, or nothing,” said Hodla, who grew up in one of the nearby villages. “The communities round here are just on the line. The reserve plays a major role. Everyone knows someone who works here.”Many fear that if the crisis continues for many more months, hundreds of thousands of hectares across South Africa that have been converted to more lucrative game reserves in recent decades will revert to cattle or cereal farming – with a massive loss of habitat for endangered animals and other species.But if the business of wildlife conservation has been hit badly, so too has that of safeguarding other parts of the country’s heritage.Like many parts of rural South Africa, the north of KwaZulu province suffered from acute unemployment, massive health problems including TB and HIV, and deep poverty even before the pandemic. Industries have been gutted in recent decades, with many mines and factories closing.In some places, such losses have been partially compensated by what has been a booming trade in battlefield tourism. Tens of thousands of British visitors have come to walk the sites where British troops fought Zulus in the bloody war of 1879 that consolidated the imperial hold on southern Africa.The battlefields of Isandlwana and Rorke’s Drift are the main attraction for British tourists usually old enough to be fans of the 1964 film Zulu that dramatised the story of the catastrophic British defeat and last-ditch stand at the sites.This winter – or summer in the southern hemisphere – both battlefields are “empty”, the memorials, graves and museums deserted.“There is no work. We are just sitting there. The situation is so bad. There is a drought and no crops in our fields, and a sack of mealie [maize flour] costs twice as much as it did back in the spring,” said Dalton Ngobese, a local guide, who has not worked since March.With the tourists gone, so too are the hawkers who sold ethnic craft, snacks and water. A portion of the entrance fee to the battlefield site goes to schools, so this source of revenue too has dried up.The accommodation lodges were shut for much of the summer, and have only recently reopened, welcoming far fewer guests. The lodges provide jobs and also fund support programmes for local students, charitable foundations, orphanages and other projects.“If we are suffering, the entire community takes a knock,” said Shane Evans, manager of the Isandlwana Lodge, which hosted groups touring the battlefield.In the village of Isandlwana, there is resignation. With so few jobs locally, men have traditionally travelled to Johannesburg, six hours’ drive north, to work in mines or, more recently, hotels. But both industries are suffering too and most of Isandlwana’s residents who had jobs have lost them.Government aid has been patchy, and a huge burden for a country still battling the legacies of the racist, repressive apartheid regime. The ruling African National Congress, in power since 1994, is accused of incompetence and corruption, but also has to deal with a flagging economy, tens of millions of people in poverty and massive debts. A job support programme has been guaranteed until the end of the year, but money is slow to come through.One consequence in the villages around Isandlwana is that crime is rising, with cattle theft and burglary getting worse, said Ngobese. A recent drought has meant local communities around the battlefields have been unable to plant the crops that traditionally supplement incomes and diet.Nellie Buthelezi’s husband was among those laid off by the local government in swingeing job cuts earlier this year, while the lodge where she works has been shut since March. The 41-year-old mother of four has lived in Isandlwana all her life and cannot remember times ever being as bad.“Food is expensive, and it goes so fast. We’ve got no money for rent,” she told the Observer. “We just hope to God for a better new year.”
Why the world's biggest mammal migration is crucial for Africa – photo essay	David Mubiana will always remember the day he was shot. It happened in 2002, when his unit was ambushed by poachers with AK-47 rifles and a shotgun. He was wounded in the arm and stomach; one bullet rupturing his spleen. As a wildlife police officer in Zambia’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife, his job is inherently risky.“Even if you fall down, you have to stand up and continue fighting. If we finish our wildlife, [our children] are not going to see what we are seeing today,” he says.David Mubiana puts his life on the line to watch over straw-coloured fruit bats and other wildlife in Kasanka national parkLike other wildlife protectors, he puts his life on the line every day. But not every animal needing protection is a big beast. Following the incident in 2002 in a park bordering Angola, Mubiana was transferred to Kasanka national park in central Zambia, where he now protects one of nature’s mysteries – and the biggest mammal migration in the world – from poachers and land encroachment. These poachers may be after antelope and elephants, but their actions also pose a threat to the straw-coloured fruit bat, Eidolon helvum.The straw-coloured fruit bat is listed as near threatened by the International Union for Conservation of NatureEvery year, between October and December, 8–10 million straw-coloured fruit bats descend on the park to feast on an abundance of fruit. From west Africa, over the forests of the Congo basin and on to Zambia, the bats migrate thousands of kilometres over savanna and open land, dispersing seeds into deforested areas, and reforesting and regenerating landscapes on their journey. Scientists are still trying to fathom why these fruit bats, or “flying foxes”, gather at Kasanka in numbers not seen anywhere else. Each night they leave their evergreen swamp fig roosts to fly up to 55 miles (90km) in search of wild berries and fruit.Listed as near threatened on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s red list, the straw-coloured fruit bat is one of the largest fruit bats in Africa. There are fears that if their numbers drop below a certain amount, the colony may not be able to keep going. “If that turns out to be true, we might be in trouble,” says Dr Dina Dechmann of the Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior, whose team has studied the bats for 12 years.Wildlife scouts use watchtowers and patrol the park on foot to stop poachers and illegal acts of deforestationWhile sightings have revealed where the bats have been spotted, the precise route they take is unknown. Dechmann’s teams is about to deploy satellite trackers to follow the migration. “I think this bat is crucial for Africa – more than most other species in that [they] cover long distances,” says Dechmann. “If you think about seed dispersal, antelopes, monkeys, birds, you name it – even most other bats – they will not leave the protection of the forest canopy, so they are not as effective as seed dispersers. If you have a colony like in Kasanka with several million bats, if each disperses one seed every night – that’s huge.” If you have a colony with several million bats, if each disperses one seed every night – that’s hugeWith the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic, the bats have faced a new threat from humans seeking to attack them. “These bats are being persecuted because of ongoing publicity about their role as virus hosts. Their importance completely outweighs the potential threat,” says Dechmann, adding that their role in transmitting viruses such as Covid-19 directly to humans has not been scientifically proved.Helen Taylor-Boyd at Bats without Borders, a conservation group in southern Africa, says: “We’ve got to put this in a larger context: the context is the risk is increased by humans encroaching into animal habitat … [Wild animals] are best left well alone, and human encroachment is not a wildlife-caused problem.”Kasanka Trust has employed 30 new scouts to prevent illegal deforestation and stop poaching in the parkBut habitat loss is fast becoming the park’s chief threat. As forests where bats roost and feed are lost, they are increasingly being forced out. “Bats will either need to forage farther, or they will remain in the same location and overuse resources. So it’s a habitat and wildlife management issue just as much as an urban-human bat conflict issue,” says Taylor-Boyd.Deforestation across Zambia is alarmingly high at 250,000 to 300,000 hectares (620,000 to 740,000 acres) of forest a year. According to Kasanka Trust, which manages the park, 10,000 hectares of commercial farming has already encroached into a prohibited buffer zone around the park. The trust, which has lost 70% of its revenue due to the pandemic, has employed 30 new scouts to patrol with police officers like Mubiana to prevent illegal deforestation and encroachment.Since the outbreak of Covid-19 the bats have faced a new threat: they are being attacked because of their perceived role in the spread of the diseaseThe Kasanka Trust’s general manager, Richard Peel, says: “Emerging threats from commercial agriculture around the park are extremely dangerous and could bring an end to the bat migration if it’s not brought under control. This migration depends on healthy and intact forests within and around the park. The [bats] utilise more than 10 times the size of the national park, which highlights the importance of protecting the areas [within it].”Areas surrounding the park are also critical for people who rely on the forest for food and income. The trust has helped communities gain legal ownership of 60,000 hectares of surrounding forest, supporting income-generating activities such as beekeeping. Churchill Musungwa, a voluntary forest guard, says his community decided to work with the trust after seeing land nearby destroyed.Commercial agriculture is causing habitat loss, which threatens the future of the straw-coloured bat“If [we] protect the forest, we can benefit as a community in the coming years,” he says. “When we put up beehives we are going to sell the honey; have money to educate our children. We can push [for] our lives to be better.”Community forest guards have put up beehives in the areas they manage to generate income for local peopleFind more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features
Democrats' Georgia success reshapes US political landscape	The US state of Georgia on Wednesday afternoon looked set to present an early inauguration gift to Joe Biden, giving him a decent shot at breaking Washington gridlock and enacting his agenda.If Democrats win both Senate runoff elections in that state and gain control of the chamber, as is now widely expected, it will also mark a profound political shift in the American south, full of grim omens for Donald Trump and a divided Republican party.The Rev Raphael Warnock, who defeated Senator Kelly Loeffler, made history as the first Black senator from Georgia, a state shaped by the legacy of the civil war, the Jim Crow era and the civil rights movement. Jon Ossoff appeared to be on course to unseat the Republican incumbent David Perdue and would become the youngest member of the Senate at 33.The resulting 50/50 party split in the Senate would give the incoming vice-president, Kamala Harris, the tie-breaker vote and make Democrat Chuck Schumer majority leader. That would give Democrats an unlikely clean sweep of the White House, Senate and House of Representatives in the lengthy aftermath of the November presidential election.Warnock and Ossoff may yet help Biden implement what could be the most progressive legislative agenda in generations. In order to facilitate everything from confirming his cabinet nominees to raising taxes and enacting a sweeping climate plan, Biden will need Senate approval. Senate committees will be chaired by Democrats rather than Republicans.Of course, it will not be plain sailing. The Democratic senator Joe Manchin of the staunchly pro-Trump state of West Virginia, will now wield extraordinary influence and be able to curb progressives’ ambitions.And the Senate cloture rule – which requires 60 votes to cut off debate on most measures – enables Republicans to filibuster significant parts of the Democrats’ agenda. But the budget reconciliation process will allow Biden to circumvent the filibuster for some of his spending plans.It is all vastly preferable to what had seemed the probable alternative: the Kentucky Republican Mitch McConnell as majority leader, ruthlessly blocking the incoming Democratic president’s legislative goals and judicial nominees. Haggling in what used to be called smoke-filled rooms would have been the order of the day.Trump now seems destined to go down in history as the man who lost the presidency after one term and was impeached along the way, then lost the House and – after two months of particularly wild and corrupt behaviour – lost the Senate to boot.This undercuts the narrative that down-ballot candidates rode his presidential coat-tails and strengthens the argument that his brand of mendacious demagoguery has become a liability, and all amid an out-of-control coronavirus pandemic that he downplayed from its start almost a year ago.“If they win, I will get no credit and, if they lose, they’re going to blame Trump,” he said with characteristic self-pity at possibly his last campaign rally as president in Dalton, Georgia, on Monday night.Loeffler and Perdue fiercely aligned themselves with the president, including his bogus claims of election fraud. Their loss may be a warning to other Republicans about the limits of Trump’s appeal after he leaves office, particularly in fast-changing parts of the country.Georgia now looks more like Arizona – another once reliably conservative state with an increasingly diverse electorate anchored around a major city – than its southern neighbors. After backing Trump in 2016, Arizona has since sent two Democratic senators to Washington and voted for Biden in November.For Democrats, their success was affirmation that a “new Georgia” was rising in the south. In their telling, the state’s political transformation began long before Trump ran for president, spurred by not only by demographic change and a reverse migration of young Black – and white – residents to Georgia but also by decades of long-term organizing to get out the vote.Population growth and immigration have turned the once-conservative and mostly white suburbs of Atlanta into diverse and Democratic-friendly territory, and in addition, Black voters surged to the polls in some rural areas and smaller cities where such turnout has historically lagged.Until the 1970s, conservative Democrats dominated Georgia politics. Unlike its neighbors, the state initially resisted Republicans’ rise across the deep south but ultimately relented in the early 2000s. Georgia has been reliably Republican in the two decades since.During that time, activists say the Democratic party fought to regain its foothold by returning to an old playbook. The party ran candidates who sought to appeal to moderate white voters while relying on Black voters, who represent nearly a third of the state’s electorate and lean heavily Democratic.This clashed with a new vision for Georgia Democrats, championed by a group of Black female leaders, who pushed the party to abandon the fiscal and social conservatism of the past and embrace a new, more progressive and inclusive politics.They saw a party that reflected the state: a broad coalition of Black, Hispanic and Asian American voters, politically active young progressives and white, well-educated suburban women.For decades, activists worked to register disaffected voters, newly arrived immigrants and young people. Their work was year-round but their gains were gradual and they struggled to convince donors and national leaders to take the state seriously as a battleground.Stacey Abrams, the former minority leader of the state house of representatives, who founded a voter registration group called the New Georgia Project, has become the public face of these efforts.Her near-miss in the state’s 2018 governor’s race helped persuade national party leaders and campaigns that the approach could work. Two years later, Biden became the first Democratic presidential nominee to carry the state in nearly three decades.At a campaign rally on the eve of the runoffs, Biden praised Abrams’s work: “You’ve changed Georgia and you’re changing America.”
Maga mob's Capitol invasion makes Trump's assault on democracy literal	The US Capitol, the seat of American democracy, has been stormed by a pro-Donald Trump mob, egged on by the president in a desperate and violent effort to overturn the results of the election.Minutes after the news spread that the vice-president had announced he would not do the president’s bidding and reverse Trump’s defeat to Joe Biden at the ballot box, hundreds of pro-Trump rioters broke down the barriers around the Capitol building, and surged forward.Footage from inside the building showed that some pro-Trump rioters had reached one of the doors to the Capitol and smashed out the glass. A group managed to make their way to the atrium of the Senate Rotunda, carrying Confederate flags. The Capitol police were outnumbered and seemed to melt away.One female rioter was shot and later died of her injuries, according to the DC police. Three other people experienced “medical emergencies” throughout the day and died. Explosive devices were found near the offices of the Democratic National Committee and the Republican National Committee. Several police officers were also injured.It was the most dramatic challenge to the US democratic system since the civil war and it forced the suspension of a joint session of Congress that had convened to certify the results of November’s presidential election.Members of Congress were told to put on gas masks after teargas was fired in the Rotunda of the US Capitol, and the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and other senators were led out, escorted by staff and police.A 6pm curfew was declared in the capital, and the Pentagon said about 1,100 DC national guard would be deployed to help support law enforcement agencies.And a few hundred miles away in Georgia, votes were being counted in runoff elections.Democrats Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff both won their races, giving Democrats control of the Senate for the opening of Joe Biden’s presidency in a unmistakable renunciation of Trump and Trumpism in the deep south.The crowds in Washington, however, had been told by their leader that the votes against him had been rigged, and told to march on the Capitol to “stand strong for the integrity of our elections” and to “save our democracy”.Trump told them to converge on Congress “peacefully and patriotically” but order broke down just minutes after he spoke.The mob, in Make America Great Again caps, rushed up the Capitol steps, forcing the police to withdraw, firing flash-bangs and paintballs from higher balconies in an effort to keep them at bay.The massed ranks of national guard and federal agencies who had driven peaceful Black Lives Matter protesters off the streets around the White House over the summer were nowhere to be seen.In the eyes of the rioters, the democratic procedures and traditions of which the US has thus far been so proud, had been transformed, by their leader’s insistent oratory, into the mere trappings of betrayal.As protesters took selfies inside the Senate chamber and offices, Trump tweeted “Remember, WE are the Party of Law & Order respect the Law and our great men and women in Blue.”But the outgoing president came under increasing pressure – from allies and foes – to condemn the violence.Joe Biden lamented the “assault on the rule of law” in Washington, a “citadel of liberty”.“The scenes of chaos at the Capitol do not reflect a true America, do not represent who we are,” the president-elect said. “What we’re seeing is a small number of extremists dedicated to lawlessness.”Biden said the violence at the Capitol “borders on sedition” and “must end now”.“I call on President Trump to go on national television now, to fulfill his oath and defend the constitution and demand an end to this siege,” Biden said. “It’s not a protest; it’s insurrection. The world is watching.”Trump’s vice-president called on the rioters to leave the Capitol immediately, going further than Trump who merely called for his supported to “remain peaceful”.In a tweet on Wednesday afternoon, Pence said, “This attack on our Capitol will not be tolerated and those involved will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.”Hours after his supporters had stormed the Capitol, Trump released a video telling them: “Go home, we love you, you’re very special,”. But he also used the video to repeat his baseless claims about the “fraudulent” vote which he lost.At the other end of the national mall, half an hour before the Capitol was besieged, the defeated president had painted a stark picture. Those Republicans who voted to upturn the election were the patriots, and the others were “weak” and “pathetic” allowing Democrats to destroy the country.Trump singled out his vice-president, Pence, who until Wednesday had been loyal to a fault. “Mike Pence is going to have to come through for us, and if he doesn’t, that will be a sad day for our country,” Trump yelled from a stage that had been set up a block from the White House, for a crowd that had gathered on the grassy Ellipse below the national monument.As the president was speaking, Pence was, for the first time, doing the opposite of what he was been told by his boss. He formally notified Congress that his role was a ceremonial one, to read out the election results, not to change them.Trump had promised his supporters he would accompany them on their walk to the Capitol, but instead drove in his motorcade the hundred metres back to the White House, from where he fired off a tweet disowning Pence who he alleged “didn’t have the courage” to protect the country and the constitution.The day had begun seemingly like any other American political carnival, with bright flags, exuberant costumes and vendors selling T-shirts and hotdogs. It was only with a closer look, that something it became apparent far more dystopian was at hand, with a seething potential for violence.“Fuck Your Feelings, Trump 2020,” was the message on the fastest-selling T-shirt. Some of the flags declared: “Fuck Biden”. The crowd that sprawled across the Ellipse was a mix of families and the elderly, men and women, young and old. Only about one in 10 was wearing camouflage gear, though that was more than the percentage wearing masks.A young couple, Kasey and Mike, were sitting under one of the ornamental cherry trees planted along the mall, having traveled down from Rhode Island to witness the climactic day. They spoke with the dreamy smiles of two people in love, sharing a moment in history, but their message was one of looming conflict.“People here are mad. They’ve watched so many people destroy our country like that. I don’t think they’re just gonna sit back any more,” Kasey said, convinced that a Biden win would lead to a bleak, socialist state.“I think Trump’s only option he really has left is to call military action into it because he has the right to do that.” 
The joys of being an absolute beginner – for life	One day a number of years ago, I was deep into a game of draughts on holiday with my daughter, then almost four, in the small library of a beachfront town. Her eye drifted to a nearby table, where a black-and-white board bristled with far more interesting figures (many a future chess master has been innocently drawn in by “horses” and “castles”).“What’s that?” she asked. “Chess,” I replied. “Can we play?” she pleaded. I nodded absently.There was just one problem: I didn’t know how. I dimly remembered having learned the basic moves as a kid, but chess had never stuck. This fact vaguely haunted me through my life. I would see an idle board in a hotel lobby or a puzzle in a weekend newspaper supplement, and feel a pang.I had picked up a general awareness of chess. I knew the names Bobby Fischer and Garry Kasparov. I knew that the game had enchanted historical luminaries including Marcel Duchamp and Vladimir Nabokov. I knew the cliche about grandmasters being able to look a dozen moves ahead. I knew that chess, like classical music, was shorthand in movies for genius – often of the evil variety. But I knew chess the way I “knew” the Japanese language: what it looks like, what it sounds like, its Japaneseness, without actually comprehending it.I decided to learn the game, if only to be able to teach my daughter. It took a few hours, hunched over my smartphone at kids’ birthday parties or waiting in line at Trader Joe’s, to get a feel for the basic moves. Soon, I was playing, and some-times even beating, the weakest computer opponents (the ones with catastrophic blunders abundantly programmed in). Yet it soon became apparent that I had little concept of the larger strategies. I didn’t want to try to teach what I knew only poorly.And yet, how to learn? The number of chess books was dauntingly huge. Sure, there was Chess for Dummies. But beyond that, the chess literature was enormous. It was filled with algebraic-looking thickets of chess notation, a quasi-language that itself had to be learned. And the books were achingly specific: for example, A Complete Guide to Playing 3 Nc3 Against the French Defence.That’s right: an entire book devoted to the permutations of a single move – a move that, I should add, has been regularly played for a century. Yet people were still figuring out, 100 years and many chess books later – 288 pages’ worth of new things to say about it.A well travelled fact that one hears early in chess is that after only three moves, there are more possible game variations than there are atoms in the universe. And, indeed, I felt cosmically stupefied as I tried to figure out how to boil down this exponentially complex game to someone whose favourite show was Curious George.So I did what any self-respecting modern parent does: I hired a coach. The twist was that I wanted someone to teach my daughter and me at the same time.For most of us, the beginner stage is something to be got through as quickly as possible, like a socially awkward skin condition. But even if we’re only passing through, we should pay particular attention to this moment. For once it goes, it’s hard to get back.Think of a time when you first visited a new, distant place, one with which you were barely familiar. Upon arrival, you were alive to every novelty. The smell of the food in the street! The curious traffic signs! The sound of the call to prayer! Flushed from the comfort of your usual surrounds, forced to learn new rituals and ways to communicate, you gained sensory superpowers. You paid attention to everything because you didn’t even know what you needed to know to get by. After a few days, as you became more expert in the place, what seemed strange began to become familiar. You began noticing less. You became safer in your knowledge. Your behaviour became more automatic.Even as your skills and knowledge progress, there is a potential value to holding on to that beginner’s mind. In what’s come to be known as the Dunning-Kruger effect, the psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger showed that on various cognitive tests the people who did the worst were also the ones who most “grossly overestimated” their actual performance. They were “unskilled and unaware of it”.This can certainly be a stumbling block for beginners. But additional research later showed that the only thing worse than hardly knowing anything was knowing a little bit more. This pattern appears in the real world: doctors learning a spinal surgery technique committed the most errors not on the first or second try, but on the 15th; pilot errors, meanwhile, seem to peak not in the earliest stages but after about 800 hours of flight time.I’m not suggesting experts have much to fear from beginners. Experts, who tend to be “skilled, and aware of it”, are much more efficient in their problem-solving processes, more efficient in their movement (the best chess players, for example, tend also to be the best speed-chess players). They can draw upon more experience, and more finely honed reflexes. Beginner chess players will waste time considering a huge range of possible moves, while grandmasters zero in on the most relevant options (even if they then spend a lot of time calculating which of those moves are best).And yet, sometimes, the “habits of the expert”, as the Zen master Suzuki called it, can be an obstacle – particularly when new solutions are demanded. With all their experience, experts can come to see what they expect to see. Chess experts can become so entranced by a move they remember from a previous game that they miss a more optimal move on a different part of the board.This tendency for people to default to the familiar, even in the face of a more optimal novel solution, has been termed the Einstellung effect (after a German word that means “set”).In the famous “candle problem”, people are asked to attach a candle to the wall using nothing more than a box of matches and a box of tacks. People struggle to solve it because they get hung up on the “functional fixedness” of the box as a container for tacks, not as a theoretical shelf for the candle. There is one group, it turns out, that tends to do pretty well on the candle problem: five-year-olds.Why? The researchers who found this suggest that younger children have a more fluid “conception of function” than older children or adults. They are less hung up on things being for something, and more able to view them simply as things to be used in all sorts of ways. Small wonder they conquer new technology so handily; everything is new for them.Children, in a very real sense, have beginners’ minds, open to wider possibilities. They see the world with fresher eyes, are less burdened with preconception and past experience, and are less guided by what they know to be true.They are more likely to pick up details that adults might discard as irrelevant. Because they’re less concerned with being wrong or looking foolish, children often ask questions that adults won’t ask.No one wants to stay a beginner. We all want to get better. But even as our skills improve, and our knowledge and experience grow, what I hope to encourage is the preservation, or even cultivation, of that spirit of the novice: the naive optimism, the hypervigilant alertness that comes with novelty and insecurity, the willingness to look foolish, and the permission to ask obvious questions – the unencumbered beginner’s mind.What the chess master Benjamin Blumenfeld advised a century ago applies as much to life as to chess: “Before you make your move, look at the position as if you were a beginner.”When my daughter first began competing in school chess tournaments, I would often chat to other parents. Sometimes, I’d ask if they played chess themselves. Usually, the reply was an apologetic shrug and a smile. When I volunteered that I was learning to play, the tone was cheerily patronising: “Good luck with that!” I thought: “If this game is so good for kids, why are adults ignoring it?” Seeing someone playing Angry Birds, I wanted to tap them on the shoulder and say: “Why are you having your kids do chess while you do that? This is the game of kings! There are chess games recorded from the 15th century!”At chess tournaments, I saw a dynamic that was all too familiar from the world of children’s activities: kids doing the activity, and adults like me staring into their smartphones.Sure, we parents had work to do, work that we allowed to spill into weekends, work that helped pay for the lessons our kids were enjoying (or enduring). But I also wondered if we, in our constant chaperoning of these lessons, were imparting a subtle lesson: that learning was for the young.Strolling down the hall during one tournament, I looked into a classroom and saw a group of parents with what I took to be an instructor. They were playing chess! Just then, as if on cue, a group of kids passed me, peering in on the same scene. “Why are adults learning chess?” one asked, in a vaguely mocking tone, to the collective amusement of the group. They marched on while I slowly died in front of a cheery bulletin board.I was tired of sitting on the sidelines. I wanted in. And that is how I got a membership card from the US Chess Federation and started throwing myself in.Early on, I was nervous, even though I really had nothing to lose, save my pride. “A master can sometimes play badly,” as one grandmaster put it, “a fan, never!” And fan I was: the sombre rituals, the pulse-pounding encounters, the tense atmosphere. It was three hours of sustained concentration and intense thinking, with my phone turned off. It felt like a gym for the brain.Being a beginner can be hard at any age, but it gets harder as you get older. Children’s brains and bodies are built for doing, failing, and doing again. We applaud virtually anything they do, because they are trying.With adults, it’s more complicated. The phrase “adult beginner” has an air of gentle pity. It reeks of obligatory retraining seminars and uncomfortable chairs. It implies the learning of something that you should have perhaps already learned.There is safety in sticking with what we’re already good at. “It’s hard to be old and bad at something,” as a friend, returning to hockey after many decades, put it. We can be so put off by being a beginner that we forget we were once beginners in all sorts of things, until we were not.Adult beginners face their own version of what is known by sporting coaches as “stereotype threat”, whereby a negative image becomes associated with a particular group of players, and leads them to repeat mistakes – in this case, one that says it’s harder to learn when you’re older. There’s a pernicious, goading little voice: “You’ve started too late. Why bother?” One day, at her swimming lesson, I was impressed to see my daughter “flip turn” at the end of the lane while doing a backstroke. This is not something I can do. “How’d you learn to do that?” I asked. “You have to be a kid,” she responded matter-of-factly.As I was finding out, this kind of idea is deeply ingrained in chess. There seems to be a relation between the age at which you first learned the game and your later success in tournaments. This idea is so pervasive that Magnus Carlsen, the current No 1, is held as a fascinating outlier. “At five years old,” one account marvels, “an age by which any aspiring grandmaster should at least have made a start, Magnus Carlsen showed little interest in chess.”Sitting down against younger opponents, I tried to keep in mind a bit of advice gleaned from the Guardian writer Stephen Moss’s book The Rookie: just face them the way you would anyone else.This could be hard. The way they played just threw me. In the face of my agonised dithering, they would launch fast, brute-force attacks – sometimes effective, sometimes foolhardy. “Children just kind of go for it,” Daniel King, the English grandmaster and chess commentator, told me. “That kind of confidence can be very disconcerting for the opponent.”Young children, for example, have been shown to be faster and more accurate at tests involving “probabilistic sequence learning” – the sort in which people must guess which triggers will lead to what events (for example, if you press button A, event X will happen).After the age of 12, this ability begins to decline. As researchers suggest, people start relying more on “internal models” of cognition and reasoning, instead of what they see right in front of them. In other words, they overthink things. In chess games, where my adult opponents often seemed to battle unseen internal demons, the kids just seemed to twitch out a series of moves.I was buying into the stereotype threat. If I lost to an adult, I would chalk it up to my own stupid errors. But if I lost to a child, I would suddenly imagine them as some incipient genius against whom I never had a chance.When I asked our chess coach about what it was like to teach adult chess beginners as opposed to child chess beginners, he thought for a moment and said: “Adults need to explain to themselves why they play what they play.” Kids, he said, “don’t do that”. He compared it to languages: “Beginner adults learn the rules of grammar and pronunciation and use those to put sentences together. Little kids learn languages by talking.”The analogy goes deeper than we might think. My daughter was, in effect, learning chess like a first language, whereas I was learning it like a second language. Even more important, she was learning it young.Language is one of those endeavours (like music, and perhaps chess) that seems to flourish best if learned during a so-called “sensitive period” in which, as one researcher has described it, “neural systems are particularly responsive to relevant stimuli, and are more susceptible to change when stimulated”.By contrast, because I am an adult, expert speaker of English, my brain may be so “tuned” to the sounds of my native language that it is harder for me to take on new grammar. What I know already gets in the way of what I want to learn. Kids, by knowing less, can actually learn more (the cognitive scientist Elissa Newport calls it the “less-is-more hypothesis”).Harder does not mean impossible. “Sensitive” periods are not “critical” periods, and the science, in any case, is not conclusive. The skill of having perfect pitch, for example, which is not only exceedingly rare but has long been thought to be impossible outside a narrow age range in childhood, can be trained in some adults, as research from the University of Chicago has shown (albeit to not quite as high a level as those possessing “true” perfect pitch).Kids often make more progress simply because they are kids, with lives built largely around learning, having few other responsibilities, and with eager parents to cheer them on. They are also motivated: if you were dropped into an entirely new setting, the way infants are, and found that you couldn’t communicate, you’d probably learn pretty quickly.You may, by now, be rightly asking, why should I bother learning a bunch of things that aren’t relevant to my career? Why dabble in mere hobbies when I’m scrambling to keep up with the demands of a rapidly changing workplace?First, I might suggest that it’s not at all clear that learning something like singing or drawing actually won’t help you in your job – even if it’s not immediately obvious how.Learning has been proposed as an effective response to stress in one’s job. By enlarging one’s sense of self, and perhaps equipping us with new capabilities, learning becomes a “stress buffer”.Claude Shannon, the brilliant MIT polymath who helped invent the digital world in which we live today, plunged into all kinds of pursuits, from juggling to poetry to designing the first wearable computer. “Time and time again,” noted his biographer, “he pursued projects that might have caused others embarrassment, engaged questions that seemed trivial or minor, then managed to wring breakthroughs out of them.”Regularly stepping out of our comfort zones, at this historical moment, just feels like life practice. The fast pace of technological change turns us all, in a sense, into “perpetual novices”, always on the upward slope of learning, our knowledge constantly requiring upgrades, like our phones. Few of us can channel our undivided attention into a lifelong craft. Even if we keep the same job, the required skills change. The more willing we are to be brave beginners, the better. As Ravi Kumar, president of the IT giant Infosys, described it: “You have to learn to learn, learn to unlearn, and learn to re-learn.”Second, it’s just good for you. I don’t mean only the things themselves – the singing or the drawing or the surfing – are good for you (although they are, in ways I’ll return to). I mean that skill learning itself is good for you.It scarcely matters what it is – tying nautical knots or throwing pottery. Learning something new and challenging, particularly with a group, has proven benefits for the “novelty-seeking machine” that is the brain. Because novelty itself seems to trigger learning, learning various new things at once might be even better. A study that had adults aged 58 to 86 simultaneously take multiple classes – ranging from Spanish to music composition to painting – found that after just a few months, the learners had improved not only at Spanish or painting, but on a battery of cognitive tests. They’d rolled back the odometers in their brains by some 30 years, doing better on the tests than a control group who took no classes.They’d changed in other ways, too: they felt more confident, they were pleasantly surprised by their work, and they kept getting together after the study ended.Skill learning seems to be additive; it’s not only about the skill. A study that looked at young children who had taken swimming lessons found benefits beyond swimming. The swimmers were better at a number of other physical tests, such as grasping or hand-eye coordination, than non-swimmers. They also did better on reading and mathematical reasoning tests than non-swimmers, even accounting for factors such as socio-economic status.Many of these studies or recommendations are oriented toward children. Chess, for example, is held up as a way to improve children’s focus and concentration, to strengthen their problem-solving skills, to bolster their creative thinking. But I’ve become convinced that whenever something is touted as being good for children, it’s even better for adults, in part because we assume we no longer need all those benefits an activity is said to provide.And yet what better remedy for the widespread affliction of “smartphone addiction” than two hours of burning your eyes and brain into 64 squares on a board, trying to analyse an almost infinite variety of moves and countermoves?Learning new skills also changes the way you think, or the way you see the world. Learning to sing changes the way you listen to music, while learning to draw is a striking tutorial on the human visual system. Learning to weld is a crash course in physics and metallurgy. You learn to surf and suddenly you find yourself interested in tide tables and storm systems and the hydrodynamics of waves. Your world got bigger because you did.Last, if humans seem to crave novelty, and novelty helps us learn, one thing that learning does is equip us with how to better handle future novelty. “More than any other animal, we human beings depend on our ability to learn,” the psychologist Alison Gopnik has observed. “Our large brain and powerful learning abilities evolved, most of all, to deal with change.” We’re always flipping between small moments of incompetence and mastery. Sometimes, we cautiously try to work out how we’re going to do something new.Sometimes, we read a book or look for an instructional video. Sometimes, we just have to plunge in. • This is an edited extract from Beginners: The Curious Power of Lifelong Learning by Tom Vanderbilt is published by Atlantic and available at guardianbookshop.co.uk• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, sign up to the long read weekly email here, and find our podcasts here
Why Deaf interpreters are a crucial tool during the pandemic	Saamanta Serna describes herself as a Coda – the child of a Deaf adult. She grew up up with a Deaf mother and a father who is hearing and an American sign language (ASL) interpreter, and later decided to pursue interpreting herself after high school.Now a certified ASL interpreter, Serna has done frequent in-person interpreting for medical appointments during Covid. She has also noticed a change in the world’s perception of sign language since the beginning of the pandemic: more people are paying attention.Conveying updated information to everyone in the time of Covid is a matter of life or death, as the Trump administration learned recently after losing a groundbreaking federal lawsuit to the National Association for the Deaf, which ensured that a sign language interpreter must be present in Covid briefings and visible on the live feed from the White House. The Trump White House did not include its first sign language interpreter on a Covid briefing until 11 November, a full nine months after the pandemic reached America.ASL is a common sign language – though by far not the only one – for people who are d/Deaf or hard of hearing (deaf refers to the physical condition of deafness, while Deaf refers to belonging to the Deaf community). About 15% of adults in America report hearing loss, and about 1 million use sign language to communicate. ASL has its own rules and incorporates hand movements as well as facial motions, grammar and word ordering distinct from English, from which it is completely separate. Marla Berkowitz, a certified Deaf interpreter, explains that ASL “entails five parameters: handshapes, palm orientation, location (space on the body, around the signer), movement and of course, facial expressions”.Even within ASL there are wide variants, differences in rhythm or slang, even regional accents and dialects. Black American Sign Language (BASL), for example, is a dialect of ASL developed during segregation. Black d/Deaf Americans, denied deaf education, socialized language differently than white d/Deaf Americans, with unique hand positions and word formations. Nakia Smith, a 22-year-old who is the fourth deaf generation in her family, explained this recently in a video from Netflix. (Smith’s TikTok channel, which featured her and her grandpa signing and explaining BASL, recently went viral.)TikTok videos from d/Deaf creators like Smith (her TikTok username is itscharmay) and Diandra Hooper (theoriginaldeafbae) have helped bring sign language to the hearing masses. Instagram and Twitter are also full of accounts featuring video clips where people can learn a sign a day.Perhaps the interest in signing is due, in part, to pandemic mask-wearing. Masks muffle speech, making it more difficult to communicate using spoken language, even for those who are hearing. For those like me, who are hard of hearing and utilize lip reading, it’s virtually impossible.More people than ever are also being exposed to sign language through frequent Covid-related press conferences. Alongside governors and medical officers, in press briefings and media events, on television and online, sign language interpreters are working to pass on vital information.Translating spoken English to sign language requires interpreters like Berkowitz, who is also certified by the supreme court of Ohio and the Ohio department of education. She made national news with her work signing for Ohio’s governor, Mike DeWine. Admirers made a Facebook fan page, and she even has her own bobblehead doll.I wish that people would normalize this communication access versus just making it a showOther interpreters who have gone viral recently include Nic Zapko, who works with the Minnesota governor, Tim Walz; David Cowan, known for interpreting Governor Brian Kemp’s press conferences in Georgia; and Arkady Belozovsky, who grabbed the world’s attention when he interpreted an intense exchange between the New York governor, Andrew Cuomo, and reporters.Viewers have been drawn to Berkowitz’s energy, animated manner and expressions. Facial expressions, as Berkowitz said, “are an equivalent to intonation, revealing feelings, thoughts and mood while simultaneously utilizing the grammar markers (eye-gazing, eyebrow raised/lowered …) to distinguish statements from questions”. It’s not simply dramatic effect, but essential to the language. “I wish that people would normalize this communication access versus just making it a show,” said Serna.I talked to Brian Cheslik, the artistic director for Deaf Austin Theatre and an interpreter for performances. Cheslik is also d/Deaf, as is Berkowitz, in a field where many interpreters are hearing. “There is a stark difference in the interpretation style between Deaf and hearing interpreters,” Cheslik said. “Often, Deaf interpreters are native signers [since birth], so their signing style incorporates Deaf cultural norms, whereas hearing interpreters have a different style … as a Deaf person, I can always tell if an interpreter is Deaf or hearing.”Berkowitz described hearing interpreters as “second-language users. Deaf people are not an ethnic monolith and require interpreting training to be certified Deaf interpreters, yet to work as an interpreter, one has to be bilingual – ASL and English – as well as [to have] inherited cultural knowledge and nuances.”Both Cheslik and Berkowitz spoke to the importance of working together with hearing interpreters, especially when information may be impromptu or rapidly evolving. “I cherish my hearing interpreters on my team because they are always there to help me when I miss something, or if there is a change or announcement made,” Cheslik said, characterizing work with hearing interpreters as “a very important relationship”.Perhaps no recent situation has a more urgent need for clear information than Covid press conferences. These conferences relay ever-changing regulations, and provide essential medical advice on stopping the spread of the virus. “Interpreting during Covid is challenging in every way,” Berkowitz said, describing handling press conference jargon, teamwork with other interpreters who may have different styles, and “the tremendous responsibility with getting accurate information in ASL”.“The greatest joy is knowing the Deaf and hard of hearing community are receiving first-hand information seen on TV in ASL for the very first time in our lives,” Berkowitz said.“To have Deaf interpreters spotlighted and highlighted during events like Joe Biden’s press conferences has been so amazing,” says Serna. “Also the fact that that he is normalizing having an interpreter on camera.”All the interpreters interviewed for this story spoke to the struggle of getting sign language to be respected by the hearing population – a struggle I remember from my own studies, when I fought with my hearing professors who said ASL was not a “real” language, and would not count for my degree.“ASL is NOT broken English or even a form of English. ASL is an actual language with its own grammatical structure, and syntax that is embedded in Deaf culture,” Cheslik said. “Yes, ASL is beautiful, but it is our language.”
UK coronavirus live: PM says people should be able to get vaccine within 10 miles of home; death toll rises by 1,162	Brigadier Phil Prosser, who is coordinating the army’s support for the programme, says his team is embedded in the NHS.Their main contribution is planning support, he says.He says his day job is delivering supplies to the army at times of war, he says.He says his team has worked “shoulder to shoulder” with the NHS. They have to make sure everyone has access to the vaccine. They have to flexible enough to cope with care homes. They have to manage the logistical problems of keeping the vaccine at the right temperature. And they have to make sure it does not get wasted.He says they are using tried and tested techniques.There are 21 vaccination quick reaction teams, he says.This operation is unparalleled in its scale and complexity, he says.He says it has been the equivalent of setting up a major supermarket chain in a month.He says he is a proud member of the armed forces, an organisation drawn from all communities of the UK, and the Commonwealth. He is proud to be serving those communities, he says.Stevens says if people in the top four priority groups get vaccinated, that should prevent the vast majority of Covid deaths.He says the UK has vaccinated more people than countries like Germany and France.But the target is challenging, he says. There are just 39 days to go to hit the target.They have to expand supply. But the supply is expanding, he says.They have to increase the number of places carrying out vaccines. Most vaccination will take place at GP practices, where GPs will vaccinate their local patients.Hospital hubs will be used. And there are also larger vaccination centres, which will work seven days a week, with extended hours. These may be more convenient for some people, he says.He says there has been talk in the press about Israel’s successful programme. They have used large vaccination centres. But, he says, the UK’s geography means a mixed approach should work better.Over 80,000 people have been trained on these vaccinations, he says. Some 18,000 of them have already started work. St John Ambulance have contributed volunteers to. And the armed forces are involved as well, he says.Simon Stevens, the NHS England chief executive, says the pressures on the NHS are real and growing. The number of Covid patients in hospital is growing “very, very rapidly”.Johnson says they have vaccinated 1.26 million people in England, 13,000 in Scotland 49,000 in Wales and 46,000 in Northern Ireland. That is nearly 1.5 million people in the UK, he says.He says by the end of this month he hopes to have offered every elderly care home resident a vaccine.Johnson says by the end of the week there will be over 1,000 GP sites, 223 hospital sites, seven giant vaccination centres and 200 community pharmacies delivering the vaccine.Everyone should have a vaccination available within 10 miles, he says.Boris Johnson opens his press conference saying the one question people want answered is how fast the vaccine will be delivered.People want to know the government is “throwing everything at it, round the clock if necessary”, he says.He says people have a right to know how the government will meet its target of getting people in the top four priority groups, some 15 million people in the UK, vaccinated with the first dose by 15 February.Downing Street has confirmed that its plan for televised briefings with political journalists has been postponed due to the latest lockdown, PA Media reports. The White House-style televised press conferences, set to be led by the PM’s new press secretary Allegra Stratton, had been due to start next week. No 10 said that instead of the regular TV briefings at least three press conferences a week will take place, led by Boris Johnson or other relevant ministers and scientific experts, for “the next few weeks”.Here are the main points from Matt Hancock’s evidence to the Commons health committee. It was only a one-hour hearing (which is relatively short, for a Commons committee), but it had been arranged at short notice. Here are the main points.I anticipate we will probably need to revaccinate because we don’t know the longevity of the protection from these vaccines. We don’t know how frequently it will be, but it might need to be every six months, it might need to be every year.As with the flu vaccine each year, for a type of vaccine that has been clinically trialled and approved, if you make small adjustments to it, then it may not need the full year-long trials process that a new vaccine needs. That, of course, is a decision for the independent MHRA (Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency).The way I have described it, is if you are lucky to have Range Rover and you get a new wing mirror stuck on it, it’s still a Range Rover and should be classified as such.In the same way, if you make a small change to a vaccine it’s essentially a regulatory clinical decision as to whether that needs to go through the full panoply of the full three phases of clinical trials.The UK government has just updated its coronavirus dashboard, and the death figures are not getting any better. Here are the key statistics.Jeremy Hunt, the committee chair, and a former health secretary, ends the session by thanking Hancock for his time. He says the NHS may now be facing its most challenging week ever.Hancock says the government has not yet decided in what order people will be vaccinated once people in the priority groups identified by the JCVI have been covered. (In other words, who goes first when the programme reaches healthy people under 50.) Hancock says teachers, nursery staff and the police would all have a good case for being considered as priorities at that point.Hancock says we do not know yet whether people will need to have the coronavirus vaccine more than once, as with the flu vaccine. He says he thinks people will probably need to get revaccinated. He says this might have to happen every six months, or it might have to happen every year.Hancock says he will publish a mental health white paper next week. It will take forward many of the recommendations in the Simon Wessely report. He says he wants to legislate in this parliament. The new law will replace the 1983 Mental Health Act. He hopes there will be cross-party support for this.Q: What is the plan if a variant comes along that is immune to the vaccine?Hancock says, if you have a vaccine platform, and you only need to make small adjustments to it, then it should not need to start the regulatory process all over again.He compares this to having a Range Rover, and changing the wing mirror. That does not mean you have a new car. It is still a Range Rover, he says.Q: How many vaccines do you hope to deliver by mid-February to people in the top four priority groups?Hancock says he would like take-up to be 100%.People will be “offered to have had the vaccine” by 15 February. That is the target, he says. He says the government cannot claim to have met the target just by offering people a date for a jab before 15 February.He says the target specifies an “offer” because the government cannot force people to take the vaccine.Q: There was a doubling of still births in the last lockdown. Will shielding go before 28 weeks?Hancock says that is a clinical matter. Q: Prof Whitty says we need to have a discussion about what the level of acceptable risk would be. Is the government having that discussion?Hancock says we need to have a discussion about that. Parliament, and this committee, will have a role to play in that, he says.Q: Are you worried about people’s behaviour changing as more and more people get vaccinated?Hancock says generally people have been complying with the rules.As vulnerable people are protected, he says he hopes people will continue to follow the rules.
Jon Ossoff wins Georgia runoff election, giving Democrats control of Senate	The Georgia Democrat Jon Ossoff has won his Senate runoff election, giving Democrats control of the Senate for the opening of Joe Biden’s presidency.Ossoff’s victory against David Perdue, was called by the Associated Press late on Wednesday, and follows fellow Democrat Raphael Warnock’s victory against incumbent Kelly Loeffler.With the victories of Ossoff and Warnock, the US Senate is now 50-50.Vice-President-elect Kamala Harris will serve as the tie-breaking 51st vote, giving Democrats control of the chamber for the first time since 2015.A pastor who spent the past 15 years leading the Atlanta church where Martin Luther King Jr preached, Warnock’s victory makes him the first Black senator in his state’s history.The results were a stinging rebuke of Donald Trump, who made one of his final trips in office to Georgia to rally his loyal base behind the state’s Republican candidates.In an emotional address early on Wednesday, Warnock vowed to work for all Georgians whether they voted for him or not, citing his personal experience with the American dream. His mother, he said, used to pick “somebody else’s cotton” as a teenager.“The other day, because this is America, the 82-year-old hands that used to pick somebody else’s cotton picked her youngest son to be a United States senator,” he said. “Tonight, we proved with hope, hard work and the people by our side, anything is possible.”The Democrats were propelled to victory in Senate runoff elections by Black voters, young voters and new arrivals to the rapidly diversifying state, a coalition just strong enough to topple a long-dominant GOP and take control of the US Senate.Black voters cast 32% of the ballots, a slight increase from the presidential election two months ago, according to AP VoteCast. As in November, almost all – 94% – of those votes went for Democrats. Black voters accounted for about 60% of ballots for Democrats, according to the survey of 3,700 voters in the runoff elections.Voters under the age of 45 also broke for Democrats, as did suburban voters, women, low-income voters and voters who have lived in the state fewer than five years, a group that cast about 60% of their votes for Democrats.The coalition closely mirrored the one that handed Georgia’s electoral college votes to President-elect Joe Biden, the first Democrat to win the state since 1992. In defeating Republicans Kelly Loeffler and David Perdue, Democrats will have half the seats in the chamber, leaving Vice-President-elect Kamala Harris to serve as tie-breaker.The high-stakes runoffs drew hundreds of millions of dollars, media attention and a massive organizing effort. The result was a game of inches – both Republicans and Democrats largely held their voters from November, the survey showed, but Democrats did just slightly better in pushing their voters to the polls.The GOP candidates won an overwhelming majority – almost three-quarters – of white voters and 60% of voters 65 and older. They also captured majorities from voters earning $75,000 or more. That coalition in the recent past likely would have been enough to keep Perdue and Loeffler in the Senate. But shifting demographics and an energized Democratic party have turned the tables.
Global Dispatch: sign up for a different world view	Discover our pick of breaking stories and hard-hitting features, uncovered by our correspondents across Africa, Asia, South and Central America and beyond.We bring you the voices and opinions of people living under extraordinary circumstances along with expert analysis of the key issues from the most authoritative voices: the developing world in words, pictures, podcast and video. See the latest edition here.***Explore all our newsletters: whether you love film, football, fashion or food, we’ve got something for you***The Guardian’s newsletters include content from our website, which may be funded by outside parties. Newsletters may also display information about Guardian News and Media’s other products, services or events (such as Guardian Jobs or Masterclasses), chosen charities or online advertisements.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer	Working as a journalist in Gaza, says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion.“You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.”The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of spaceNow living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone.“I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window.Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks“For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience.“My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018.An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge“My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer).Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab IdolPalestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision“I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man.A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers“Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering.Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phoneQueuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list“These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.”Showing her coloursJehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
Gender conversion 'therapy' made me suicidal. I fear for other young Nigerians	When I was nine, my parents took me to a traditional healer. He used a razor to make three incisions on the insteps of my feet, my wrists, my elbows, my forehead and on the back of my neck. As blood started to flow, the healer rubbed a concoction of herbs into the incisions and gave me a potion to drink. He took alligator pepper and rubbed it on various parts of my body. There was a rooster, into which he cast the “demon” inside me. The rooster was slaughtered and thrown into the river, supposedly taking my sexuality with it.In boarding school, I met a boy who I would say was my first love. We talked about everything and liked to take long walks. But he struggled. I watched him struggle to accept his sexuality. He felt there was something wrong with him but I didn’t know how to help him. For me it was different. It wasn’t just about sexuality; it was also about gender. I was born male but I have never felt like a man.When I was 22, in university, I met a transgender woman. She was a lot more open, more cosmopolitan, more upfront about what she wanted. I’d never met anyone like her. We had a sisterhood –– fun, graceful, pure. It was as if the scales fell from my eyes.What part of me has been lost in the effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form?My family was not happy about our friendship. They said I was bringing shame to the family. They took me to a Catholic priest to cast away the stubborn spirit that made me different. The priest told me that God had intended a great path for me, but some negative force had diverted me from it. He made me believe I could change. For a year, I fasted, I went to mass and took communion. I recited all the prayers as though my life depended on it. And it felt as if it did, you see, with the way everyone treated me.But I was all right. I always was. The main issue with conversion therapy is that victims don’t talk about it. It tends to make something that is so wrong look right. The worst part is when they are able to convince you that change can happen, that there is indeed something wrong with you, that you are a mistake of nature, an anomaly. It messes you up. The encounter with the healer was many years ago, but the memory is still harrowing. What part of me has been lost in an effort to make me fit a heteronormative, socially acceptable form? I’m 43 now. Still gay, still a trans woman. Still looking over my shoulder fearing that someone might want to hurt me. I’m much more scared than the average person. And I’m not the only one. Exposure to gender identity conversion efforts can have severe adverse effects on mental health. There are thousands of young people in Nigeria being subjected to these dangerous practices in a bid to “cure” them.There are no structures in Nigeria to deal with these psychological scars. That’s why we need our community. We need to have conversations about safety and security, especially with regard to familial relationships and dating. We need to openly talk about the devastating impact of conversion therapy. I have contemplated suicide several times. I attempted it once; relieved that it failed. I’ve noticed that when people have a personal experience –– they find out their partner or friend or child is LGBTQ+ –– they become less aggressive. I think my mother always knew, even as she went through the motions of trying to convert me. At some point she realised it wasn’t something she could struggle against. My father never accepted my reality, even until he died. He didn’t know how to deal with it. People need to realise that the world is not black and white; it’s in colour. Many people, like my friend in university, left for other countries where they thought they could live freely. But nowhere is safe. Brazil, Ecuador, Taiwan, Malta and Germany are the only countries in the world that have banned conversion therapy. Nigeria is a hostile place. The Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act makes our existences illegal. I have not been able to undergo surgery here because there’s no access to medical care to support transitioning. I know that if I look after myself, I will be fine. I’m concerned about the younger ones. The Commonwealth Equality Network is working towards decriminalisation of homosexuality in Commonwealth countries. I look forward to freedom. It may not be in my time. But we must keep fighting. Just so future generations will not live through the same things I have lived through.• The author, from Nigeria, wished to remain anonymous to protect her safetyIn the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
How a 'tree mortgage' scheme could turn an Indian town carbon neutral	In the misty, hilly terrain of Wayanad, in the southern Indian state of Kerala, the people with any access to land in the quiet town of Meenangadi have been out counting their trees.Sheeja CG, a 46-year-old farmer, has lived among coffee, coconut and pepper plantations all her life but last month she increased her income dramatically by mortgaging 53 of her trees at the local bank, in return for a sum of 2,650 rupees (£26.96), or 50 rupees each. She was one of the first beneficiaries of the state-sponsored scheme.It’s a simple incentive with big gains: plant a tree, and after three years residents can mortgage each sapling for an interest-free loan that can be renewed annually for 10 years. The money need be repaid only if the tree is chopped down.Kerala, with its sweeping, spice-filled forested landscape has been troubled in recent years by an ailing farming sector, deforestation which has led to loss of biodiversity, and the climate crisis making summers much warmer, especially in the Wayanad, which used to be comfortably cool.Suicides of farmers, landslides and floods have made the headlines. Farmers have been compelled to fell trees to supplement their income. Against such a background, the tree banking project, facilitated by a 10 crores rupee (£1.01m) grant from the state government, comes as a big incentive to keep them rooted to the ground.“With temperatures almost five degrees higher than normal, I’ve faced a crop loss of 25%. The loan from the tree banking scheme will ease financial pressure. I will buy manure for my farm,” says Sheeja.I have faced a crop loss of 25%. The loan from the tree banking scheme will ease financial pressureProlonged dry spells and erratic rainfall have made the region increasingly vulnerable, with shrinking paddy farms and a threat to cash crops such as pepper and coffee. According to the Kerala State Action Plan on Climate Change, Wayanad is one of the four major climate change hotspots in the state.But the tree banking scheme has an ambition to reverse the damage and turn Meenangadi, a town of about 35,000 people into a carbon neutral region. The Carbon Neutral Meenangadi Project is the first of its kind in India, and has changed the way the community lives and works.“An energy audit in 2018 found Meenangadi had 15,000 tonnes of excess carbon. We are working on ways to bring it down to zero,” says Meenangadi’s panchayat (local government) president, Beena Vijayan. To balance the carbon emissions, a meticulous action plan has been set in motion.“We have held more than 500 meetings with farmers in every nook and corner on waste management, recycling plastic, solar lighting and panels, manufacturing environment friendly coffee and using high-efficiency stoves,” says Vijayan.Encouraging tree planting is a first step. “It is a model project for the whole district of Wayanad. It took root three years ago, when we prepared a nursery with 33 types of saplings under the national rural employment guarantee scheme. We planted 300,000 saplings in 250 homes in Meenangadi and common areas,” says Vijayan.“With the trees now mature, we rolled out the tree banking scheme and received about 200 applications that are being processed.”It was Kerala’s finance minster, TM Thomas Isaac, who first mooted the idea, saying it wouldguarantee a sustainable income for farmers in the district and vastly improve the socio-economic environment.“Wayanad has the lowest per capita income in Kerala state, so the aim is to double the income of the farmers without overly industrialising the region,” says Jayakumar C, founderof Thanal, the environment agency that is implementing the project. The trees also bring supplementary income to the residents, through the sale of fruit and other products, he adds.Among the thickets around her red-roofed cottage is a cluster of jackfruit trees that Sheeja has mortgaged, white tags hanging from their branches. The trees are monitored through an app.“We go from farm to farm with a team of volunteers to survey the trees that have matured, take photographs and map them on our monitoring system,” says Ajith Tomy, the project coordinator. “We will implement the project in 23 other panchayats in Wayanad by 2021. We plan to plant about 10m trees in the next few years.”For Sumathy Valiyakolli, the loan has come through at just the right time, as expenses for her brother’s medical treatment are mounting. She says: “It’s been very helpful. I will plant more trees and mortgage a higher number next year.”Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Idi Amin challenged my dad to a wrestling match – then chickened out	My father, Samson “Sunlight” Okiror, lived an extraordinary life. He was a soldier, a rebel and one of Uganda’s most famous sportsmen.A wrestler and heavyweight lifter, he could lift a car off the ground. He could tie a rope to a Land Rover and stop it from moving when the engine was turned on. He could stretch steel chains and springs. He travelled across east Africa and to Europe to train and perform.It wasn’t a profession his family had considered. Samson was born into a farming family in the eastern Ugandan district of Serere. I was told he had a single bone in his forearms. But at 16 he was offered a job that changed the course of his life. He became store keeper for the 4th battalion of the British King’s African Rifles.Even as a boy, he was strong, and his strength was noticed in the army. In 1965, the army gave him surgery on his right hand, which had been damaged by burns sustained as a child. To strengthen his arm after the operation, dad started lifting weights.By 1970, he was a second lieutenant in the Ugandan army, and had become a renowned professional heavyweight lifter and wrestler.He was called the “golden rock of Africa”, known for his crowd-pulling stunts – he earned mythical status in April 1975 when he anchored a helicopter, holding it down with chains as it hovered overhead. Two months later, he successfully pulled a ferry in Lake Nalubaale 100 metres to the docking area.In 1977 the Voice of Uganda newspaper called “Sunlight” Okiror the country’s greatest athlete.Amin cancelled the match claiming he was too busy but, the whispers went, really fearing humiliation from Africa's leadersHis skills reached the attention of Idi Amin, then president, who challenged my father to a wrestling match. The much-anticipated bout was slated for 28 July 1975 in Kampala, during a summit of what is now the African Union. Amin cancelled the match, claiming he was too busy, but, the whispers went, really fearing humiliation before Africa’s leaders.“You see my [honourable] son of the soil, that I have had no good time to practise. The visitors are due to come, we people of Uganda must prepare to welcome them. We don’t need to wrestle now,” Amin told my dad at a meeting at State House.Later, Amin would hire a plane to fly dad to Germany for training and performances. “Our country lacks foreign exchange. While you are there, collect as much [as you can] and send to your country. OK?” Amin instructed him.I was born in 1979 and grew up hearing the stories – the man whom the most brutal military dictator feared to wrestle. He was a great dad. Very tough, but loving.He loved us, his children, and his wives so much. He used to drive us around in his minibus and land cruiser. At the time, we lived both in Serere and Kampala. Our home was the only one in the whole village with a tiled roof.People used to stop him on the street. Some people called him “Power Mike” – in reference to Michael Okpara, the 1970s Nigerian wrestler and former African heavyweight champion.By the time Yoweri Museveni became president in 1986, dad was the Ugandan army’s director of sports. But he grew increasingly frustrated with what he saw as Museveni’s poor governance and in May 1987, he joined the sons of Teso, launching the Uganda People’s Army (UPA) rebellion. He was commander of the UPA’s headquarters brigade when he was killed in March 1991, aged 44.I was at school when I heard the news and joined a group of children in running to the village, where hundreds of people had already gathered, to see if the strongman was really dead. Seeing my dad’s body riddled with bullets and lying in a pool of blood, I broke down and cried: “God be with you, dad, till we meet again.”His death was a rude awakening for a 12-year-old boy whose mother had already left the family, and who had until then lived a privileged life. Our powerful family disintegrated. I had to leave home, as my grandmother couldn’t provide for me. I did odd jobs in people’s homes to make ends meet. At times I slept without a meal.The family has struggled ever since. My dad’s army pension has never been paid nor have we received any compensation for the property and cattle lost during the insurgency in the north of the country.Recently I started thinking about my dad’s legacy and his contribution to sport. I posted some pictures of him on Facebook and Twitter and began to hear, once again, stories about the “golden rock”.“I actually watched one of his shows in Lira town during Idi Amin’s time,” commented one person, Djegeti Omara, on one of my Facebook posts. “It was very entertaining. I watched him hold a vehicle and it couldn’t move. I still remember that episode,” he said.“Yes, he was a great man,” wrote Lawrence Okae, national chairman for the opposition party, Uganda People’s Congress. “As he parked [his vehicle] … a towering, well-built, seemingly tough-looking, confident man came out,” he said. “It’s at this moment we got to know it belongs to ‘Power Mike’ – Okiror, a man who could pull down an aeroplane.”People still remember my father fondly. Perhaps it is not a surprise that the Ugandan government has never considered his legacy. On the 30th anniversary of his death next year, I would like that to change. I would like my father’s achievements to be honoured – for a sports arena or an annual tournament to bear his name. “Sunlight” Okiror lifted the country’s flag high through his sport. For that I believe he now deserves some recognition.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Inside Somalia: how Covid-19 created a perfect storm in a humanitarian crisis	Considering the country was in the middle of a pandemic, the silence at the entrance to Mogadishu’s De Martini hospital felt unnerving.The stillness in its deserted, sanitised halls, sent a chill through me as I arrived in May to capture the work being done at what was, until recently, the Somali capital’s only hospital taking coronavirus patients. It felt like a prison.I was covered from head to toe in PPE kit because I feared contracting the virus myself and what would happen.Then I stepped inside the treatment centre and there was chaos. Movement everywhere, a lot of instructions being shouted, a lot of whispering between doctors and nurses. A camera usually attracts attention but now I felt invisible as the medical staff rushed around me, going from patient to patient or trying to change oxygen tanks. I was just trying to stand to the side and not interfere.Even before Covid-19, Somalia faced ongoing insecurity, the worst desert locust infestation in decades, flash flooding that has affected more than 1 million people since March, and a cholera outbreak that began in 2017.Then coronavirus began taking lives, stretching the health system in a country where 20% of the population is internally displaced, with many people spread out over more than 2,000 settlements next to crowded urban areas.When the outbreak began in March, Somalia had no ventilators and just two healthcare workers per 100,000 people.De Martini hospital has 71 beds, the main quarantine hospital for a city population of about 2.5 million, as well as the large displaced community living on the outskirts of the capital.Officially, the country has had just 93 deaths from the virus, but Action Against Hunger believes the true figure is much higher.“The official number of cases stands at 3,076, but this number simply doesn’t square with what we are seeing or hearing in our communities” says Ahmed Khalif, Action Against Hunger’s country director in Somalia.“Early evidence suggests the pandemic is slowing other health services, and we are seeing an alarming rise in hunger and malnutrition levels, particularly among the most vulnerable communities. If current trends continue, child mortality could increase an estimated 13% in Somalia. This is not normal. There is obviously a problem.”When I roamed around Mogadishu three months ago many people were still unsure about what to believe – and often quite sceptical about information they were given. When photographing in markets, I wore a niqab to cover my face mask, because a lot of people thought anyone who wore one was exaggerating the threat.In Mogadishu’s displacement camps, I met people who believed the virus was a problem that existed in the main city but did not affect them, even though they lived in crowded conditions with limited access to healthcare, water and sanitation.Many people had also started to believe that anyone who entered De Martini hospital never left.In Somalia, 20% of the population is internally displaced, living in camps such as Kahda (main image) and Xidig.But despite the country’s best efforts, its ability to respond to a pandemic remained inadequate. While oxygen tanks were available at the hospital, ventilators to treat the most serious cases of Covid-19 remained scarce. “If a patient needs to be intubated, we will have to watch the patient suffer because we can’t do anything. Eventually they will die,” Dr Xilwo Daud, who supervised the ward, told me at the time.With 60 cases already confirmed among the staff at De Martini hospital, all staff were housed on the premises to minimise the risk of spreading the virus. Despite missing their loved ones, it was a sacrifice they were taking in their stride.“I believe the reason I went to school to get an education is that if such pandemics take place, I can be on the frontline to support my people,” said Daud, who was forced to leave her young daughter with her parents.Somalia is now in its dry season, and malnutrition levels are expected to rise. According to the UN, one in five people in the country (3.5 million) will be pushed into food insecurity by September, and more than 1 million children will be malnourished. With already limited healthcare facilities struggling because of Covid-19, there are fears that aid agencies will not be able to cope in the face of overwhelming humanitarian need.Last month the Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC) launched its Coronavirus Appeal to raise money to help people in the world’s most fragile states, including Somalia, to protect themselves against Covid-19.Khalif is sombre in his appraisal of Somalia’s prospects. “The situation in Somalia is incredibly grave. Our health system has been overwhelmed and the money is drying up. Without more support from the international community, I fear Covid-19 could be the straw that breaks the camel’s back.”As told by Fardosa Hussein to Kaamil Ahmed
Pakistan's #MeToo movement hangs in the balance over celebrity case	It takes a lot to rattle Leena Ghani. As an artist turned activist helping to raise the voices of Pakistan’s women, she has often fielded abuse, threats and harassment.But when she learned, on a morning in late September, that police had charged her for criminal defamation, linked to Pakistan’s most high-profile #MeToo case, Ghani says she was shaken. “In terms of silencing and demonising people speaking out against sexual assault, it was a new low even for Pakistan,” she says.Ghani was not alone. Eight others were also named in the case, facing three years in jail for criminal defamation. Some only learned of their involvement through a newspaper article.Lawyers say the case has exposed how cyber defamation laws passed under the guise of protecting women from online harassment are being used instead to silence Pakistan’s victims of sexual assault.On 16 December, the authorities said there was enough evidence to take Ghani and others to trial – and the future of Pakistan’s #MeToo movement now hangs in the balance.That movement began in April 2018 after Meesha Shafi, a singer and actor who starred in The Reluctant Fundamentalist, sent out a tweet alleging sexual harassment.Shafi alleged that she had “been subjected, on more than one occasion, to sexual harassment of a physical nature” at the hands of one of Pakistan’s most beloved celebrities, Ali Zafar. Shafi wrote that by speaking out, she hoped to “break the culture of silence that permeates through our society”.Zafar denies “any and all claims of harassment lodged against me by Ms Shafi”, and so far has successfully defeated the sexual harassment claims she brought against him in court.The allegations reverberated through Pakistan’s deeply conservative Islamic society, where women speaking out against assault is rare and taboo. Because of Zafar’s popularity disbelief was rife, but dozens of women and men came out in support of Shafi on social media, including several who alleged assault by Zafar.Among them was Ghani, who said her concerns about Zafar’s treatment of women emerged after they became friends in 2014. Writing on Twitter, Ghani accused Zafar of behaviour towards her that “displays a clear lack of respect for women”, including “inappropriate contact, groping, sexual comments”.“You hide from him,” read Ghani’s post, “hoping his sleazy eyes and hands don’t find you again. His hands don’t make their way up and down your waist or hold you too tight while you desperately try to wriggle and run.”Similar accusations followed. Blogger Humna Raza alleged that Zafar had groped her at an event, while Maham Javaid, a journalist, recounted on Twitter an alleged incident where Zafar had “tried to kiss my cousin and pull my cousin into a restroom with him. Luckily, my cousin’s friends were there to push him off.”Zafar has accused Shafi of organising a social media campaign against him. According to newspaper reports, he said he could not believe that “anyone can come forward and accuse someone who is innocent and decent, has worked hard for over two decades – solely on social media”.Zafar filed a civil defamation lawsuit against Shafi, seeking a billion rupees in damages. The court accepted the lawsuit and placed a gag order on Shafi, which still prevents her from discussing the allegations in public.Over the next two and a half years, Zafar appeared on a dozen television shows to defend his name, sometimes breaking down into tears and occasionally accompanied by his wife. He alleged the accusations were a smear campaign, coordinated by a group of women who created fake accounts and were funded by foreign money. Last month, Pakistan’s president awarded Zafar the Pride of Pakistan, one of the country’s highest honours.In July 2018, Shafi also began legal proceedings, attempting to take Zafar to court for sexual harassment in the workplace. Her case was dismissed on the technicality that freelancers were not covered by the law. An appeal to the Lahore high court was unsuccessful and although her lawyers have challenged the ruling in the supreme court, the case has still not been heard.In November 2018 rumours began to swirl that Zafar had also filed criminal charges against Shafi and 25 of her online supporters and fellow accusers with the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA), Pakistan’s most powerful investigating body.By July 2019, dozens of people, mainly women, who had written social media posts either making allegations about Zafar or expressing support for Shafi, began to receive notices to appear before the FIA for questioning.Ghani, Javaid and Raza were among them, as well as Iffat Omar, an actor who knew Shafi and Zafar personally. When Zafar claimed on television that the women taking Shafi’s side were being paid by the west to spread propaganda, Omar wrote “stop lying harasser” on her social media.Omar and Ghani were questioned by the FIA and both separately alleged they had been put under pressure by officers to retract their allegations against Zafar and apologise. Both refused. The senior FIA officer on the case was later suspended over a tweet which led to accusations he was being “Ali Zafar’s personal spokesperson” on social media. The FIA declined to comment on the case.At least three of the women also allege that Zafar applied “indirect harassment” through social networks. Omar says she received a “clear message from Ali Zafar that if I just apologise, everything will be better for me – and I have given him the direct answer that it is not happening.”Ghani alleges that “Zafar also tried to get to me through my family and would send cruel messages about my family’s problems through third parties. A lot of dirty tactics. He was trying to put pressure on me to apologise and I’ll admit it was scary.”But in late 2019, after she had filed a legal petition against Zafar and the FIA for harassment and Javaid had written to the senate human rights committee to complain, everything went quiet. Until September 2020, when news of the charges broke.Nine people, five women including Shafi, Ghani, Omar, Javaid and Raza, and four men, had been booked for defamation by the FIA’s cybercrime wing over the alleged social media “character assassination” of Zafar. The charges carried a three-year jail sentence.There was confusion as to why only nine had been booked in the case, when the original list had 25 names. But then, says Javaid, the penny dropped: “We realised we were the only ones who had refused to apologise to Zafar.”One of the accused, journalist Haseem uz Zaman, is facing charges for tweets that claimed “Ali Zafar harasses women”. They refuse to apologise. “That would not only harm my future and my journalistic credibility, but it would also harm every other survivor of sexual harassment who comes forward in the future,” they say. “And I could not live with that.”After news of the criminal charges broke, Ghani and the others began to face a barrage of online rape and death threats and harassment, and say they were vilified in Pakistani media.A week later, the blogger Raza created a new Twitter account and published a handwritten note retracting her allegations against Zafar and apologising for “the hurt” she had caused him and his family. Zafar shared the tweet. Raza’s name has been dropped from the case.For the women, most galling of all was the law they had been charged under. The Prevention of Electronic Crimes Act was passed in 2016 partly to protect women from online harassment, but the wing of the FIA tasked with prosecuting these cases is accused of being ineffective.Nighat Dad, Shafi’s lawyer, says she knows dozens of women who have complained to the FIA about online abuse, hate-speech, rape threats and vindictive sharing of intimate videos, but had received no response.“It’s rare the cybercrime wing will register cases lodged by women activists, and even if they do, it usually takes years for anything to happen,” says Dad. “So I was never expecting that they would be so shameless as to take action against women survivors who are speaking up.”This was not an isolated use of the law against women. When girls at the prestigious Lahore Grammar School recently alleged harassment by teachers and fellow students, several were threatened with criminal defamation, after which the accusations went quiet. At Lahore University of Management Sciences, a Facebook page for student testimonials of sexual assault was shut down with a letter threatening to report them to the FIA.“We are seeing this happen over and over,” says Dad. “The cyber laws that were enacted in the name of protecting women in Pakistan now are being misused and weaponised to silence them.”As Shafi’s lawyer, Dad claims she herself has been subjected to a “vicious smear campaign”, with newspapers making allegations that she is a foreign operative running an “illegal NGO”, unsubstantiated claims retweeted by Zafar. “They will not only try and silence victims, but anyone who tries to help victims fight for justice,” says Dad.On 15 December, the FIA presented evidence that Shafi and others in the case were “guilty” of defamation and asked for court proceedings against them to begin.Ambreen Qureshi, Zafar’s lawyer, declined to talk to the Guardian about the allegations but said “we have presented evidence to the FIA on account of which Ms Shafi and eight others are booked”. Qureshi says Shafi had failed to provide any witnesses to support her allegations. Shafi’s lawyers say she was not given the opportunity.According to Qureshi, the court documents so far show “in this case an innocent man was made a target of a criminally motivated malicious campaign by a group of closely related women.” The eight women facing charges deny any previous relationship or any campaign and say they intend to fight the case in court and push for the cyber defamation law to be repealed.Ghani says: “People keep saying #MeToo is dying in Pakistan, which is so terrible because it’s not like women are not getting harassed and assaulted and raped, but we are being silenced. We all realise that Pakistan’s #MeToo movement hinges on this case.”“The whole system is against us; Ali Zafar is a powerful man, and going to court is hard – but what can be harder than lying and living with that lie,” she adds. “I would rather go to jail.”Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay	It has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in Kyrgyzstan, at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too?Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers.Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestockAn upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low.Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountainsBut if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen.In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018, have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020. Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%.Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the villageTashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient ulak tartysh horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts.The traditional sport of ulak-tartysh in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-MogolThen, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism.In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games.Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair.All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.”His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs.The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction, each of which can expect 20% contraction.Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitorsTashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world.“It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.”Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouseIt was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit.They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village.Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back.Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago“It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.”Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers.Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the areaBut villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby.Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river.Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again.Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu villageSign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
New-sprung: the project turning PPE offcuts into Covid patient mattresses	At the height of the pandemic in the Indian state of Kerala, fashion designer Lakshmi Menon, 46, heard that every new Covid care centre had to have 50 beds. Mattresses were in short supply. Every time a patient was discharged, the mattress had to be incinerated. “I thought: that’s a lot of mattresses and a lot of burning,” says Menon.Menon’s solution was to collect the mountains of plastic pieces from factories that make PPE – all the little bits left over after cutting. Women then braid the bits into rope-like plaits 6ft long. The braids are laid out in a zigzag and the ends tied together. The result is a light, soft, washable, hygienic mattress for just 300 rupees (£3) – half the price of a normal one.The women of Arayankav near Kochi, where Menon lives on a rubber plantation, get jobs, the environment is protected and Covid clinics get mattresses – “shayya” in Sanskrit.The idea of using waste scraps came to her when she was driving to Kochi in February and saw children sleeping on the road. A few days later, she visited a friend who runs a fashion house and saw heaps of waste fabric of different sizes.“That’s when I thought I could use braiding to make mattresses for the homeless. Braiding allows you to use every single bit of fabric of different sizes. Even the tiniest bit can be incorporated and everyone knows how to tie a plait,” she says.In March, she made 20 mattresses and handed them out to homeless families. Then lockdown happened. Her friends in design and fashion lost business overnight. Workers were laid off and things looked grim.Menon forgot about the fabric mattresses, until she went to a friend’s tailoring unit in July and saw that he had started making PPE. In the corner lay a mountain of plastic pieces. Menon’s eyes gleamed.“I picked them up and found they were cleaner, softer and more dust-free than fabric scraps. It was the best material I could have wished for,” she says.Her friend was delighted when Menon took the scrap pieces. He had been struggling with how to dispose of them because burning was out of the question.At the same time Kerala, overwhelmed by the pandemic, ordered the setting up of 50-bed Covid centres across the state and village councils scrambled to find enough mattresses.Apart from the Covid centres that have bought them, Menon is working with NGOs to provide shayyas to homeless shelters and rough sleepers on the principle that “everyone deserves a good night’s sleep”. India’s 1.7 million homeless people normally sleep on the ground, usually on a thin mat.Students in India who are part of Enactus, the international not-for-profit organisation set up by accountancy firm KPMG, are working on making the mattress widely available.“We also feel that yoga centres might be interested in buying them as they are soft and light and easily rolled up,” says Ishartek Pabla, operations head of Enactus at Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies. Menon is unlikely to meet a shortage of raw material. India has become the world’s second-largest PPE manufacturer, with more than 1,000 manufacturers producing 4.5m pieces a day, the country’s textile ministry announced this week.Menon’s shayya has been taken up by UN staff who will include it in a list of Covid innovative ideas that can be easily replicated.Several Indian corporations have also contacted her. “These big companies have to fulfil their corporate social responsibility objectives and the mattress provides a good way of proving income for rural women in a sustainable way with no need for any equipment. Nothing really. Just a bit of space,” says Menon.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
25th amendment: can Trump be removed from office before his term ends?	The storming of the US Capitol by supporters of Donald Trump on Wednesday has prompted calls by some lawmakers to remove him from office before Joe Biden is sworn in on 20 January.The chaotic scenes unfolded after Trump – who has been condemned for inciting violence by spreading falsehoods about the election and refusing to admit defeat – addressed thousands of protesters in Washington, using his speech to repeat lies that the election was stolen from him.The events have renewed questions as to whether Trump could be declared unfit for for office, or charged with a criminal act.There are two ways to remove a president from office: the 25th amendment of the US constitution, and impeachment followed by a Senate conviction. In either scenario, the vice-president, Mike Pence, would take over until Biden’s inauguration.Calls for such a move are already under way from multiple Democrats who urged the invocation of the 25th amendment, while Ilhan Omar, a Minnesota Democratic congresswoman, said she was drawing up articles of impeachment. Meanwhile, editorials from the New York Times and the Washington Post called for consequences in the form of Trump’s removal.But how would it work, and is it even possible? Here’s what you need to know.The 25th amendment, ratified in 1967 and adopted in the wake of John F Kennedy’s assassination in 1963, deals with presidential succession and disability.Section 4 addresses situations in which a president is unable to do the job but does not step down voluntarily.The drafters of the 25th amendment clearly intended for it to apply when a president is incapacitated by a physical or mental illness, experts say. Some scholars have also argued that it could also apply more broadly to a president who is dangerously unfit for office.For the 25th amendment to be invoked, Pence and the majority of Trump’s cabinet would need to declare that Trump is unable to perform the duties of the presidency and remove him. In that scenario, Pence would take over.Trump could subsequently declare that he is capable of resuming the job. If Pence and the majority of the Cabinet do not contest Trump’s determination, Trump regains power. If they dispute Trump’s declaration, the issue would be decided by Congress, but Pence would continue to act as president until then.A two-thirds majority of both chambers of Congress would be needed to keep Trump sidelined. But the Democratic-controlled House could simply delay voting on the substantive dispute until Trump’s term ends, said Paul Campos, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Colorado.Campos said the 25th amendment would be an appropriate way to remove Trump from office and has the benefit of being quicker than impeachment. “Pence could instantly become president, whereas impeachment and conviction could take at least a few days,” Campos said.Yes.A misconception about “impeachment” is that it refers to the removal of a president from office. In fact, impeachment refers only to the House of Representatives, the lower chamber of Congress, bringing charges that a president engaged in a “high crime or misdemeanors” – similar to an indictment in a criminal case.Trump has already been impeached once and could be impeached a second time, for a different crime.If a simple majority of the House’s 435 members approves bringing charges, known as “articles of impeachment”, the process moves to the Senate, the upper chamber, which holds a trial to determine the president’s guilt. The constitution requires a two-thirds vote of the Senate to convict and remove a president.Trump was previously impeached by the Democratic-led US House in December 2019 on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress stemming from his efforts to pressure Ukraine to investigate Biden and his son. Trump was acquitted by the Republican-led Senate in February 2020.Frank Bowman, a professor of constitutional law at the University of Missouri, said Trump “arguably fomented sedition”, or an attempted overthrowing of the US government.But Bowman said Trump could also be impeached for a more general offense: disloyalty to the US constitution and failing to uphold his oath of office. Congress has discretion in defining a high crime and misdemeanor and is not limited to actual criminal offences.“The essential offense would be one against the constitution – one of essentially trying to undermine the lawful results of a lawfully conducted election,” Bowman said.Reuters contributed to this report
Trump officials resign and other senior advisers consider quitting	Donald Trump’s deputy national security adviser, Matt Pottinger, former chief of staff and current special envoy to Northern Ireland, Mick Mulvaney, and Ryan Tully, the top White House adviser on Russia, have resigned.Two other senior White House officials – the national security adviser, Robert O’Brien, and the deputy chief of staff, Chris Liddell – are reportedly considering stepping down after a mob of Donald Trump supporters stormed the US Capitol building.Pottinger and Mulvaney’s departures come amid speculation that others will also quit after the US president incited and praised rioters while continuing to air baseless grievances over his loss of the presidency.“I called [secretary of state] Mike Pompeo last night to let him know I was resigning from that. I can’t do it. I can’t stay,” Mulvaney told CNBC on Thursday morning.“Those who choose to stay, and I have talked with some of them, are choosing to stay because they’re worried the president might put someone worse in.”So far seven officials associated with Trump and his inner circle have said they are quitting, including members of Melania Trump’s team, after the deadly violence that surrounded the congressional vote to certify Joe Biden’s presidential election victory in November.Trump’s pledge early on Thursday to an “orderly transition” to Joe Biden on 20 January was partly intended to head off further resignations, but was not likely to stop some departures, especially from the national security staff, a senior unnamed official told the Reuters news agency.Senior Republican figures have also indicated splits from the president.Tweeting from his personal account, O’Brien – a staunch Trump loyalist – praised the behaviour of the vice-president, Mike Pence, who resisted Trump’s pressure to overturn the election certification, while making no mention of Trump.“I just spoke with Vice-President Pence. He is a genuinely fine and decent man,” he tweeted. “He exhibited courage today as he did at the Capitol on 9/11 as a congressman. I am proud to serve with him.”In further fallout that underlined the fracturing of the Trump administration’s inner circles, Marc Short, Pence’s chief of staff, indicated to journalists he had been banned from the White House by Trump after the president “blamed” him for advice he gave to Pence on Trump’s demands he overturn the election result.According to reports in the US media, some senior administration officials have also begun talking informally about invoking the 25th amendment to remove the president before his term expires on 20 January, while calls are also growing for a second impeachment to ensure Trump cannot run for public office again.In stark language that underlined the toxic and swirling sense of crisis, the Washington Post quoted one administration official describing Trump’s behaviour on Wednesday as that of “a monster”, while another said the situation was “insane” and “beyond the pale”.Two of the first lady’s top aides resigned on Wednesday night including Stephanie Grisham, a longtime Trump loyalist who previously served as White House press secretary. Anna Cristina Niceta, the White House social secretary, also resigned.The deputy White House press secretary, Sarah Matthews, also announced her resignation, saying she was “deeply disturbed” by the storming of the Capitol.“I was honoured to serve in the Trump administration and proud of the policies we enacted. As someone who worked in the halls of Congress I was deeply disturbed by what I saw today,” Matthews said in a statement. “I’ll be stepping down from my role, effective immediately. Our nation needs a peaceful transfer of power.”The sense of anger within a Republican party at war with itself was increasingly in full view. “[Trump] screwed his supporters, he screwed the country and now he’s screwed himself,” a 2016 Trump campaign official told Politico.The former New Jersey governor Chris Christie – who said he repeatedly tried to call Trump during the crisis – also laid the blame squarely at Trump’s feet.“The president caused this protest to occur,” Christie told ABC News. “He is the only one who can make it stop.”
Maga v BLM: how police handled the Capitol mob and George Floyd activists – in pictures	The contrast between the law enforcement reaction to the storming of the Capitol on Wednesday and the suppression of peaceful protests in the summer is not just stark – it is black and white.The Black Lives Matter demonstrators crowd outside the White House on 1 June was a block away from the building and made no attempt to breach its security. It was a mostly Black crowd, and it was charged by a force made up of Washington police, US Park police, over 5,000 national guard troops and federal agencies like the Bureau of Prisons. An army helicopter swooped low over the heads of the protesters. Teargas, batons and horses were used to clear a block so that Donald Trump could stage a photo op outside a church across the road. A national guard commander later admitted there had been “excessive use of force”.The events in Lafayette Park in June 2020 represented a defining moment of the Trump presidency. So will 6 January 2021. The mob that stormed the seat of US democracy on Wednesday had openly talked about such a plan, were explicitly intent on overturning a fair election, and some had hinted they might be carrying guns. They were almost all white. Many were openly white supremacists, and yet the thin Capitol police collapsed in their path.The events in Lafayette Park in June 2020 represented a defining moment of the Trump presidency. So will 6 January 2021It is unknown why there was not a greater show of force in front of the Capitol building, given all that was known about the plans of Trump’s supporters. In the summer, the national guard from several states parked armoured cars in the Washington streets and stood in full body armour in serried ranks on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial – all ahead of protests calling for the law to be upheld and an end to impunity for the police killing of Black Americans.The deployment ahead of the 6 January riot was far lighter. After Washington’s mayor, Muriel Bowser, made a request, 340 guardsmen were activated in advance, of which 115 were on duty at any one time, mostly helping direct traffic. The DC and Virginia national guard were only deployed in significant numbers after the Capitol had been breached.One big difference was that Trump was driving the deployment in June. He was silent on Wednesday, apparently unwilling to set troops on his own supporters. The New York Times reported he resisted calling out the national guard. The deployment was finally ordered by the acting secretary of defence, Christopher Miller.Below: Supporters of Donald Trump clash with police officers in front of the Capitol building in Washington DC on Wednesday. Photograph by Leah Millis/ReutersBelow left: A pro-Trump rioter is tended to by a police officer while suffering the effects of chemical agents used to disperse crowds after rioters stormed the grounds of the Capitol on Wednesday. Photograph by Jon Cherry/Getty ImagesRight: On 1 June, police clear the street near the White House as protesters demonstrate against the death of George Floyd. Floyd died after being restrained by Minneapolis police officers. Photograph by Evan Vucci/APBelow left: Trump supporters gather in the Capitol Rotunda after breaching security on Wednesday. Photograph by Jim Lo Scalzo/EPARight: A protester raises her hands near a line of national guard troops near the White House on 1 June, as demonstrations against George Floyd’s death continue. Photograph by Roberto Schmidt/AFP via GettyBelow left: Rioters supporting Trump break into the Capitol on Wednesday. Photograph by Win McNamee/Getty ImagesRight: Police advance on protesters outside the White House on 1 June. Photograph by Erin Schaff/The New York Times via eyevineBelow left: A demonstrator is taken into custody by police after a curfew took effect during a protest over the death of George Floyd, on 1 June 2020 near the White House. Photograph by Alex Brandon/APRight: A rioter takes a photo near police officers in riot gear who are dispersing people gathering at the Capitol on Wednesday. Photograph by Tasos Katopodis/Getty ImagesAbove left: Trump supporters climb on walls at the US Capitol on Wednesday. Photograph by Jose Luis Magana/APRight: Trump walks between lines of riot police in Lafayette Park across from the White House after walking to St John’s church for a photo opportunity during protests over racial inequality, on 1 June. Photograph by Tom Brenner/ReutersAbove: US Secret Service uniformed division officers stand guard during a rally near the White House against the death of George Floyd on 1 June. Photograph by Jonathan Ernst/ReutersAbove: Trump supporters clash with police and security forces as they storm the US Capitol on Wednesday. Photograph by Roberto Schmidt/AFP via Getty
Congress certifies Biden as US president – as it happened	This live blog is now closed. Follow continuing coverage on our new live blog:Here’s a summary of where things stand:Politico has published a riveting group account, from reporters on the scene, of events inside the Capitol as it was invaded on Wednesday. Here’s an excerpt: Olivia Beavers: They’re getting evacuated. This is really escalating.Melanie Zanona: And then a police officer is like, “OK, everyone, follow me.” The way the balconies are set up, it’s like they’re sectioned off. So we have to climb over these gold railings.Olivia Beavers: As I’m climbing over one railing, this police officer yelled at us to take cover and duck.Olivia Beavers: There was a moment when a reporter asked me: “Do you think we should take off our press badges?” I said, No.Read the full piece here.The extraordinary and violent scenes that consumed the US Capitol building on Wednesday have dominated news coverage across the world.The Guardian carries a scene from the Capitol’s rotunda, filled with a pro-Trump mob waving the flag of their leader: “Chaos as pro-Trump mob storms US Capitol”. Prominence is given to a quote from the US president-elect, Joe Biden, who said: “Our democracy’s under assault, unlike anything we’ve seen in modern times.”Guardian front page, Thursday 7 January 2021: Chaos as pro-Trump mob storms US Capitol pic.twitter.com/LF2E5O9om2'Anarchy in the USA': what the papers say about the storming of the US Capitol https://t.co/vT0MXjIdYyThe House will not reconvene on Monday after all, the Democratic leadership announces, according to Fox News’ Chad Pergram.Back in two weeks: Hoyer announces no sessions of the House until after the inauguration.The UK home secretary, Priti Patel, said Donald Trump’s incendiary remarks directly provoked the violence witnessed in the US Capitol as she urged him to condemn it.“His comments directly led to the violence and so far he has failed to condemn that violence – and that is completely wrong,” she said.She said the departing president’s statement, in which he said “we love you” to the rioters, and repeated his unproven claims of electoral fraud did “very little to de-escalate the situation”.“He basically has made a number of comments yesterday that helped to fuel that violence and he didn’t do anything to de-escalate that whatsoever,” she told BBC Breakfast.Read the full piece:An Israeli journalist reporting outside the US Capitol on Wednesday had to face a torrent of antisemitic abuse from a pro-Trump supporter live on air.The reporter for Channel 13 television news was confronted by a man in a helmet and asked inaudible questions that appeared to be requests to explain his government’s actions, a video of the event showed.“I’m not representing the Israeli government,” the reporter replied.“You lying Israeli, you play the pilpul game,” the man said. “Pilpul” is a word used to refer to the process of analysing Jewish religious texts, and has been racistly misappropriated to mean lying.The protester then went on to demand the reporter tell him what a “goy” was. A “goy” is a word for a non-Jew.The Jerusalem Post, an Israeli newspaper, said the protester had also called the reporter a deeply offensive term for a Jewish person.The US-based Anti-Defamation League said the incident was “absolutely despicable”.The Washington Post editorial board joined Democratic voices overnight in calling for the removal of Trump through the 25th amendment before Inauguration Day. From their piece:The president is unfit to remain in office for the next 14 days. Every second he retains the vast powers of the presidency is a threat to public order and national security. Vice President Pence, who had to be whisked off the Senate floor for his own protection, should immediately gather the Cabinet to invoke the 25th Amendment, declaring that Mr. Trump is “unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.” Congress, which would be required to ratify the action if Mr. Trump resisted, should do so. Mr. Pence should serve until President-elect Joe Biden is inaugurated on Jan. 20.While removal of Trump through the 25th amendment is extremely unlikely in the less-than-two-weeks before the election, discussion of such a move has surfaced repeatedly during Trump’s term. Here’s a video explainer from 2018 about how it could work: Should Trump be impeached again?“Oy,” Kamala Harris says and walks into an elevatorAt a daily press briefing in Beijing this afternoon, China’s foreign affairs spokeswoman, Hua Chunying, said - inaccurately - that the Chinese people have the right and freedom to express their views and comments on the Internet. “Many people are thinking about this: (this is) a scene of deja vu, but the response of some people in the United States, including some media, is quite different. In July 2019, radical protestors violently attacked the Legislative Council building in Hong Kong... and surrounded the police with toxic powder and liquid, even bit off the police’s fingers and stabbed the police with knives. However, the Hong Kong police maintained a high degree of restraint and professionalism, and none of them died. But while the degree of violence and destruction in Washington is not as serious as what happened in Hong Kong, four people have died...”Hua’s comments came after the Global Times quoted unnamed netizens gleefully revelling in the scenes, reportedly describing it as “karma”, “revenge”, and “deserved”.“It was like watching a thrilling action movie!” they quoted one saying.Across editorials and social media posts, the hawkish tabloid repeatedly drew crude comparisons between the footage of Capitol Hill and footage from the Hong Kong protests, ignoring the diametrically opposed motivations behind the two groups.The German chancellor was made furious and sad by the scene last night at the US Capitol, a German broadcaster reports:Merkel on Capitol violence 2/2- Praises Biden’s statement -        Congress getting back to work a sign of hope -        Certification means US can open a new chapter of its democracy in 2 weeksTrump’s social media aide Dan Scavino has tweeted a “Statement by President Donald J. Trump on the Electoral Certification”: Even though I totally disagree with the outcome of the election, and the facts bear me out*, nevertheless there will be an orderly transition on January 20th. I have always said we would continue our fight to ensure that only legal votes were counted. While this represents the end of the greatest first term in presidential history, it’s only the beginning of our fight to Make America Great Again!”*The facts do not bear Trump out. The House adjourns until Monday. Biden and Harris will be inaugurated at noon on Wednesday, 20 January. Less than two weeks. “The chair declares the joint session resolved,” Pence says. He drops a gavel and mingling commences. We don’t know what Trump makes of this because he’s suspended on Twitter. And at 3:41 EST, we can all go to bed.The 138 House Republicans who voted to sustain the objection to Pennsylvania’s election results:https://t.co/D2n6fwBAOg pic.twitter.com/PFLCntgy2KThe Chaplain is deploring the desecration of the Capitol in his closing prayer. It is all over. Goodnight.The teller, senator Amy Klobuchar, reports: “Joe Biden and Kamala Harris will be the president and the vice president according to the ballots that have been given to us.”Applause in the room. Pence says Biden “has received 306 votes” and Trump “has received 232 votes.”“The announcement of the state of the vote by the president of the senate shall be deemed as sufficient of the election of the president and the vice-president,” Pence says. It’s done. Closing prayer.Wyoming’s three votes for Trump stand. That’s it. Biden wins 306-232. We knew this months ago.“The tellers will ascertain and deliver the result to the president of the senate,” Pence says. 
Woman shot and killed in storming of US Capitol named as Ashli Babbitt	A woman shot and killed by police during the storming of the US Capitol by a pro-Donald Trump mob has been named as a 14-year veteran of the US air force and of four foreign military tours, including to Iraq and Afghanistan.Ashli Babbitt, 35, had travelled to Washington DC from San Diego, her husband told the local news station KUSI, adding that she was a passionate Trump supporter.Three other people died from “medical emergencies” during Wednesday’s siege of the Capitol, according to the Washington DC police chief, Robert Contee.Contee has confirmed to reporters a woman was shot by Capitol police – a federal law enforcement agency responsible for protecting the US Congress – but has not released further details.Less than a day before she joined the Trump loyalist protest, Babbitt, an avowed and public Trump supporter as well as a subscriber to a number of alt-right conspiracy theories, had vowed the insurrectionist movement could never be halted. “Nothing will stop us … they can try and try and try but the storm is here and it is descending upon DC in less than 24 hours … dark to light!” she wrote on Twitter.Babbitt, 35, was reportedly shot as she and other rioters tried to break through a barricaded door in the building where Capitol police officers were armed on the other side. On video footage circulating on social media, a single gunshot is heard during an attempt to storm the barricaded door. Other footage shows police attempting to perform emergency first aid on a woman lying on the floor bleeding.Babbitt was taken to hospital with a gunshot wound but later pronounced dead.On Twitter, Babbitt described herself as a veteran and a libertarian. Her social media account is filled with declarations of support for Trump and condemnation of November’s presidential election, which Trump lost.She also retailed many of the conspiracy theories shared by alt-right groups, including one about a vast network of high-profile and powerful paedophiles. Babbitt regularly retweeted controversial lawyer and conspiracy theorist Lin Wood, a high-profile Trump supporter who has litigated several of the president’s failed lawsuits contesting the election result.She had also called on the vice-president, Mike Pence – who has split with Trump in refusing to oppose the certification of Joe Biden’s election win – to resign and face charges of treason.Babbitt’s mother-in-law, Robin Babbitt, told the New York Post: “I’m numb. I’m devastated. Nobody from DC notified my son and we found out on TV.”Everything is “pretty surreal”, Babbitt’s brother-in-law Justin was quoted as saying. “It’s hard, because we haven’t been officially notified.”Contee said 14 officers were injured in the assault on the Capitol. One was taken to hospital after being dragged into a crowd and assaulted, another suffered “significant facial injuries” after being hit by a projectile.Contee reported 52 arrests: five for firearms offences and 47 for curfew violations and unlawful entry. Twenty-six of those arrested were on the grounds of the US Capitol.A cooler packed with molotov cocktails was also found on US Capitol grounds. Police recovered two pipe bombs at the Democratic National Committee and Republican National Committee offices.The mayor of Washington DC, Muriel Bowser, declared a citywide public emergency until 21 January, the day after Biden’s inauguration as president.Bowser called the attack on the Capitol an “affront on our American democracy” and urged city residents to abide by the city’s curfew.“I urge anyone who is not in place in your home or your hotel – and if you mean to cause trouble in the streets of DC you will be arrested,” she said.Bowser said Trump held ultimate responsibility for the violent protests.“We saw an unprecedented attack on our American democracy incited by the United States president.“He must be held accountable. His constant and divisive rhetoric led to the abhorrent actions we saw today.”
World Bank calls for rapid action to prevent Covid debt crisis	The World Bank has called for rapid and decisive action to prevent a new debt crisis as it said the Covid-19 pandemic could result in a decade of disappointment for the global economy.In its half-yearly health check, the Washington-based institution said the pandemic had led to the sharpest annual increase in government debt in more than 30 years, and had exposed the vulnerability of many emerging market and developing countries.David Malpass, the Bank’s president, said the biggest slump in the global economy since the 1930s had widened the gap between rich and poor and there was a risk it could take years for people at the bottom to see a sustained improvement in their lives.The bank’s Global Economic Prospects (GEP) report said there would be only a subdued recovery in 2021, with projected growth of 4% still leaving output 5% below its pre-crisis trend.It added, however, that there was a “material risk” that setbacks in containing the pandemic could lead to a much weaker rebound at a time when countries were faced with growing financial difficulties.Several countries had already defaulted on their debts and more were at risk of debt distress, the GEP said.Malpass said: “Already at record levels before the pandemic, both domestic and external debt burdens have become much heavier due to the devastating contraction in incomes across emerging market and developing economies.”A comprehensive set of policy interventions was needed to tackle what the bank called a fourth wave of debt, Malpass said. Similar episodes in the past had culminated in the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s and the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s.Efforts to come up with a comprehensive package to alleviate debt have been hampered by the unwillingness of private sector creditors and some countries – particularly China – to take part. Malpass said there was a need for greater participation by all private and official bilateral creditors along with deep debt reduction for countries in debt distress; better debt transparency practices that overcome secrecy and restrictions in debt contracts; and legislative reforms to speed up the restructuring of private sector debt.“The global community needs to act rapidly and forcefully to make sure the latest wave of debt does not end with debt crises in emerging market and developing economies, as has been the case previously,” the GEP said. “The pandemic has exacerbated existing debt-related risks and vulnerabilities.”Shallower recessions in advanced economies and a stronger recovery in China meant the estimated 4.3% slump in global output in 2020 was slightly less severe than the World Bank feared six months ago. It added, however, that in addition to a heavy death toll, the pandemic had plunged millions into poverty and could depress incomes and activity for a prolonged period.“As with previous economic crises, the pandemic is expected to leave long-lasting adverse effects on global economic activity and per capita incomes. It is likely to steepen the slowdown in the growth of global potential output – the level of output the global economy can sustain at full employment and capacity utilisation – that had earlier been projected for the decade just begun. If history is any guide, unless there are substantial and effective reforms, the global economy is heading for a decade of disappointing growth outcomes.”Advanced economies were likely to experience a “slow and challenging recovery” as a result of new waves of infections, the Bank said. The US, the world’s biggest economy, was forecast to expand 3.5% in 2021, after an estimated 3.6% contraction in 2020, while the euro area was anticipated to grow 3.6% this year, following a 7.4% decline in 2020. China, which grew by 2% in 2020 was likely to expand by 7.9% this year, the bank said.
UK watchdog begins investigating Nvidia's $40bn takeover of Arm	Britain’s competition watchdog has launched an investigation into the $40bn (£29.5bn) takeover of the UK-based chip designer Arm by the US company Nvidia.The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has called for interested parties to submit views on the contentious deal before the launch of a formal investigation later this year.Arm Holdings, which employs 6,500 staff including 3,000 in the UK, is a global leader in designing chips for smartphones, computers and tablets. California-based Nvidia, a graphics chip specialist, announced its plan to buy the British tech group from Japan’s SoftBank in September.SoftBank had acquired Arm for $32bn in 2016, when the Japanese company took advantage of the fall in value of the pound after the Brexit vote. Arm is based in Cambridge but has operations in a number of UK towns and cities, including Manchester, Belfast and Warwick.Its chief executive, Simon Segars, acknowledged at the time of the Nvidia deal that it could take up to 18 months to win approval from regulators around the world.On Wednesday, the chief executive of the CMA, Andrea Coscelli, said: “The chip technology industry is worth billions and critical to many of the products that we use most in our everyday lives. We will work closely with other competition authorities around the world to carefully consider the impact of the deal and ensure that it doesn’t ultimately result in consumers facing more expensive or lower-quality products.”The CMA said it would examine the possible effect of the deal on competition in the UK and whether Arm had an “incentive to withdraw, raise prices or reduce the quality of its intellectual property licensing services to Nvidia’s rivals”.If the investigation finds that the deal breaches UK competition rules, the CMA’s powers include the authority to block the takeover.In October, Hermann Hauser, the co-founder of Arm, wrote to the House of Commons foreign affairs committee arguing that if the deal was allowed to proceed, the combined business would become the next US tech monopoly alongside companies such as Google and Facebook.He has argued that because Nvidia is one of more than 500 users of Arm’s designs worldwide – which include Apple, Samsung and Qualcomm – becoming the Cambridge-based business’s parent company will destroy Arm’s “even-handed” model and ultimately kill the world-leading British tech company.Hauser also told the BBC last year the deal would be “an absolute disaster for Cambridge, the UK and Europe”, adding that Nvidia would inevitably decide to relocate Arm to the US, leading to lost jobs.Hauser has said the government should use its powers to prevent the takeover, but has also backed indefinite legally binding conditions as an alternative. These include a guarantee to keep Arm’s staff in Cambridge, Belfast, Manchester and Warwick, and a promise that Nvidia does not get preferential treatment on new versions of the designer’s chips.The shadow business secretary, Ed Miliband, has also expressed concerns about the deal, and has called on the government to intervene to prevent parts of Arm from being moved out of the UK.
'We see huge benefits': firms adopt four-day week in Covid crisis	When Target Publishing cut staff pay after the first coronavirus lockdown last year, the magazine group knew it had to make a positive gesture to its employees. So it introduced a four-day week.“I felt better in myself that I was able to give something back to match the sacrifice everyone had made,” says Target’s founder and owner, David Cann. Faced with sliding advertising sales and several cancelled projects, the publisher of 20 titles including Natural Lifestyle and Health Food Business had cut pay for its 30 staff by 20%.But the shift to a four-day week brought immediate benefits for the Essex-based company. What surprised Cann was how much more effectively staff worked and that in July, when the situation had improved, he was able to reinstate everyone’s pay and retain the four-day week.“Of course there were teething problems, but we found meetings were much shorter and we looked at the way staff worked and what they did much more closely to achieve significant efficiencies.“And from a mental health point of view, we see huge benefits and because everyone wants it to work, you get an upside in higher profits.”When Unilever said in November it would move staff in its New Zealand office to a four-day week on the same pay, the maker of Dove soap and Magnum ice-cream which employs more than 150,000 people worldwide, gave the kind of high-profile endorsement for flexible working that campaigners have been waiting for.“Its time has come,” says the economist Aidan Harper, who has championed the four-day week with colleagues at the New Economics Foundation (NEF) thinktank and a growing number of political organisations across Europe.Harper is the co-author of a new book, The Case for a Four-Day Week, that sets out the practical arguments for a reduction in the hours spent at work with no loss of pay.He said that during much of the 20th-century companies were forced, either by trade union action, government policy or labour shortages to give workers a large slice of the gains in productivity – the output of each worker per hour – but this ran out of steam in the 1980s.With productivity increases close to zero since the 2008 financial crash and the pandemic forcing companies like Target to rethink how they deploy their resources, there is a growing expectation that a broader shift to shorter working hours will happen in 2021.A recent report by the thinktank Autonomy argued that the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, could prevent a steep rise in unemployment if he supported companies moving to a four-day week. It said a majority of 50,000 firms studied would be able to cope with the change through higher productivity or by raising prices.It urged the government to investigate ways of rolling out a four-day week, starting with the public sector.A few weeks after the Unilever announcement Awin, an online marketing firm, said its 1,000 employees – including more than 300 based in the UK – would move to a four-day week after trialling several forms of flexible working.Like Awin, Unilever will trust staff to work more effectively during a 12-month pilot project. This is not based on hope, but on analysis of how 81 white-collar workers in Auckland carry out their day-to-day tasks using the practical lessons from a local advisory firm Perpetual Guardian, itself a four-day week business run by Andrew Barnes, a former boss of £5.7bn turnover investment broker Bestinvest.Unilever will introduce new project management software to cut down on unnecessary tasks and support faster decision-making. After the trial, the company says it will evaluate the outcome with Sydney’s University of Technology business school and look at how a shorter working week could be adopted by the rest of its 155,000 employees globally.The initiative follows a similar trial by Microsoft in its Japanese operations and Toyota’s adoption of reduced hours in several of its factories.Microsoft said in November that employees increased productivity by 40%, more than making up for the 20% drop in attendance by staff. The US tech firm restricted meetings to half an hour and changed many of its working practices as part of part of a summer project that allowed greater participation by staff teams. The company has yet to reveal what happens next.Until now the number of organisations taking the plunge is few and progress towards a widespread four-day week culture has so far been glacial, but Harper expects the pressure on companies to review their operations to accelerate take-up in the new year.“At its recent conference the Scottish National party called on the Scottish government to launch a review of working practices, including the possibility of a four-day week, while the recent Marmot review into health outcomes put shorter working hours on its list of priorities to cut stress and extend life expectancy,” he says.Julius Goldthorpe, the co-founder of the recruitment company Four Day Week, says the concept has been growing in popularity but remains a small part of the jobs market.“We started out wanting to focus just on jobs that were four days a week, but we were ahead of the curve and within six months had broadened out to take in all forms of flexible working,” he says.The supermarket chain Morrisons said in the summer it would be moving to a four-day week at its Bradford headquarters, though it is a more tentative move than the headline announcement suggests.There was a cut in weekly hours from 40 a week to 37.5 and the company said staff will work nine-hour days to cram the time into a four-day week with a six-hour shift on a Saturday once a month.The resulting gain of 2.5 hours is less than the 4.2 hours the NEF believes UK workers should have received from productivity growth since 1980.Harper, like the economist Lord Skidelsky, who advised Labour’s former shadow chancellor John McDonnell to adopt shorter hours on a sector by sector basis – rather than a blanket approach - wants the government to swing behind the move to improve the UK’s low ranking among European countries.Full-time employees in the UK – which make up 74% of the workforce – work longer hours than full-time employees in all other EU countries except Greece and Austria. The EU average was 41.2 hours a week in 2018; the UK’s is 42.5. A four-day week would reduce those hours, but investment is also needed to ensure that productivity gains follow.
Developing economies need a fairer way to help them decarbonise	With the US president-elect Joe Biden’s incoming administration promising a fresh, rational approach to climate change, now is an ideal time to make the case for a World Carbon Bank that would transfer and coordinate aid and technical assistance to help developing countries decarbonise. The proposed Green New Deal in the US and the European commission’s European Green Deal have laudable environmental goals but are too inward-looking. When an entire building is burning, to concentrate firefighting resources on one floor would only delay, not prevent, its destruction.According to the International Energy Agency, almost all the net growth in carbon dioxide emissions over the next two decades will come from emerging markets. Although China recently pledged to achieve zero net emissions by 2060, it is sobering to consider that it accounts for half of the world’s coal output and half of its coal consumption.India, too, is highly dependent on its plentiful coal reserves, and will likely remain so despite strong advances in solar power. For all the fanfare accompanying the 2015 Paris climate agreement, the share of clean energy in global energy investment is still only about 34%, almost exactly the level five years ago. Wind and solar account for only 8% of global energy. The IEA estimates that allowing existing power plants to operate for the remainder of their expected lifespans in their current form would by itself cause global temperatures to rise by 1.7C relative to pre-industrial levels.Right now, the most widely discussed approach to encouraging developing economies to cut their CO2 emissions is a carbon border tax on imports from countries without adequate carbon-pricing systems. The EU is considering such a measure and the Climate Leadership Council (whose members include the incoming US Treasury secretary Janet Yellen) also has advocated it.Economists almost universally favour carbon taxes (Europe’s carbon-pricing system is a clumsier version) so that producers and consumers take account of how their actions affect the global commons. A border-tax adjustment is aimed at prodding developing economies to introduce their own carbon taxes. The policy is conceptually sound but is too static and difficult to implement.Developing economies have neither the resources nor the technology to transform themselves overnightFor starters, developing economies have neither the resources nor the technology to transform themselves overnight. Part of the reason advanced economies have been able to mitigate their CO2 emissions is that global manufacturing has migrated to emerging markets that have invested heavily in energy.The average age of coal plants in Asia is 12 years, compared with 43 years in advanced economies. Given that the lifespan of a coal plant is about 50 years, and coal is one of the few natural resources that China and India possess in abundance, the cost to developing Asia of decommissioning its coal plants is huge. And then there is Africa, where the number of people lacking access to electricity has risen during the Covid-19 pandemic, to almost 600 million.The gap between the developing world’s ability to deal with climate change and the ambitious plans being discussed in advanced economies is just another example of the huge disparity in wealth and resources between the global north and the global south. In response to the coronavirus crisis, for example, advanced economies marshalled fiscal and credit support in 2020 averaging over 16% of GDP, compared with 6% in emerging markets and 2% in developing economies, according to the International Monetary Fund. And this wide gap does not take into account the potential for pandemic-related debt build-ups to morph into a full-blown developing-country debt crisis over the next couple of years, making decarbonisation even more difficult.Global carbon pricing is an essential part of any long-term solution to the climate crisis but advanced economies need to provide the developing world with a carrot and not just a stick. This should come in the form of highly concessional financing, combined with technical expertise and sharing of best practices – all guided by a World Carbon Bank.The IMF, the World Bank and regional development banks have an important role to play but their mandates are too diffuse for them to deal effectively with the climate challenge on their own. Meanwhile, those who think that government-to-government assistance should not play any role in climate solutions need to bear in mind that state-owned firms, which are not terribly responsive to economic incentives, increasingly dominate the global coal industry.Is it too optimistic to think that inwardly focused advanced economies will ever be willing to earmark large amounts of aid – at least $100bn to $200bn a year – to help the developing world meet climate goals? The response to the Covid-19 crisis so far offers little encouragement; the G20’s Debt Service Suspension Initiative has delivered a few billion dollars of relief to 40 very poor countries but that pales in comparison to the trillions that rich countries have spent on their own citizens. An enhanced carbon tax or pricing regime could be one source of sustainable funding over the longer term but the problem is too urgent to wait for this to fall into place.The goal of achieving zero net CO2 emissions by 2050, which the EU has adopted and the US is likely to do soon, is praiseworthy. But not-in-my-backyard, or nimby, environmentalism is no way to solve a global problem.• Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard University and was the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund from 2001 to 2003.© Project Syndicate
Dow Jones, Nasdaq hit record highs after service sector rebound – as it happened	On Wall Street, the Dow Jones and tech-heavy Nasdaq have surged to fresh record highs after the stronger-than-expected ISM service sector survey. The Dow rose through the 31,000 mark to 31,081, a gain of 0.8%, and the Nasdaq climbed 2.1% to 13,009.Investors around the world were cheered by confirmation that Democrats have taken control of the US Senate after two crucial wins in elections in Georgia. This prompted the US investment bank Goldman Sachs to upgrade its US growth forecasts, on the assumption of a bigger US stimulus package. Calm returned on Capitol Hill and Joe Biden’s election as the next US president was certified hours after hundreds of Donald Trump supporters stormed the Capitol.In London, the FTSE 100 index has turned positive again, trading 0.19% higher at 6,854. Germany’s Dax is up 0.71%, France’s CAC is 0.83% ahead and Italy’s FTSE MiB has gained 0.27%.The UK construction sector enjoyed a rebound at the end of 2020, boosted by a sharp rise in housebuilding, according to an IHS Markit/CIPS survey, while in the eurozone, construction activity declined for a 10th month.Thank you for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow. Stay safe! - JKAndrew Hunter, senior US economist at Capital Economics, is somewhat sceptical, saying the unexpected rebound in the ISM services index in December is hard to square with other evidence that shows the second wave of virus cases adn restrictions is starting to weigh more heavily on the economy, particularly services.Like the manufacturing survey released earlier this week, the headline services reading received an artificial boost from a jump in the supplier deliveries component, which reflects virus-related disruption rather than stronger demand. The employment index, which fell to 48.2 from 51.5, was the only one to suggest the virus is taking its toll, and lends some support to our forecast that the employment report due tomorrow will show non-farm payrolls falling by 100,000 in December.While both of last month’s ISM surveys have been much better than expected, we already know that real consumption fell in November and the latest high-frequency data point to a further decline in December. The recent fiscal stimulus, with the promise of more to come following the Democrats’ Senate victories, should help drive a rapid economic recovery from the middle of this year once the vaccine rollout reaches critical mass. But with the current spread of the virus showing few signs of slowing, the economy still looks set for a bumpy few months in the meantime.The ISM Service sector report put in for a smart rebound. The 57.2 figure came instead of a 1.3 point slip expected. Favorable for US economic outlook, but I don't think that is where our attention is at the moment: pic.twitter.com/qoStPREdIrUS ISM Non-Mfg. PMI Full Report Read Here.https://t.co/oXE1MQxdJc pic.twitter.com/dHgrhPz5neUS stocks have extended gains, driving the Dow Jones and the tech-heavy Nasdaq to fresh record highs, after the stronger-than-expected non-manufacturing survey from the Institute of Supply Management.It showed activity in the US service sector picked up in December, with the main reading rising to 57.2 from 55.9, better than expected.US ISM Non-Mfg PMI Dec: 57.2 (est 54.6; prev 55.9)- Business Activity: 59.4 (est 55.0; prev 58.0)- Employment Index: 48.2 (prev 51.5)- New Orders Index: 58.5 (prev 57.2)- Prices Paid: 54.8 (prev 66.1)Wall Street has just opened, and US stocks are up!Wall Street is expected to open higher as markets are hopeful that a Democrat-controlled Senate will pass more economic stimulus measures. US Congress certified Joe Biden’s election victory, hours after hundreds of Donald Trump’s supporters stormed the Capitol and halted the process.Dow Jones futures are up 117 points, or 0.38%, while S&P futures are 21.5 points ahead, a 0.57% gain, and Nasdaq futures rose 104.5 points, or 0.83%.In London, the FTSE 100 index has lost some 31 points or 0.46% to 6,8120 amid profit-taking on banking stocks. Germany’s Dax is 0.38% ahead while France’s CAC has gained 0.41% and Italy’s FTSE MiB is flat.Separate US trade data show the country’s trade deficit rose more than expected to $68.1bn in November from $63.1bn in October. The deficit with China was little changed at $30.68bn.The number of Americans filing first-time claims for jobless benefits unexpectedly fell last week – but stayed very high as the coronavirus pandemic rages on. Initial claims for state unemployment benefits were 787,000 in the week to 2 January compared to 790,000 the previous week, the Labor Department said. Economists had forecast 800,000 applications in the latest week.The figures come ahead of the closely watched non-farm payrolls data on Friday. Wall Street economists are forecasting the creation of 71,000 jobs (compared with 245,000 in November), which would be the smallest increase since the jobs recovery started in May, and mean the economy recouped 12.m of the 22.2m jobs lost in March and April.Covid-19 cases in the US have risen to more than 21 million, and the death toll exceeds 352,000, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.National Express is to suspend its entire network of coach services across the UK from Monday due to the latest Covid-19 travel restrictions, writes the Guardian’s transport correspondent Gwyn Topham.The company, a major provider of timetabled coach routes, said it would be halting all services until March.Chris Hardy, managing director of National Express UK Coach, said: We have been providing an important service for essential travel needs. However, with tighter restrictions and passenger numbers falling, it is no longer appropriate to do this.All journeys until Sunday night will run as planned to ensure that no passengers making essential journeys are stranded, National Express said, while customers whose travel has been cancelled will be contacted for free rebooking or full refunds.And here is our full Ryanair story:On the vaccine front: the rollout of coronavirus vaccines in Britain is being limited by the supply of jabs. The UK government it is working with the drugmakers Pfizer and AstraZeneca to increase supplies of their coronavirus vaccines, the health secretary Matt Hancock has said. He told broadcasters:The rate limiting step is the supply of vaccine, and we’re working with the companies, both Pfizer and of course AstraZeneca, to increase the supply.The manufacturers are doing a brilliant job, and they’re delivering to the schedule that’s agreed, but that schedule is the amount of vaccine that we have... we expect to see that amount of vaccine being delivered going up.His comments came as doctor’s surgeries started administering the vaccine developed by Oxford University and AstraZeneca, as part of a herculean effort to vaccinate the most vulnerable within six weeks. More than 1.3m people in the UK have received one shot of the Pfizer/BioNTech or the AstraZeneca/Oxford University so far. They require two doses.The government must ramp up its vaccination programme to 2m a week to hit its target.
What happened at the Capitol was an attempted coup. Call it that	On Wednesday, a coup attempt was led by the president of the United States. A rightwing mob attempted the coup in the form of a violent riot that stormed the Capitol building. They disrupted the proceedings that would have completed the recognition of the election of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Those proceedings had been disrupted earlier by elected officials bringing forth bad-faith claims that the election was not legitimate and should instead produce a continuation of Trump’s presidency. This too was a coup attempt, an effort to violate the constitution and override the will of the voters in this election. Inside and outside were two faces of the same thing, and both were fomented by the leaders of the Republican party and by the US president. The mob outside would not exist without the politicians inside. Those insiders will make noises of horror and repudiation, but they own this.Had Mitch McConnell and other Republican leaders recognized the legitimate winner of the election in early November, had there been no challenge to a legitimate election from inside the government, there would have been no mob. Having failed to suppress enough votes to guarantee a Republican presidential victory, the Republican party and the Trump administration decided to try to suppress them retroactively. Trump invited the mob and whipped it up for months and set it off today, as surely as if he’d lit a bomb’s fuse.I call it a coup attempt because, though I assume it will not prevent the Biden presidency, it certainly intended to, and is part of a campaign to delegitimize and thereby weaken the incoming administration. It was a long time coming, building up for years with white rage, especially white male rage fuelled by everyone from Trump himself to the National Rifle Association, Fox News and the various rightwing pundits, the Republican party, the various faces of white supremacy, and far-right groups such as the Proud Boys. It is a rage against the fact that other people might be equal under the law, that women and people of color might also govern as power begins to be distributed more equally, the same rage that attempted to delegitimize a black president with birtherism and obstruction. It is a rage against equality.Democracy is a set of agreements to make decisions together and respect the outcome whether you like them or not. The kind of violence we saw on Capitol Hill is authoritarian, a way to try to force other people to submit to the will of the perpetrators. This violence comes from the white men who were long the only people with power in this country imagining themselves as marginalized and oppressed outsiders because others might also have power and a voice. We saw these kind of men last summer, when they invaded the Michigan capital while carrying semiautomatic rifles and saw them again when a handful of them were arrested for a plot to kidnap Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer. We saw them in racist shootings from the Texas border to a Pennsylvania synagogue.This coup attempt was built by the more and more uninhibited ideology of violence we have seen again and again, in the mass shootings that became a norm in 21st-century America, the fetishization of guns and gun rights that made the killing machines and the death they inflict far more common, so that death by gun recently overtook death by car as a leading American way to die.As I write, I hear a Republican leader on TV say “Remember we are the party of law and order,” and, of course, the riot going on in the Capitol is technically lawless, but “law and order” as a rightwing slogan means that they are the law and they impose their version of order. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I change them at will and punish those who don’t obey, or, if I feel like it, those who do because I can. Political scientist Frank Wilhoit once said: “Conservatism consists of exactly one proposition … There must be in-groups whom the law protects but does not bind, alongside out-groups whom the law binds but does not protect.” They are demonstrating that nothing binds them and that they expect to have whatever they want. Entitlement is too demure a word for this.Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I punish those who don’t obeyWhat is at stake in America today is the outcome of an election. But it’s also the rule of law and the rights of voters. And in the end it’s also about the authority of facts and evidence and history and science, that no one has the right to override those things for personal gain. Trump’s position all along has been that he in particular has that right. Today it came to a head and became a crisis as a mob sabotaged a constitutionally mandated procedure for the peaceful transition of power. This was always going to happen because Trump’s power was always going to be finite in reach and duration under the law, and because he wants that power to be infinite, he was always at war with the law, and he always had a volunteer army willing to help him take it. Today they acted like an army, a hostile occupying force in the nation’s capital. This is what he wanted and this is what he orchestrated and this is what we got.Trump was the most prolific public liar America has ever seen, and his lies were an essential part of his authoritarianism, a refusal to be bound by facts, even the facts of what he said or did the day before. He demanded a parallel narrative in which he won the election and laid the groundwork long before to claim, if he lost, that it was illegitimate, as he did in 2016. In a recorded video on Wednesday, Trump said to the crowd “We love you” as he told them to go home but also reasserted that the election was stolen, which is why they’re there in the first place. Ivanka Trump apparently deleted a tweet in which she called them “American patriots”.The Trumps and their loyalists in office will disavow the worst of what happened and pretend to be surprised by it and continue feeding it. Conversation about what’s been happening over the past several months has often bought into the false binary that either we have a successful coup, in which they steal the election, or we have a failed coup, but there is something insidious in-between: the delegitimization of the democratic process and the incoming administration. In this in-between state, Trump supporters continue to regard their leader and themselves as above the law and entitled to enforce it however they see fit, on the basis of whatever facts they most enjoy having. They are building a separate reality and appear to wish for a shadow government to beleaguer and undermine the legitimate one. Today, we’ve seen it in action.Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist
How a mob of Trump supporters stormed the Capitol – visual guide	11.50am Donald Trump addresses a crowd of thousands of supporters whom he has encouraged to come to Washington on the day of the planned congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory in November’s presidential election.Speaking at the Ellipse, a park between the Mall and the White House, Trump incites the crowd, including members of far-right groups, with rambling and baseless claims of a stolen election. Trump encourages them to march to the Capitol, where Congress is sitting, to protest.Trump says he will accompany the march, but as it sets off he returns to the White House to watch events unfold on television.12.15pm Members of the crowd, including some wearing body armour and helmets, begin peeling away from the park, walking the kilometre or so down Pennsylvania Avenue towards the Capitol.As Congress gathers to hear challenges to the certification of the election result, the mob topples barricades to the west of the Capitol’s grounds, pushes past Capitol police, clambers over a low wall and heads for the building itself.Inside the building, at about 1pm, the vice-president, Mike Pence, indicates that he will not follow Trump’s demand to throw out state votes. Within minutes, the crowd outside starts scuffling with officers on the Capitol steps.Pushing through the remaining thin line of police, some rioters break into the building through the front door.1.26pm The mob is now inside the Capitol building. At one end is the Senate chamber, at the other, the House of Representatives, with the Rotunda in the middle.As rioters run amok through the Capitol, at times fighting with police, other parts of the congressional campus are locked down, including outlying office buildings. By 1.33pm C-Span is reporting that rioters are in Statuary Hall. At 1.40pm the DC mayor, Muriel Bowser, announces a citywide curfew from 6pm.Police lock the doors of the House chamber, barricading one entrance and issuing protective “escape hoods”.I'm safe. We've been equipped with escape hoods and we're being moved through the Capitol. pic.twitter.com/8YRX9Z3UToInside the House chamber, security officers draw their guns and people rush for cover after rioters break the windows on the chamber’s door.Fearing for the safety of those inside, police now concentrate on evacuating staff and lawmakers, clearing a path through the corridors to escort them to safety. Pence is rushed to a safe place as others hide in their offices or in one of the canteens.At about 2.10pm, another police line is breached and more rioters scale the walls on the west side of the building. At some point yet more enter through a door on the east side.At 2.44pm reports begin to emerge that shots have been fired inside the Capitol. It later emerges that a female Trump supporter who had joined the mob has been fatally injured. Three other people will die of “medical emergencies” during the riot.At 3pm footage emerges of rioters on the floor of the Senate chamber and at its dais.They are also pictured in lawmakers’ offices, including that of the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi. There is widespread looting.2-6pm As rioters mill around outside the Capitol, taking selfies and giving interviews, inside the building – largely out of sight of the cameras – heavily armed police reinforcements gradually begin regaining control of the complex using pepper spray, flash-bangs and making arrests.While Trump reportedly resists deploying the National Guard, around 1,000 Guard members in DC are mobilised, and Maryland and Virginia also offer to send reinforcements. Trump belatedly announces that he has authorised use of the National Guard.At 4.10pm Joe Biden appears on national television to denounce the “mob” and call on Trump to step up and end the “siege”. When Trump does issue a video statement around half an hour later, he continues to falsely assert that the election was stolen, and showers praise on the rioters. He does, however, call for them to go home.At 5.50pm officials declare the Capitol complex is “secure” over the congressional address system and a four-hour occupation is at last brought to an end by heavily armed officers. Lawmakers applaud.As the afternoon turns to evening and condemnation of Trump’s role in inciting the riot mounts, some rioters begin to drift away. Social media companies, concerned about the prospect of more violence egged on by Trump, freeze his social media accounts.The moment of worst danger appears to be over.At 8pm Congress reconvenes to resume counting the electoral college votes. Multiple Republican senators reverse course and now say they will not object to congressional certification of Biden’s election victory.
Donald Trump suspended from Facebook indefinitely, says Mark Zuckerberg	Donald Trump will be suspended from Facebook and Instagram indefinitely and at least until the end of his time in office, Mark Zuckerberg has said, as a consequence of his support for the rioters who stormed the US Capitol on Wednesday.The US president was initially suspended from the social network for just 24 hours, as a result of two posts shared to the platform in which he appeared to praise the actions of the rioters.In a post to Facebook on Thursday Zuckerberg said the suspension would last much longer. “The shocking events of the last 24 hours clearly demonstrate that President Donald Trump intends to use his remaining time in office to undermine the peaceful and lawful transition of power to his elected successor, Joe Biden,” Facebook’s chief executive wrote.“We believe the risks of allowing the President to continue to use our service during this period are simply too great. Therefore, we are extending the block we have placed on his Facebook and Instagram accounts indefinitely and for at least the next two weeks until the peaceful transition of power is complete.”The news of the indefinite suspension sparked joy inside the company, where Zuckerberg’s note was cross-posted to Facebook’s internal message board. In comments posted by employees, most praised the decision – a sentiment repeated externally. “I’m not always proud to work at Facebook, but today I am,” wrote Jake Blakeley, an employee of Oculus, the company’s VR division. “This was a strong decision.” And former Facebooker Mary Minno Ioannidis, who now works at Google, said: “This is an incredibly courageous step by the company,” .In private, however, some questioned the timing, noting that it came the day after the Democrats seized control of the Senate, after Congress certified the electoral votes for Biden, and after Trump’s deputy chief of staff Dan Scavino committed to an “orderly transition of power”.Senator Mark Warner, a Democrat from Virginia, supported the move, but said it was far too late. Warner, a long-time critic of Facebook, told the Guardian: “These isolated actions are both too late and not nearly enough. These platforms have served as core organising infrastructure for violent, far-right groups and militia movements for several years now – helping them to recruit, organise, coordinate and in many cases (particularly with respect to YouTube) generate profits from their violent, extremist content.”There was also some unexpected opposition to the ban: Edward Snowden, the NSA whistleblower, tweeted that Facebook had “officially silence[d] the President of the United States. For better or worse, this will be remembered as a turning point in the battle for control over digital speech.”The development came after Trump’s 12-hour ban from Twitter ended at 7am Washington time. Trump did not immediately return to the social network. A few hours earlierScavino, had shared on his behalf a short statement committing to that “orderly transition” – albeit maintaining that he “totally disagrees with the outcome of the election”.The initial suspensions, the first the president had faced in his four-year term of office, were derided by many as not being severe enough for the harm inflicted by Trump’s posts, which appeared to support and encourage the far-right mob that stormed the US Capitol building.“Facebook, Twitter and YouTube must terminate Donald Trump’s social media accounts,” said Eric Naing, the media relations officer for American civil liberties group Muslim Advocates. “After today’s mob violence inside the US Capitol, it is clear that the president’s social media accounts are the world’s most prominent organising tool for violent white nationalists. For years, social media companies have done little or nothing at all while President Trump used their platforms to foment violence, spread hate and put people’s lives in danger – all in clear violation of the companies’ policies.”The comedian Sacha Baron Cohen added his voice to the demands, tweeting: “Facebook and Twitter have spread Trump’s lies and hate and helped radicalize the extremists who attacked the Capitol. Suspending Trump for a few hours is NOT ENOUGH!” He added the hashtag #BanTrumpSaveDemocracy.Calls to go further than simply labelling or restricting posts also had some unlikely supporters. Alex Stamos, the former head of information security at Facebook, now a Stanford professor working on technology and civil liberties issues, said the events of Wednesday should help tech companies realise a line had been crossed.“Twitter and Facebook have to cut him off,” Stamos tweeted. “There are no legitimate equities left and labelling won’t do it. The last reason to keep Trump’s account up was the possibility that he would try to put the genie back in the bottle but as many expected, that is impossible for him.“There will always be the alt-sites and peer-to-peer, but at least the damage he does would be more contained.”If Trump does continue to violate Twitter rules to the point of being banned from the site, a community of alternative social networks already exists to provide him with an alternative platform.On Parler, a Twitter clone built to allow users to “speak freely” and populated largely by the far right, a new account claiming to be the president gained more than 13,000 followers in a matter of hours before being taken private on the website.The president already has a “verified account” on another social network, Gab, with a similar focus, but that account is currently no more than a shell that reposts tweets from Twitter. It is not clear whether it is run by the president’s team or Gab itself.
World leaders react with horror to 'disgraceful' storming of US Capitol	World leaders have reacted with horror to the chaos that has consumed Washington, describing Wednesday’s insurrectionist attempt on the US Capitol building as “disgraceful”, “pitiful”, and “shocking”.Prime ministers and presidents around the world urged US president Donald Trump and his supporters to accept the result of November’s presidential election. President-elect Joe Biden’s administration is set to be inaugurated in 14 days.The US Congress on Thursday certified Biden as the next president, while a statement from Trump promised an “orderly transition” to a new administration even though “I totally disagree with the outcome of the election, and the facts bear me out.”“A fundamental rule of democracy is that, after elections, there are winners and losers,” said Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel. “Both have to play their role with decency and responsibility so that democracy itself remains the winner.”Merkel said Trump had “not conceded his defeat since November, and that has prepared the atmosphere in which such violent events are possible”. Germany’s foreign minister Heiko Maas urged the president and his supporters to “finally accept the decision of the American voters and stop trampling democracy”.The German president, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, denounced the scenes as “the result of lies and yet more lies, of division and contempt for democracy, of hatred and rabble-rousing, including from the very highest level”.France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, confirmed his country’s “friendship and faith” to the US, adding that what had happened in Washington was “not America, definitely. We believe in the strength of our democracies, we believe in the strength of American democracy.”We believe in democracy.#WeAreOne pic.twitter.com/dj3hs66KKnThe French foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian condemned the violence perpetrated against American public institutions as “a grave attack on democracy”, saying: “I condemn it. The will and the vote of the American people must be respected.”Nato secretary general and former Norwegian prime minister Jens Stoltenberg tweeted that the outcome of the election “must be respected”, warning that “the world is watching”, while Sweden’s premier Stefan Lofven said Trump and “many members of Congress bear significant responsibility for what’s taking place”.Charles Michel, the president of the European council, tweeted: “The US Congress is a temple of democracy. To witness tonight’s scenes in Washington DC is a shock. We trust the US to ensure a peaceful transfer of power to Joe Biden.”In protests described as the greatest threat to US democracy since the civil war, Trump loyalists stormed the the Capitol building seeking to block the certification of the presidential election held in November, temporarily halting the vote.Ireland’s foreign minister, Simon Coveney, said the extraordinary scenes “must be called out for what it is: a deliberate assault on Democracy by a sitting President & his supporters, attempting to overturn a free & fair election”.In Britain, Prime Minister Boris Johnson condemned the “disgraceful scenes” in the US Congress. “The United States stands for democracy around the world and it is now vital that there should be a peaceful and orderly transfer of power,” he added.The UK foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, tweeted: “The US rightly takes great pride in its democracy, and there can be no justification for these violent attempts to frustrate the lawful and proper transition of power.”The disquiet reached allies on the other side of the globe. Australia’s prime minister Scott Morrison stopped short of criticising Trump but condemned the violence and “look[ed] forward to a peaceful transfer of government to the newly elected administration in the great American democratic tradition”.New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said what was happening “is wrong. Democracy — the right of people to exercise a vote, have their voice heard and then have that decision upheld peacefully — should never be undone by a mob.”Others called for more drastic measures, as representatives drew up articles of impeachment against Trump for the second time in his presidency.Poland’s former foreign minister Radek Sikorski tweeted: “The US Cabinet should immediately, under the 25th Amendment of the US constitution, declare @realDonaldTrump insane and terminate his presidency.”Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said the country was “concerned and we’re following the situation minute by minute. I think the American democratic institutions are strong, and hopefully everything will return to normal shortly.”Japan’s top government spokesman, Katsunobu Kato, said the Japanese government country was “hoping for a peaceful transfer of power” in the US.The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, said: “Distressed to see rioting and violence in Washington DC. Orderly and peaceful transfer of power must continue. The democratic process cannot be subverted through unlawful protests.”Close Trump allies such as Israel, meanwhile, voiced concern that the government’s fawning over Trump during the past four years might severely damage its relationship with Washington after Wednesday’s events.Prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu described the “rampage at the Capitol” as “a disgraceful act and it must be vigorously condemned”. But the Times of Israel news website wrote that Israelis were “watching in horror” at the pro-Trump assault.Some of their worries were “prompted by the extent to which our leadership has partnered so closely with a president who is ending his term so shamefully” it said. Michael Oren, a former Israeli ambassador to the US, told local radio the storming of the Capitol was “very worrying for the State of Israel”.Not everyone, however, condemned the actions of the mob. “American democracy is obviously limping on both feet ... This, alas, is actually the bottom,” said Konstantin Kosachev, head of the foreign affairs committee in Russia’s upper house. “I say this without a shadow of gloating. America no longer charts a course and therefore has lost all rights to set it — and even more so, to impose it on others.”Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said drew attention to “the fact that the electoral system in the US is archaic; it does not meet modern democratic standards, creating opportunities for numerous violations”.Brazil’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, another ally of Trump’s, reiterated baseless allegations of US election fraud. Asked by a supporter for his views on the chaotic scenes in Washington, Bolsonaro said: “I followed everything today. You know I’m connected to Trump, right? So you already know my answer.”“There were lot of reports of fraud, a lot of reports of fraud,” he added, in a video posted on social media, without providing evidence.An Iraqi MP, Hakim al-Zamili, said the world had considered America “as a successful model of democracy, but we have now witnessed the chaos, the assault against congress members and the looting. Same as third-world countries!”In China, the state-run Global Times, a mouthpiece for the Chinese communist party, sought to equate Hong Kong’s pro-democracy protesters with those in the US seeking to subvert the democratic process, ignoring their diametrically opposed motivations.The paper quoted unnamed social media commenters gleefully revelling in the scenes, describing it as “karma”, “revenge”, and “deserved”. Venezuela’s authoritarian government – which Trump has spent the last two years unsuccessfully trying to topple – struggled to conceal its glee at the unrest..@SpeakerPelosi once referred to the Hong Kong riots as "a beautiful sight to behold" — it remains yet to be seen whether she will say the same about the recent developments in Capitol Hill. pic.twitter.com/91iXDzYpcO“The US is suffering exactly what it has caused in other countries with its aggressive policies,” the foreign ministry said in a statement. “Venezuela hopes these violent events will soon cease and that the US people will finally be able to find a new path towards stability and social justice.”
Trump's former attorney general Bill Barr says president 'orchestrated' Capitol riot – live	The national security adviser, Robert O’Brien, confirmed that his deputy had resigned following the violence at the Capitol yesterday.Reports of Matt Pottinger’s resignation emerged yesterday, hours after a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol, forcing lawmakers to evacuate.1/2 Matt Pottinger has served the nation and the Administration with distinction for the past four years. His work lead to a great awakening in our country and around the world to the danger posed by the Chinese Communist Party.“Matt Pottinger has served the nation and the Administration with distinction for the past four years. His work lead to a great awakening in our country and around the world to the danger posed by the Chinese Communist Party,” O’Brien said in a statement.“Asking Matt Pottinger to serve as my deputy was my first act as NSA and it turned out to be one of my best decisions. As he heads West to rejoin his family in beautiful Utah, Matt does so with my appreciation for a job well done and with my enduring friendship.”Several senior administration officials, including former acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney, have announced their resignations since the violence yesterday.Among the president’s many critics, the resignations have been generally met with the question, “What took you so long?”It appears the White House notified the Senate yesterday that it was withdrawing Chad Wolf’s nomination to lead the department of homeland security.Deleting a tweet about Chad Wolf. The White House says the withdrawal of his nomination as DHS secretary was sent yesterday (it was an outstanding nomination and Senate wasn’t going to move on it) and it’s unrelated to his statement today calling on Trump to condemn violence.The White House sent a statement this morning announcing the withdrawal, hours after Wolf released a statement calling on Donald Trump to condemn the violence, prompting speculation that the acting DHS secretary was being punished for his comments.The chief of Capitol Police has released a statement pledging that the agency will conduct a “thorough review” of how a violent mob was able to breach the Capitol yesterday.“The violent attack on the US Capitol was unlike any I have ever experienced in my 30 years in law enforcement here in Washington DC,” Steven Sund said in the statement.“The USCP had a robust plan established to address anticipated first amendment activities. But make no mistake – these mass riots were not first amendment activities; they were criminal riotous behavior. The actions of the USCP officers were heroic given the situation they faced, and I continue to have tremendous respect in the professionalism and dedication of the women and men of the United States Capitol Police.”Law enforcement officials have been criticized for not appropriately planning for the pro-Trump march yesterday, which ultimately resulted in the storming of the Capitol.The National Guard was also not deployed to the Capitol until after it was already breached, an oversight that has attracted intense criticism. The DC police chief said 68 people had been arrested so far in connection to the storming of the Capitol yesterday.D.C. Police Chief Robert Contee says 68 people arrested so far for the Capitol siege, and department is working "to identify and hold each and every one of the violent mob accountable." Police are working with local businesses and FBI, and asking for tips to identify rioters pic.twitter.com/5Mp2hLsOlVThe police chief, Robert Contee, said law enforcement officials are still working to collect information about other people who joined the pro-Trump mob, which could result in additional arrests.It’s worth noting that more than 400 people were arrested in Washington last summer amid the protests over the police killing of George Floyd.Contee also confirmed that four people died amid the violence yesterday, and three of those deaths have been attributed to medical emergencies.The White House has withdrawn Chad Wolf’s nomination to lead the department of homeland security, hours after the acting DHS secretary issued a statement calling on Donald Trump to condemn yesterday’s violence.The White House announced in a statement this morning that it had notified the Senate it was withdrawing Wolf’s nomination.My full statement condemning violence at the U.S. Capitol. pic.twitter.com/N9vlAUQILAThe announcement came hours after Wolf, who has led the department in an acting capacity since November 2019, issued a statement condemning the violent storming of the Capitol.“This is unacceptable,” Wolf said. “These violent actions are unconscionable, and I implore the President and all elected officials to strongly condemn the violence that took place yesterday.”Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer has released a statement saying Donald Trump should be removed from office after his actions yesterday, as a mob stormed the Capitol.“What happened at the US Capitol yesterday was an insurrection against the United States, incited by the president. This president should not hold office one day longer,” Schumer said in a statement.“The quickest and most effective way – it can be done today – to remove this president from office would be for the vice-president to immediately invoke the 25th amendment. If the vice-president and the cabinet refuse to stand up, Congress should reconvene to impeach the president.”A Republican congressman, Adam Kinzinger, also called for invoking the 25th amendment today, and some progressive lawmakers, including congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez have said Trump should be impeached (again).Donald Trump will also be indefinitely suspended from Instagram, which is owned by Facebook.The US president was initially suspended from Facebook for just 24 hours, as a result of two posts shared to the platform in which he appeared to praise the actions of the rioters who stormed the Capitol yesterday.Trump’s 12-hour ban from Twitter ended at 7am ET. Trump did not immediately return to the social network. A few hours earlier, his deputy chief of staff, Dan Scavino, had shared on his behalf a short statement committing to an “orderly transition” of power – albeit maintaining that he “totally disagrees with the outcome of the election”.The initial suspensions, the first the president had faced in his four-year term of office, were derided by many as not being severe enough for the harm inflicted by Trump’s posts.Mark Zuckerberg, the CEO of Facebook, has announced that Donald Trump’s account will be suspended indefinitely and for at least the next two weeks, until he leaves office.We believe the risks of allowing President Trump to continue to use our service during this period are simply too great, so we are extending the block we have placed on his Facebook and Instagram accounts indefinitely and for at least the next two weeks. pic.twitter.com/JkyGOTYB1Z“The shocking events of the last 24 hours clearly demonstrate that President Donald Trump intends to use his remaining time in office to undermine the peaceful and lawful transition of power to his elected successor, Joe Biden,” Zuckerberg said in a post.“We believe the risks of allowing the President to continue to use our service during this period are simply too great. Therefore, we are extending the block we have placed on his Facebook and Instagram accounts indefinitely and for at least the next two weeks until the peaceful transition of power is complete.”Facebook initially suspended the president’s account yesterday, amid concerns that Trump’s comments about the storming of the Capitol would incite further violence.Facebook has been a powerful tool for the president and his campaign to reach supporters, and the social media giant’s broad reach has helped fuel Trump’s messages to voters. A Republican congressman is calling for the 25th amendment to be invoked, removing Donald Trump from office.Adam Kinzinger, a Republican of Illinois who has previously criticized the president, said the storming of the Capitol represented a “call to accountability.”It’s with a heavy heart I am calling for the sake of our Democracy that the 25th Amendment be invoked. My statement: pic.twitter.com/yVyQrYcjuD“It’s time to invoke the 25th amendment and to end this nightmare,” Kinzinger said in a video posted to his Twitter account. “Here’s the truth: The president caused this. The president is unfit, and the president is unwell, and the president must now relinquish control of the executive branch, voluntarily or involuntarily.”Invoking the 25th amendment would require Mike Pence and a majority of cabinet members to support removing the president from office, which seems quite unlikely given that many cabinet secretaries are Trump loyalists.William Barr, the former attorney general, released a scathing statement about Donald Trump’s behavior yesterday, as a mob stormed the US Capitol.Barr, who left office late last month, described the president’s conduct as a “betrayal of his office and supporters.”In a statement to the AP, Barr said that “orchestrating a mob to pressure Congress is inexcusable.” After a pro-Trump stormed the Capitol, forcing lawmakers to evacuate, the president praised his supporters as “very special” and told them, “We love you!”Trump also justified the mob’s actions yesterday by citing his baseless claims of widespread fraud in the presidential election, essentially blaming his opponents for the violence that left four dead.Twitter removed three of Trump’s tweets about the storming of the Capitol due to a “risk of violence.”The Guardian’s Peter Beaumont, Matt Fidler, Nikhita Chulani, Paul Scruton, Paul Torpey, Chris Watson and Finbarr Sheehy have put together a visual guide of yesterday’s events.It begins with Donald Trump encouraging a crowd of his supporters to march to the Capitol, shortly before the building was stormed by a mob, forcing lawmakers to evacuate.Sally Yates, the former deputy attorney general under Barack Obama, offered her congratulations to Merrick Garland about his nomination to lead the justice department.Congratulations to Judge Garland and the outstanding team nominated to lead DOJ.A highly respected jurist and dedicated public servant,Judge Garland will ensure that DOJ earns the trust of the people it serves.Under his leadership, the Justice Department will live up to its name.“Congratulations to Judge Garland and the outstanding team nominated to lead DOJ,” Yates said in a tweet. “A highly respected jurist and dedicated public servant, Judge Garland will ensure that DOJ earns the trust of the people it serves. Under his leadership, the Justice Department will live up to its name.”Yates was reportedly one of the top contenders to be nominated as attorney general, along with former senator Doug Jones, but Joe Biden ultimately selected Garland.Marco Rubio criticized Donald Trump and some of his Republican colleagues -- without naming them of course -- after a mob stormed the Capitol yesterday, amid the certification of Joe Biden’s victory.“Some misled you,” the Republican senator said in a tweet. “That the VP could reject ballots[.] That objections could pass or used as leverage to force an audit[.] They knew the truth but thought it was a great way to get attention & raise money[.]”Some misled you That the VP could reject ballots That objections could pass or used as leverage to force an audit They knew the truth but thought it was a great way to get attention & raise moneyRubio did not say who these “some” people were, but it is quite obvious he is referring to Trump and his colleagues who objected to the certification yesterday while citing the president’s baseless claims of widespread election fraud.Rubio did not support the objections, but he also did not issue any kind of criticism of the president or his colleagues until after violence struck the Capitol yesterday.Joe Biden will introduce some of his justice department nominees during his event today, the president-elect’s transition team said in a statement.Biden will introduce the following nominees:Barack Obama nominated Garland to the supreme court in 2015 after the death of Antonin Scalia, but Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell refused to consider the nomination.This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Martin Belam. Here’s what the blog is keeping an eye on today: Joe Biden will deliver remarks in Wilmington, Delaware, a day after a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol.The president-elect spoke briefly yesterday, denouncing the “insurrection” at the Capitol and calling on Donald Trump to demand an end to the “siege.”Biden’s remarks yesterday were originally supposed to focus on the economy, so his speech today may make up for that.The president-elect could also touch on the Georgia Senate elections, which Democrats swept, giving them control of the chamber. That’s still coming up later today, so stay tuned. Forewarned is forearmed, and Steve Benen writes at MSNBC this morning about an email that you can expect “from your weird relatives” in the near future blaming the left for the Capitol riot. He cites:Lou Dobbs and Rep. Mo Brooks, discussed the possibility of antifa instigators’ infiltrating the pro-Trump mob. And former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin made the same claim, telling Fox News host Martha MacCallum that it was unclear who was instigating the riots. “A lot of it is the antifa folks,” Palin said, citing “pictures” she had seen. Laura Ingraham, one of the channel’s primetime hosts, spent much of the hour of her show suggesting without evidence that the Trump protesters had been infiltrated by antifa.Benen finishes:After he incited the violent attack on the Capitol, Trump praised the rioters, offered a justification for their crimes. In a missive that Twitter soon after removed, the president referred to his supporters as “great patriots,” before adding, “Remember this day forever!”These were not the words of a man who was disappointed with an attack on his own country’s Capitol; these were the words of a man who approved of what he saw and was sympathetic to those who acted at his behest.Which makes the “antifa” talk that much more bewildering. The rioters are simultaneously patriots who did the right thing and secret leftists to be condemned? The mob is both a source of pride and an embarrassment?Read more here: The right’s new conspiracy theory: blame left for Capitol riot
Coronavirus UK: Covid cases and deaths today	Coronavirus has hit the UK hard, with the country recording more than 2m cases and 70,000 deaths linked to the disease.The government figures below include confirmed cases only – some people who have the disease are not tested.At the start of the pandemic, London bore the brunt of coronavirus’s impact. After that, the centre of the virus shifted northwards and to areas in Northern Ireland before rising again in London and the south-east.Everyday life in the UK has been subject to varying degrees of restriction since March, and various lockdowns currently apply in England, Scotland and Northern Ireland. These regulations are set by the legislative body in each nation so there are local differences. There may also be extra measures in place at local authority level.Details of the English lockdown are listed here, Scottish lockdown here, Welsh here and Northern Irish here. You can also search for your local area below.Cases in the UK first peaked in early April, before falling in late spring and summer. But they then increased again and passed the earlier peak in September, reaching record levels in December after a dip in November.The number of people in hospital with coronavirus rose sharply after records started at the end of March, peaking in April. That figure has now been rising again since September.Deaths were at their highest during the first peak of cases, with over 1,000 daily deaths seen on some days in April. They started to once again increase in October, following the earlier rise in cases.There have been more recorded cases in the second wave of the pandemic, and this can be partly attributed to increased testing. Many more tests were done in autumn than during the first wave in the spring.In March and April, there were relatively few tests available and these were given to people with severe symptoms – mainly in hospitals. Most people with milder symptoms were not tested, so these cases were not recorded, meaning the actual number is likely to have been much higher. Sir Patrick Vallance said the daily case number may have been over 100,000 on some days in the first wave.More tests were available during the second wave and the majority of people took tests in the community. This means that people with milder symptoms are now being tested and recorded in the official figures. The real number of cases will still be higher than the recorded count, but the testing will be picking up a greater proportion of the total.However, given Covid-19’s potential for exponential growth, the shape of the cases curve is critically important, and the effect of increased cases can be seen in the hospitalisation and mortality curves above.In the table below, you can find out the number of cases per 100,000 in your area, both for the last week and since the start of the pandemic.This data comes comes from Public Health England, working with devolved authorities in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland.Differences in data collection and publishing schedules may lead to temporary inconsistencies. 3 and 4 October cases totals include cases from previous days published late owing to a technical fault.The government figures for deaths that are used in this tracker incorporate any deaths that have occurred within 28 days of a positive test. This means that they they are able to quickly capture those deaths occurring in hospitals and care homes, both settings where testing is widespread.The ONS, along with its counterparts in Scotland and Northern Ireland, captures deaths data differently. They count all deaths where Covid is on the death certificate. About 90% of these deaths are directly due to Covid while it is a contributory factor in the remaining deaths.Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation as well as possible. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Covid kills half of Sussex care home's residents over Christmas	A care home in East Sussex has been devastated by Covid, losing half of all its residents to the disease over Christmas, fuelling fears the new, more transmissible virus variant sweeping the south-east of England is beginning to breach homes’ defences.Thirteen of 27 residents at Edendale Lodge care home in Crowhurst had died with confirmed or suspected Covid since 13 December, said the home operator’s managing director, Adam Hutchison, who also runs care homes in Kent.More than a third of the staff also tested positive during the outbreak in which residents died on Christmas Eve and Boxing Day. The latest death came on Monday this week.“It was an awful Christmas and terrible for the staff,” Hutchison said. “It is just unstoppable. We are sitting ducks.”Across England, Covid outbreaks in care homes are rising again, after months of far lower infection rates than in the spring as a result of control measures.On Tuesday, Essex county council banned all visits to care homes in its area, citing “the growing number of outbreaks in care homes and the difficulty in controlling these outbreaks”. The Kent Integrated Care Alliance, which represents care homes in its area, is also warning of deaths and care worker absences, emotional and mental exhaustion among care workers and a threat to the viability of care homes themselves.Many care homes are frustrated that vaccines are yet to be deployed to residents. Boris Johnson told parliament on Wednesday he wanted the programme to be accelerated and that 10% of care home residents and 14% of care home staff had so far received the vaccine.“That clearly needs to be stepped up,” the PM said.GPs were due to start taking the AstraZeneca vaccine to care homes from the second half of this week.Hutchison said several of the deceased residents in the home had been considered to be close to the end of their lives, but the virus took them months before they were likely to have died. Others were fitter.“One of our residents played the piano and I would speak to him when I went in,” he said .The outbreak was detected by routine swab testing. None of the 14 residents who tested positive had any symptoms when the results came back, Hutchison said. One of the 12 staff who tested positive was admitted to hospital but was recovering.The outbreak appears to have confounded the home’s infection control measures, including a ban on visits, apart from at windows, personal protective equipment for carers and no use of agency staff who operate between different homes and might spread the virus.“It’s hard for me to say how it got in,” said Hutchison. “Because of the protocols we were following, everything was there.”He said some residents had attended hospital appointments and that staff necessarily had lives outside of work. His company, Belmont Healthcare, operates four care homes and asks staff to declare if they have second jobs.Care home deaths across England rose steadily during December and at a slightly faster rate than deaths overall from Covid, official figures show. At the beginning of December, care homes in England recorded 440 people who died from Covid in a week, rising to 588 by the week before Christmas, according to the Office for National Statistics. While the figures are far higher than in the last week of September, when only 42 people died from Covid, they remain a fraction of the up to 2,700 care home residents registered as dying weekly from Covid at the pandemic’s first peak in April, when there was also less testing to identify cases.HC-One, the largest private operator of care homes in the UK, said on Tuesday that a third of its 330 care homes were facing outbreaks, but mostly with limited numbers of people infected and more staff than residents testing positive. It has fewer homes in the south-east than in the north and its outbreak rates have fallen over the last month.Across the UK, visits have been largely prohibited in care homes unless residents are close to the end of their lives or infection control screens or cubicles have been set up. Homes have also been provided with free PPE by the government and a network of care homes specialising in accepting Covid-positive discharges from hospitals to try and avoid seeding the virus among the most vulnerable has been set up. In the current lockdown, close-contact indoor visits are not allowed, with window or cubicle visits also banned during outbreaks.Hutchison said that as well as the human cost, he was concerned care homes affected by new outbreaks “will simply have to close down”.“What happens to those already in unviable care homes?” he said. “Where will those individuals go? More often than not into an NHS setting, putting further stress on that health service.”
Europe at tipping point with Covid running rampant, says WHO	Europe is at a tipping point in the course of the pandemic, the World Health Organization has said, warning that the coronavirus is spreading very fast across the continent and the arrival of a new variant has created an “alarming situation”.Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said that while the arrival of vaccines offered “new tools” to fight the virus, almost half the 53 countries in the region were reporting a seven-day incidence rate of more than 150 new cases per 100,000 people, while a quarter had recorded a more than 10% surge in cases over the past week.Kluge said countries rolling out the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine could be flexible on the gap between first and second doses, saying a balance should be struck between making the most of limited supplies and protecting as many people as possible.Some countries including Britain are seeking to counter low vaccine supplies by extending the gap between first and second doses to up to 12 weeks, and by considering lower volume doses of some shots.“It is important such a decision represents a safe compromise between the limited global production capacity at the moment, and the imperative for governments to protect as many people as possible while reducing the burden of any subsequent wave on health systems,” he said.Proposals to prolong the gap between first and second dose have generated fierce debate among scientists, with both Pfizer and BioNTech warning that they have no evidence their vaccine would continue to be protective if the second dose was given more than 21 days after the first.Siddhartha Datta, of the WHO’s vaccine-preventable diseases and immunisation unit, said the organisation acknowledged that some countries would face “exceptional circumstances”, but those choosing to prioritise first doses were “strongly recommended … to look into robust evidence” of the consequences.The European region recorded more than 580,000 deaths from Covid in 2020, while the 27 countries in the EuroMOMO excess mortality monitoring project reported a threefold increase in excess deaths compared with 2018 and a fivefold increase over 2019.Any signs of stabilisation or even decreased incidence in some countries “need to be taken with some caution” because the impact of the holiday period, with its family gatherings and relaxed physical distancing, was not yet known, Kluge said.More than 230 million people in the region were living in countries under full national lockdowns, he said, with more countries set to announce new measures in the coming week as the more contagious variant first detected in the UK raises increasing alarm.The mutation had been detected in 22 European countries, Kluge said, adding that while it seemed to produce no significant change in the disease itself – meaning it was “not more nor less dangerous” – its higher transmissibility was cause for concern.“It is our assessment it may, over time, replace other lineages, as seen in the UK and increasingly Denmark,” he said. Without increased control to slow its spread, there would be an increased impact on already struggling health systems.“This is an alarming situation,” he said. “For a short period of time, we need to do more than we have done and to intensify the public health and social measures to be certain we can flatten the steep vertical line in some countries.”Basic measures such as mask wearing, limiting social gatherings, physical distancing and hand washing, along with testing, tracing and quarantine, must be intensified “to bring down transmission, lift the strain on Covid-19 wards and save lives”.Kluge said progress on rolling out Covid vaccines was “varied but promising”, adding that the limited supply of jabs and increasing burden on hospitals meant health workers and at-risk groups “must be a priority” for vaccinations to avoid health systems collapsing.Catherine Smallwood, WHO Europe’s senior emergency officer, said that although studies were still ongoing, there was “no indication for the moment” of any impact of the new strain on the efficacy of vaccines.
Coronavirus live news: 1,070 new Covid-linked deaths in Germany; Europe exceeds 25m cases, reports say	PA staff photographer Victoria Jones has tweeted these pictures of nurses at work in the Intensive Care Unit of St George’s Hospital London in the UK. Nurses normally assigned to one patient are now looking after our at once, all while wearing full PPE. Nurses work in the Intensive Care Unit in St George's Hospital, London, where the number of ICU beds has been increased from 60 to 120, mostly for coronavirus. Nurses normally assigned to one patient are now dealing with up to four at once, whilst wearing full PPE #Covid19UK #NHS pic.twitter.com/pO51iiu4SgHealth authorities in Australia have cracked down on a number of wildly inaccurate rapid Covid-19 antibody test kits being pushed on to the Australian market, cancelling approvals, issuing fines and pledging to investigate one supplier marketing an unapproved device.Relatively little scrutiny was applied to the large volumes of rapid test kits that were rushed on to the Australian market in the pandemic’s early stages.The kits promised to detect antibodies and return results within 15 minutes, without the need for laboratory testing.The UK government said a further 1,162 people have died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 as of Thursday. This is the highest daily reported total since April 21 when 1,224 were recorded, the It brings the UK total to 78,508.The figures continue to be affected by a lag in the publication of recent data and will contain some deaths that took place over the Christmas and New Year period that have only just been reported.Separate figures published by the UK’s statistics agencies for deaths where Covid-19 has been mentioned on the death certificate, together with additional data on deaths that have occurred in recent days, show there have now been 94,000 deaths involving Covid-19 in the UK.The UK government also said that, as of 9am on Thursday, there had been a further 52,618 lab-confirmed cases of coronavirus in the UK.It brings the total number of cases in the UK to 2,889,419.Two drugs used to treat rheumatoid arthritis could help to save the lives of intensive care patients with severe Covid, researchers have found.Early results from the international trial previously suggested tocilizumab might improve outcomes for those with life-threatening coronavirus infections. However, other trials reported mixed results.Now further results from a larger group of patients not only confirm the drug brings benefits but reveal that another arthritis drug, sarilumab, appears to do the same, not only saving lives but cutting the length of time patients spent in intensive care.Prof Anthony Gordon, of Imperial College London, the UK’s chief investigator on the trial behind the findings, said he expected the drugs to be used in patients in the UK imminently. He said:My understanding is they will become available so that we can immediately start treating patients in the intensive care units with these drugs so that they can start having immediate effects.Italy reported 414 coronavirus-related deaths on Thursday against 548 the day before, the health ministry said, while the daily tally of new infections fell to 18,020 from 20,331.Reuters reports:Some 121,275 swab tests were carried out in the past day, the ministry said, against a previous 178,596.Italy has registered 77,291 COVID-19 deaths since its outbreak came to light on Feb. 21, the second highest toll in Europe and the sixth highest in the world. The country has also reported 2.220 million cases to date, the health ministry said.Patients in hospital with COVID-19 stood at 23,291 on Thursday, up 117 from the day before. There were 156 admissions to intensive care units, compared with 183 on Wednesday.The current number of intensive care patients rose by 16 to 2,587, reflecting those who died or were discharged after recovery.When Italy’s second wave of the epidemic was accelerating fast in the first half of November, hospital admissions were rising by about 1,000 per day, while intensive care occupancy was increasing by about 100 per dayKenya’s health minister says the country is expected to start receiving 24 million doses next month of the COVID-19 vaccine developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford University, as countries in sub-Saharan Africa begin to announce progress in obtaining the desperately needed vaccines.The Associated Press report:Mutahi Kagwe said on Wednesday that health workers and teachers will have priority for vaccinations in East Africa’s economic hub and that the shots will be voluntary.The doses are being obtained through the COVAX facility meant to ensure vaccines for lower-income countries, Dr. Patrick Amoth, director general of public health, told The Associated Press.Kenya has been participating in a small-scale trial of the AstraZeneca vaccine, which requires two doses administered weeks apart.The vaccine can be stored at what AstraZeneca has called “normal refrigerated conditions,” which is expected to help in parts of the African continent where poor infrastructure will challenge the mass rollout of doses.Kenya’s news came as South Africa on Thursday announced it will begin receiving 1.5 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine later this month, the first announced deal for COVID-19 doses in the country with more than 1 million confirmed infections.Kenya has had over 97,000 confirmed coronavirus cases in the country of more tan 50 million people.A recent surge in infections has eased, and schools reopened this week, but health workers in Kenya have expressed concern about the lack of support as some doctors and others die without being able to afford proper care. Doctors across the country held a brief strike last month over inadequate personal protective equipment and insurance.While some of Africa’s richer countries are now announcing vaccine deals — Morocco last month announced it had ordered 65 million doses from AstraZeneca and China’s Sinopharm — it’s not clear how long it will take for COVID-19 vaccines to reach countries on the 54-nation continent without the resources to strike their own agreements.The head of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has expressed concern that the coronavirus could become endemic in parts of Africa if it takes more than two or three years to vaccinate 60% of the continent’s population of some 1.3 billion people.Coronavirus cases in Europe has surpassed 25 million, according to a Reuters tally, with several countries reinstating or extending lockdowns as a resurgence in the pandemic threatens to overwhelm health services.Europe crosses 25 million COVID-19 cases, according to a Reuters tally pic.twitter.com/jabeZDIgcBReuters reports: Europe has recorded at least 25,016,506 cases and 559,863 deaths since the start of the pandemic, recently reporting over a million new cases about every four days. (With just a tenth of the world’s population, Europe remains the worst-affected region, with nearly 30% of global cases and deaths.In Britain Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced a strict new national lockdown on Tuesday, warning that a coronavirus variant first identified in the country was spreading so rapidly it risked overwhelming the healthcare system within 21 days.Germany, which is currently reporting the highest daily deaths in the region, with more than 600 deaths daily on a weekly average, extended its nationwide lockdown until the end of January.In Italy, restrictions imposed over the Christmas break were extended until Jan. 15, while in Greece the government imposed a strict lockdown from Jan. 3 to Jan. 11.The fresh outbreaks have prompted debates over how to roll-out vaccines across the region, with some countries considering joining Britain in vaccinating as many people as possible with a single dose.Countries in eastern Europe remain the worst affected by the virus, accounting for more than 30% of the region’s case load, according to a Reuters analysis.Russia, which was the first European country to report more than 3 million cases last month, ranks behind only India and Brazil as the most affected countries in the world.Slovakia has seen record numbers of new cases and hospitalizations in recent days, with more than 2,900 cases recorded on Tuesday.The head of the Irish health service has said there were early signs the spread of Covid-19 was being curtailed by the country’s lockdown, which began in late December and has since been tightened after a spike in infections.We are seeing “early signs of reducing numbers of cases, a reducing growth rate of the number of cases, and reducing number of contacts” that people report having in the days prior to diagnosis, the head of the health service executive Paul Reid told a news conference.The chief clinical officer Colm Henry said it was not yet clear whether the number of hospitalisations by mid-January would be closer to the health service’s optimistic scenario of 1,500 or the pessimistic scenario of 2,500, up from 1,022 today.Vaccine deliveries under the Covax facility coordinated by the World Health Organization to support lower-income countries could start this month, O’Brien has said.We need about $7bn in order to deliver enough vaccine to these countries through the end of 2021. The facility has already raised about $6bn of the $7bn.So the facility has access to over 2bn doses of vaccine. We will start to deliver those vaccines probably by the end of January, and if not, then certainly by early February and mid-February.The World Health Organization is reviewing vaccines from AstraZeneca and Chinese developers for possible emergency listing, its top immunisation and vaccination expert has said, following the United Nation’s health agency’s listing of a vaccine from Pfizer/ BioNTech on 31 December.Urging vaccine developers to submit data on promising candidates, Kate O’Brien told an online social media event:We are under review of some of the vaccines from China, for the AstraZeneca vaccine. We are in discussions and beginning processes with other vaccines.A vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech is 78% effective based on late-stage trial results in Brazil, Reuters reports.Citing a person familiar with the study, the news agency has said the shot is moving a step closer to regulatory approval in South America’s biggest country.The results, closely watched by countries counting on the vaccine to begin mass inoculations, come after Turkish researchers said in December that the vaccine showed 91.25% efficacy based on interim data.Brazil and Indonesia, which have the most cases in Latin America and Southeast Asia respectively, are preparing to start using the vaccine, called CoronaVac, this month.Although the efficacy of CoronaVac trails the more than 90% success rate of vaccines from Moderna or Pfizer/BioNTech, it is easier to transport and can be stored at normal refrigerator temperatures.Sinovac also has supply deals with Turkey, Chile, Singapore, Ukraine and Thailand.
Making waves: the hit Indian island radio station leading climate conversations	Selvarani Mari is a fisher and seaweed collector who lives on Pamban Island of Tamil Nadu, on the southernmost tip of India.Every day she helps her husband cast the fishing nets, maintains rafts for cultivating seaweed, and dives into the ocean to gather sargassum. But she always makes time to listen to the radio.Mari, 33, and her friends and family all unfailingly tune into Kadal Osai on 90.4FM, India’s first local radio station for a fishing community. With guests including from older people from the villages sharing their fishing wisdom or chatting about the climate crisis, the station has become an integral part of local life, featuring gossip, jokes, old songs and news on fish prices and sea conditions. Gayathri Usman, head of Kadal Osai, fell in love with the station when she visited the area, and stayed on to run it.“While a majority of the 12-member crew is from the same community, I am the odd one out,” she says.“Our shows are popular because they are entertaining, useful, and, more importantly, in a local dialect of Tamil that the fishing community understands and finds comfort in,” she says.Started by businessman Armstrong Fernando, himself from a fishing family, Kadal Osai (“the sound of the ocean” in Tamil) began in August 2016 with just a few hours of transmission daily, before going full-time in 2019. Alongside updates on weather, marine affairs and fish prices, advice on safe and sustainable fishing and the preservation of coral reefs, the station also conducts on and off-air workshops on the climate crisis and biodiversity.On the fringes of India’s mainland, across the water from Sri Lanka, Pamban and the surrounding 20 islands and coral reefs are part of the richly biodiverse Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve, and home to 47 hamlets of the indigenous Marakeyars, engaged in fishing for centuries.“Due to poor signal reception, the fishing community cannot solely depend on the All India Radio [India’s national broadcaster], especially while at sea. In such a scenario, it is Kadal Osai – with a coverage area of 5-10km – that they tune into,” says Usman.In the past few years, the climate crisis has had a drastic effect on marine life and local livelihoods.Senthil Rajan is a microbiologist at a seaweed cultivation site in Pamban.“It has become increasingly difficult to predict and interpret water levels in the ocean, cyclone formations, and potential fishing zones. The erratic weather patterns have led to an unprecedented rise in sea levels as well as the height of the waves, thus affecting many seaweed cultivating sites,” says Rajan. “In such a scenario, tapping into the traditional knowledge of the fishing community, remains a rich source of learning.”Understanding this need to share knowledge with the next generation, Kadal Osai invites experienced fishers to talk with experts about the effects of over-exploitation on marine resources, and the importance of integrating traditional and modern fishing methods.“Using umbrella terms such as climate change and global warming with this coastal community may not drive home the point effectively. So, we juxtapose the knowledge passed down the generations with the right mix of anecdotes and scientific techniques and keep the dialogue going on climate change,” says Usman. We keep the dialogue going on climate changeRadio is one of the most powerful methods of communication in India, with enormous reach among its 1.38bn population. Even prime minister Narendra Modi has a monthly programme. Unicef collaborated with 215 community radio stations in India, such as Kadal Osai, to create awareness around ending child marriage, something which has been on the decline in India, by 2030.“We started the ‘Kutty Chutty Express’ to inform children on the ill-effects of child marriages through skits, quizzes and roadshows, as well as conducting workshops,” says Usman. The station also publicises the number for Childline India Foundation, which operates the country’s first 24-hour hotline for children in distress.During the pandemic, Kadal Osai has become a bridge between the authorities and the coastal communities. It created awareness of the importance of sanitising and social distancing, and also distributed free masks.“In the initial months, we tried to break a myth among islanders – who believed that they were safe from Covid-19, being surrounded by the salty sea water. Now, since the lockdown has been relaxed, we highlight that ostracising affected people isn’t the solution,” says Usman, as she signs off to go live on 90.4FM, and continue her mission to entertain and inform her faithful community of listeners.Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Australia says China should allow in WHO Covid investigators 'without delay'	The Australian government has called on China to allow a visit by World Health Organization experts investigating how the coronavirus pandemic started, insisting the country should grant them visas “without delay”.Canberra raised its concerns on Wednesday over reports that Chinese authorities had blocked the arrival of a WHO team investigating the early cases of Covid-19 in Wuhan.With China arguing the team’s visas had not yet been approved, even as some members of the group were on their way to the country, the development has heightened fears among Australian politicians about whether the WHO mission will be able to uncover answers needed to better prepare the world for the next pandemic.The Australian foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, said she hoped “that the necessary permissions for the WHO team’s travel to China can be issued without delay”.Speaking after months of rocky relations between the two countries, partly triggered by Australia’s calls for such an investigation, Payne said Australia had “consistently sought transparency in relation to the origins of, and responses to the coronavirus, as have other countries”.“The WHO-convened scientific study is an important part of this work and we look forward to the findings from the international field mission to China,” she said.“During this global pandemic that has affected all countries, international cooperation and partnerships will maximise our ability to respond, and to equip us for the next pandemic.”The opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, was direct in his criticism of China’s actions on Wednesday, saying the country would be wrong to block the entry of the WHO investigators.“Well, the fact is that it’s unacceptable,” Albanese told reporters in Sydney.“Not just Australia, but the whole world needs this investigation to happen. And it should happen openly and transparently. And that should be facilitated by China.”Rex Patrick, the independent senator for South Australia, said the obstruction of the WHO investigators reflected the Chinese Communist party’s “paranoia about international scrutiny”.“I’m disappointed but not surprised by China blocking access to WHO officials investigating coronavirus. Openness and transparency is not in the CCP’s DNA,” Patrick said.He said all good global citizens should be supporting the WHO’s investigation, which was not about blame but learning the lessons from a pandemic that was having a “massive global impact”.But the independent senator also took a swipe at the Morrison government for “improperly cloaking our own Covid response in cabinet secrecy”, saying that had undermined Australia’s ability to press China to display the required openness.Comment has been sought from the Chinese embassy in Canberra.The government attracted China’s ire over its early public calls for a global coronavirus inquiry, with Beijing later taking a series of trade actions against Australian exports and rebuffing calls for talks between ministers.Last week Guardian Australia reported Australia was planning to use its final months on a top World Health Organization board to press for the investigation to remain “robust, independent and comprehensive”.But the NSW Coalition senator Concetta Fierravanti-Wells – a China hawk who has long argued the inquiry had been watered down – said no amount of “monitoring” by Australia would “preclude this ending up being a Sir Humphrey exercise”.“The latest move by the communist regime in China to block the WHO team is not surprising,” she said on Wednesday.“China would not have voted for the watered down World Health Assembly motion unless it was able to ‘manage’ the process and ‘control’ the outcome. It was never going to be ‘robust’ or ‘independent’.”China ended up joining with most nations to support an “independent evaluation” motion drafted by the European Union and co-sponsored by Australia in May.The consensus motion allowed for an independent evaluation to be launched by the WHO director general and to focus on lessons learned from the handling of the outbreaks, rather than the origins of the coronavirus.The independent evaluation panel, co-chaired by the former New Zealand prime minister Helen Clark and former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, is due to provide an interim report to the WHO’s executive board this month before finalising its work in May – just before Australia’s current term expires.The WHO has separately convened a global study of the origins. An Australian health department spokesperson said 10 international experts – including Prof Dominic Dwyer, an infectious diseases specialist from the University of Sydney –was “working on this scientific study in collaboration with Chinese scientists”.China has rejected claims aired by the Trump administration that the coronavirus could have leaked out of a laboratory in Wuhan. China has also denied claims of cover-ups soon after the outbreak was first detected in Wuhan.Zhang Zhan, a 37-year-old former lawyer and citizen journalist who was arrested in May while reporting from Wuhan, was last week sentenced to four years in jail.Morrison has repeatedly said Australia would not “trade away” its sovereignty or yield to economic pressure from the country’s largest trading partner.Apart from calling for a global investigation in April – a proposal he described as “unremarkable” – Morrison also floated the idea of giving the WHO weapons inspector-style powers. In October the foreign affairs department secretary, Frances Adamson, told Senate estimates she had first heard about that idea “when it was said in public”.
Ireland tightens lockdown as cases hit record high – as it happened	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest: Here is a quick recap of recent events from the UK and around the world: France is unlikely to avoid the new and more contagious “UK variant” of the coronavirus, and may have to consider more restrictions on people’s movements next week, the government’s chief scientific advisor on the epidemic said on Wednesday.Jean-François Delfraissy said France already had about 22 confirmed cases of the UK variant, Reuters reports.“In the UK it started in September. It took two and a half months to reach 60% of the virus currently circulating and if we see the same model in France, we will see a relatively rapid spread ... I think we cannot avoid it,” Delfraissy said on France 2 television.He added that the country needed to be worried about this new variant, even if it is not yet circulating in the country in a major way.“We must do what we can to stop it, but I think we cannot avoid it. We need to slow it down as vaccinate in the mean time,” he said. England and Wales recorded the most deaths in 2020 of any year in more than a century, with the pandemic leading to a rise in the number of excess deaths, a senior statistician has revealed in a sobering analysis.Some 604,000 deaths were registered in the two nations in the last 52 weeks, about 73,000 or 14% above the five-year average, Nick Stripe from the Office for National Statistics said on Twitter (see full thread).We can adjust by population to get crude excess death rates2020 will also be the highest since 1940Even with measures taken to limit COVID spread, 2020 will still top 1951, the year of a major flu epidemicWithout all our efforts, 2020 could have been much worse9/11 pic.twitter.com/RrHghNcRBmHe said only one year since 1900 had seen annual deaths top 600,000, which was 1918, when the Spanish flu pandemic struck.Tunisia recorded 2,820 new confirmed coronavirus cases, the health ministry said on Wednesday, a record since the start of the pandemic last year.Seventy more deaths were reported, taking the death toll to more than 5,000, the ministry added, while the total number of cases has jumped to around 150,000.Tunisia banned travel between the country’s regions, and extended a curfew in October, as it tried to stem a tide of surging Covid cases threatening to exceed hospital capacity.Crystal Palace captain Luka Milivojevic has apologised for an apparent breach of Covid-19 guidelines on New Year’s Eve.Palace manager Roy Hodgson was among those who condemned the Serbian mildfieder’s actions, after social media pictures surfaced of him at a gathering with at least seven other people. At the time, London was under strict tier four Covid-19 restrictions, in which households could not mix.“I want to publicly apologise for my actions on New Year’s Eve,” Milivojevic, 29, said on Wednesday.As captain of Crystal Palace Football Club, I am fully aware that my responsibilities go beyond football, and that in this instance I have let the fans, the club, my manager and team-mates down. In what is a really difficult and challenging moment for everyone, I am truly grateful that I am able to continue to do the job I love and I do not take this for granted. I am very sorry to anyone who has been made to feel angry, hurt or upset by my actions. I am making a donation to the local NHS service to help them continue their incredible work in our community fighting this virus. Arizona has become the Covid “hot spot of the world”, public health experts have warned five months after president Donald Trump held up the US state’s pandemic response as exemplary.“It’s way worse than July already, and it’s going to continue to get worse. We’re probably two weeks behind LA in terms of our situation,” Will Humble, head of the Arizona Public Health Association, said referring to Los Angeles County, where a coronavirus surge has created a shortage of oxygen.The situation has led ambulance crews to stop transporting patients they can’t revive in the field, with one out of every 119 people in the state testing positive in the past week.Arizona, which now has the worst coronavirus diagnosis rate in the country, has seen a triple-digit number of new virus-related deaths for the second day in a row and more than 7,200 daily cases, according to health officials.As hospitals increasingly face being overwhelmed, pressure is mounting for the introduction of more forceful control measures such as mandatory statewide masks.But Humble said he doubts Republican Gov. Doug Ducey- who has rejected calls for tighter curbs by claiming they would risk jobs- will change anything. Under current rules, indoor dining is allowed and gyms are open at limited capacity. Ducey has dismissed a proposal to have all public schools switch to virtual learning for two weeks after the holidays. The International Olympic Committee is working on ways to get athletes the Covid-19 jab in the second or third wave so that the Tokyo Games can go ahead safely in July, the Guardian understands.Read our exclusive report here:Impatience about the pace at which vaccines are being rolled out to front line health workers is growing among some governors in the US, the Associated Press reports.Andrew Cuomo, the high-profile New York governor, is threatening to fine hospitals that don’t use their allotment of the Covid-19 vaccine fast enough. His counterpart in South Carolina, meanwhile, says hospitals and health care workers have until 15 January to get a shot or move to the back of the line. Elsewhere, California’s governor wants to use dentists to dispense shots, amid mounting frustration over the sluggish distribution of the vaccine.An NHS hospital doctor has criticised the government’s decision not to bring in a lockdown before Christmas, as she told of “unimaginable” hospital conditions.Speaking on the BBC’s Question Time programme, Dr Rachel Clarke said: We have ambulances queuing up outside - patients we can’t get them out of the ambulances into hospitals because every single bed in intensive care, in the wards, in A&E is full. Tonight I had messages from a doctor in London to tell me that police cars are delivering critically-ill Covid patients into his hospital in London because there are no ambulances. That is how bad things are.She added that ministers should not have “ignored” the advice from Sage when they suggested as early as September a “circuit breaker” was required to prevent an explosion of Covid cases.“We’ve lost more than the Australian death toll in 24 hours”Doctor and author @doctor_oxford criticises the government’s decision to “ignore” advice to lockdown before Christmas. #bbcqt pic.twitter.com/dUPEx19NLWMembers of the public breaking Covid rules should first be encouraged to comply with the law, new guidance from the College of Policing and National Police Chief’s Council suggests. “Enforcement can follow without repeated attempts to encourage people to comply with the law,” it says.There are fines of £10,000 for organisers of restricted gatherings.More Americans were hospitalised with Covid-19 on Wednesday than at any time since the pandemic began, as total coronavirus infections crossed the 21 million mark.US coronavirus hospitalisations reached a record 130,834 late on Tuesday, according to a Reuters tally of public health data, while 3,684 reported fatalities was the second-highest single-day death toll of the pandemic.That grim toll meant that on Tuesday someone died from the virus every 24 seconds in the country.Hi everyone. It is Yohannes Lowe here. I will be running this blog into the evening, so feel free to message me on Twitter with any story tips.
