Bobi Wine says soldiers have stormed his home as Uganda counts vote:	Soldiers have stormed the home of  Bobi Wine , the Ugandan opposition leader has said, as votes continued to be counted in the country’s election. “We are under siege,” the pop star turned politician  tweeted . “The military has jumped over the fence and has now taken control of our home.” President Yoweri Museveni has taken an early lead as votes are counted in Uganda’s  most keenly watched election in years , while opposition figures said the vote had been marred by fraud and violence. With a third of the votes counted, Museveni had more than 65% of the tallied ballots and was ahead of Wine in almost every region. Wine, one of 10 opposition challengers, had gained about a quarter of the vote, according to Uganda’s electoral body. Lt Col Deo Akiiki, Uganda’s deputy military spokesperson, said the soldiers were at Wine’s house to protect him. “As presidential candidate, do you want his security to be compromised? It’s not a deployment to arrest him. Its a deployment to keep his security like any other presidential candidate has. It’s a simple as that.” Wine, who has galvanised a mass movement of young people challenging the president’s 34-year rule, said at a press conference on Friday morning that Ugandans should reject the results.  “I am very confident that we defeated the dictator by far,” he said. “The people of  Uganda  voted massively for change of leadership from a dictatorship to a democratic government. But Mr Museveni is trying to paint a picture that he is in the lead.” Results are expected to be announced by Saturday. A candidate must win more than 50% to avoid a runoff vote. Helicopters and tanks were on patrol as millions went to the polls on Thursday following one of the most turbulent and violent election campaigns. Wine’s rejection of the results could prolong heightened tensions in the east African country. Security forces loyal to Museveni  violently suppressed opposition supporters  during the campaign. Museveni’s bid for a sixth term in power was only made possible when MPs changed the constitution to remove age limits. He has repeatedly accused Wine of being a foreign-backed “traitor”, while Wine has branded him a “dictator”. Many in  Africa  see the challenge to Museveni, who at 76 is twice as old as Wine, as emblematic of a continent-wide generational struggle between ageing leaders who refuse to relinquish power and younger voters mobilising against them. The charismatic Wine has the backing of many young people in Uganda – where the median age is 15.7 – who are drawn to his anti-establishment message. Many observers have expressed fears of state-backed moves to prevent transparency during the polls. On Wednesday night internet access was cut off for most users in the east African country, though some have used VPNs to communicate online. Uganda’s electoral commission said the lack of internet access had not affected the tallying of the count from around the country. After polls closed on Thursday, hundreds of Wine supporters in Kampala returned to their polling stations to heed his call to “protect the vote” by watching the count. At the station where Wine had voted, security forces chased his supporters away. Isabella Akiteng, a civil society activist, said late on Thursday that she and 29 others who were observing the polls had been arrested at a hotel in Kampala and were being interrogated by police. On Wednesday, the US and EU said they would not observe the elections, after several officials were denied accreditation. Peter Mwesigye, director of the Africa Media Centre of Excellence, said it would take time to determine the extent of voter fraud and violence at the polls. “We know definitely there have been credible reports of fraud, but it’s going to be much harder and it will take many more days for us to begin to get the sense and scope of it,” he said. “The shutdown of the internet robbed the process of transparency that is required of an election. It has basically been an environment that doesn’t qualify for one to call it a free and fair election.” Lina Zedriga, deputy president of Wine’s National Unity Platform for northern Uganda, said it would use all non-violent means to challenge the result. “It’s a mess. We have witnessed yet another false and great sham election […] They are just alleging and creating their own results. “We are calling upon our supporters to be calm. They want us to provoke and make us violent. We are non-violent people. We will definitely use all non-violent means possible that is going to be discussed by our legal teams.”
UK records 1,248 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  The hospital system in the Amazon city of Manaus is collapsing from a second wave of Covid-19 and it is running out of oxygen , Brazilian health minister Eduardo Pazuello has said. Speaking on a webcast with president  Jair Bolsonaro  at his side, Pazuello said the city’s hospitals were short of medical staff as deaths surge again.  Amazonas state has appealed to the United States to send a military transport plane with oxygen cylinders. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Britain reported 1,248 new deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test on Thursday, down from a record high of more than 1,500 the previous day.  The number of people in the UK to have been given a first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine as of 13 January is 2,918,252, according to Public Health England, a rise of 278,943 from the figures published on Wednesday. A total of 437,977 people have received a second dose in the UK as of January 13, a rise of 9,745 from the previous day, PHE added. Earlier in the day, a number of NHS staff gathered outside Downing Street to protest over the government’s handling of the pandemic. Wearing PPE and carrying a sign which read “You failed the public, you failed the NHS, Boris must go”, the five campaigners arrived at 8pm, the scheduled start time of the Clap For Heroes. Nobody was heard clapping along Whitehall in the heart of Westminster as one nurse told reporters: “The situation in hospitals is so severe, we are stretched across all ICUs.” ICU nurse Ameera Sheikh told reporters: “It’s been very difficult, very challenging. “We’re stressed out and very anxious, there’s a lot of PTSD amongst staff, staff are going off sick ... leaving nurses very short, which increases the risk of patients deteriorating and ultimately patients dying. “This is the government’s fault, they need to take responsibility, they need to provide us with better pay and better working conditions.” As the first groups from Central America reached the Guatemalan border as part of a caravan aiming to reach the United States , regional governments are using coronavirus measures as the latest tool to curtail migration. Small groups of migrants arrived in the  Honduran  border town of   Corinto  on Thursday afternoon, where they were stopped by police demanding negative coronavirus tests, according to local media. Hundreds more have amassed outside the bus terminal in San Pedro Sula in advance of the caravan’s formal departure on Friday morning, according to footage from local television outlets. Guatemala ,  Honduras ,  El Salvador  and  Mexico  issued a joint declaration earlier this week imposing coordinated health measures to deter migration, including requirements to produce negative coronavirus tests at border checkpoints. The tightening by Mexican and Central American authorities, coupled with pandemic-linked US border restrictions in place since March, represent a sweeping effort to use public health regulations to deter movement along one of the world’s busiest migration routes at a time when a fierce second wave of coronavirus is sweeping the region. In Mexico, the pandemic has killed nearly 137,000 people and the capital’s hospitals are spiking with Covid-19 cases. This week’s caravan, slated to depart  Honduras  on Friday, would be the first of the year and comes six days before US president-elect Joe Biden takes office. Yet, Central American and Mexican authorities are stepping up efforts to stop migrants well before the US border, which will likely be a relief for Biden, whose aides have privately expressed concerns about the prospect of growing numbers of migrants seeking to enter the US in the early days of his administration. On Thursday,  Guatemala  cited the pandemic in order to declare emergency powers in seven Guatemalan border provinces migrants frequently transit through en route to the Mexican border. The measures limit public demonstrations and allow authorities to disperse any public meeting, group or demonstration by force. Honduras and Guatemala have announced they will deploy thousands of soldiers to preemptively stop caravan members not complying with health regulations, while Mexico deployed agents to the border with Guatemala. In online forums, migrants hoping to join the caravan expressed concern on Thursday about the crackdown, with some suggesting searching for “blind points” where they could cross the borders undetected by authorities. Central America is reeling from economic crises, high rates of violence, and the devastating fallout of two major hurricanes that battered the region in November. “We barely have food to eat, how do they think we are going to pay for these (coronavirus) tests?” said 29-year-old Ulises Santos from El Salvador, who is hoping to join the caravan. Migration experts say the public health measures are part of a broader effort by Central American and Mexican authorities, under pressure from Washington, to stop migrants before they reach US territory. “The US border is moving further and further south,” said renowned Honduran human rights activist  Ismael Moreno . “The goal (of local police) is to stop migrants, whether through repression, threats, extortion, or requirements to present a Covid-19 test.”  The Gambia has registered two cases of a British-identified coronavirus mutation which is likely more infectious , the tiny West African state’s government said. Gambian health minister  Ahmadou Samateh  told lawmakers the strain was detected in two people entering the country - both of whom were asymptomatic. “People coming from 20 hot-spot countries, like the UK, Spain, France and Sweden must face another test because we have detected the new variant,” he said. “This one transmits faster”. Coronavirus  variant B117 likely emerged in southeastern England in September, according to  Imperial College London . The  World Health Organization  says it has already spread to 50 countries worldwide. This strain is believed to be more easily transmissible because of a mutation of the spike protein, the part of the virus which latches on to human cells. A former British colony of some two million people, The Gambia is the smallest country on mainland  Africa . Health officials in the poor nation have registered 3,890 coronavirus cases to date, with over 125 fatalities. Samateh said the government was engaged in “initial talks” to procure a consignment of Covid-19 vaccines, which it expects to acquire in several months. Turkey has vaccinated more than 285,000 people  as it began administering Covid-19 shots developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech to health workers on Thursday.  President  Tayyip Erdoğan  also received his first dose of the vaccine in Ankara. He urged political leaders and lawmakers to endorse the inoculation process and called on Turks not to heed criticism of the vaccine. Health minister  Fahrettin Koca  also urged citizens to get vaccinated as soon as their turn came, saying it was the “most important way” to beat the pandemic. At a research hospital in Istanbul, 30 clinics were set up to administer the vaccine. Health workers were given a first dose, with a second to be given 28 days later. Surgeon general  Nurettin Yiyit  said the hospital could vaccinate around 1,800 people a day and that its 3,500 staff, including nurses and janitors, could be vaccinated in two days. As of 8.32pm, Turkey had vaccinated 285,940 people, according to health ministry data. Asked about the rapid pace of the vaccinations, Turkey’s health ministry said vaccines had been distributed across the country at the start of the week and distribution from provincial storage centres had taken place overnight, after emergency authorisation for the vaccinations was granted. Seriously ill Covid patients are being transferred from overstretched UK capital London hospitals to intensive care units almost 300 miles away in Newcastle , the Guardian can reveal. The crisis engulfing the capital’s hospitals is so severe that in recent days patients have also been moved 67 miles to  Northampton , 125 miles to  Birmingham  and 167 miles to  Sheffield . NHS England has told hospitals in the north of England, the Midlands and other areas to open up hundreds of extra ICU beds to take patients from London, the south-east and east, where the new variant has pushed Covid hospital admissions to new levels. It is the latest dramatic illustration of the increasingly difficult situation confronting the health service. Hospitals across the UK are battling to provide care for 36,489 people with Covid, an increase of 5,872 in seven days. There were a further 48,682 confirmed cases reported on Thursday but Public Health England said that UK deaths data had been delayed due to a “processing issue”. The number of people who have received a Covid-19 vaccine in Israel has passed the two million threshold, with the prime minister saying there was “light at the end of the tunnel”. Israel “will become the first country to emerge from the corona crisis,” prime minister  Benjamin Netanyahu  said. “I am the second millionth,” to be vaccinated in Israel, read a sign held by 22-year-old Margaret Alsoso as she received her first dose of the vaccine in the city of  Ramla near Tel Aviv . Netanyahu - who faces yet another re-election contest and a corruption trial over the coming weeks - has sought to highlight his personal role in the inoculation campaign. The prime minister was the first to get the jab on 19 December, when Israel launched its inoculation campaign with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. In early January authorities said two million people would receive a two-dose Covid-19 vaccine by the end of the month. As of Thursday only 150,000 people had received their two doses. But as Israel pushes ahead aggressively with its vaccination drive, it is also witnessing a surge in the pandemic with some 9,000 coronavirus cases registered daily. The country, currently in its third national lockdown, has recorded more than 523,000 cases, including around 3,850 deaths, according to the health ministry. On Thursday, Netanyahu urged Israelis to respect lockdown restrictions. Amnesty International has called on Israel to provide coronavirus vaccine doses to Palestinians in the occupied  West Bank  and  Gaza , saying the Jewish state is obliged to do so under international law. As coronavirus continues to tear across the US without any sign of slowing down, officials have warned there is a “full resurgence” in most major population centres – and that the country could see an additional 92,000 deaths in less than a month. There have been more than 23m confirmed Covid-19 cases in the US and 385,503 deaths, Johns Hopkins University’s most recent data  revealed . White House coronavirus taskforce reports from 10 January, obtained by  CNN , said they were seeing a “full resurgence” of the virus in “nearly all metro areas” and advocated for “aggressive action”. The report, which is sent to states, suggested measures such as using “two or three-ply and well-fitting” masks, enforcing “strict” social distancing” and more aggressively testing young adults. Officials worried that there was “significant, continued deterioration from  California  across the Sunbelt and up into the south-east, mid-Atlantic and north-east”. These regions effectively comprise all of the continental US. The reports were quoted as stating that there was a “clear continuation of the pre-holiday high rate of spread as measured by rising test positivity, increased cases, increased hospitalization rates and rising fatalities”. Additional date compiled by the New York Times indicate that a record number of deaths almost daily in the US largely stems from skyrocketing cases in California and  Arizona . In  Los Angeles  county, there is a Covid-19 death every eight minutes. Chilean authorities remain confident in a vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac despite jitters elsewhere , after researchers in Brazil said its efficacy was lower than initially suggested. Rodrigo Yañez , the Chilean trade undersecretary tasked with procuring Covid vaccines for the country, said Chile’s health regulator was assessing all the available data and would announce its decision on an emergency roll-out for the inoculation soon. He said vaccines would serve their critical purpose if they helped diminish severe symptoms, hospitalisations and deaths. This week, researchers in  Brazil  released late-stage trial clinical data showing the Sinovac vaccine was 50.4% effective at preventing symptomatic infections, including “very mild” cases. The previous week they said the vaccine, called CoronaVac, showed 78% efficacy against “mild-to-severe” cases. “The numbers in Brazil are good though they could be misleading in terms of focusing only on the 50% because the target is to avoid people filling the hospitals and fatalities,” he told Reuters. “It should be very effective with the more severe symptoms of the disease, provided that the clinical data supports what was announced this week.” Chile paid $3.5m to host a clinical trial of the vaccine and has also ordered 60m doses to be administered to its population of 18 million over three years. The country’s regulator sent two inspectors to the Sinovac factory in  Beijing  in November ahead of the expected arrival of the first doses in Chile in mid-January. Chile has already started vaccinating its health workers using a Pfizer developed shot and its regulator is also weighing approval of AstraZeneca’s for emergency use. The disappointing Brazilian efficacy news prompted  Malaysia  and  Singapore , which also have purchase agreements with Sinovac, to say on Wednesday that they would seek more data from the Chinese firm on efficacy rates before they approved and bought supplies. Sinovac vaccination campaigns are  already underway in  Indonesia  and  Turkey , with Turkish president  Tayyip Erdoğan  receiving the jab on Thursday. Yañez told Reuters the Chilean Public Health Institute would look at the data from Brazil as well as Turkey and Indonesia, which reported efficacy of 91.25% and 65.3% efficacy respectively based on interim trial data. He said Sinovac’s vaccine wasn’t the only one which has raised doubts, pointing to experts in Australia who had questioned whether herd immunity could be achieved from the 62% efficacy reported for the AstraZeneca vaccine. “The common flu vaccine is between 50% and 60% effective - we run massive vaccination campaigns with those levels of efficacy,” he said. “We are in a position where we need to put a stop to the more severe impact of Covid-19. No vaccine so far is capable of proving that it also stops infections spreading. At the end of the day all of them are more or less efficient in helping you avoid the impact.” The US tennis player Tennys Sandgren has arrived in Melbourne after Tennis Australia reportedly intervened so he could board a charter flight despite testing positive for coronavirus . In a series of tweets on Thursday, Australian time, Sandgren initially suggested he would not be able to board the flight for the  Australian Open , writing “Covid positive over thanksgiving” and “Covid positive on Monday”. Later, Sandgren, a quarter-finalist at last year’s open, added it appeared he would able to board the chartered flight before lauding the Tennis Australia chief executive,  Craig Tiley , as a “wizard”. “Wow I’m on the plane. Maybe I just held my breath too long,” he said in a tweet. He then explained his first positive test was in November and he was now “totally recovered”. “I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point.” A lot couch virologists out there. My two tests were less than 8 weeks a part. I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point. Totally recovered! The Australian Open suggested Victorian health authorities had given Sandgren the all-clear to fly. The tournament’s official Twitter account said people who had recovered and were “non-infectious can continue to shed the virus for several months”. “Victorian government public health experts assess each case based on additional detailed medical records to ensure they are not infectious before checking in to the charter flights,” the Australian Open said. “Players and their teams are tested every day from their arrival in Australia, a much stricter process than for anyone else in hotel quarantine.” A group representing major US airlines has backed president-elect Joe Biden’s plan to mandate facial coverings for all air passengers , but asked him to lift it once the coronavirus pandemic ends and give them flexibilities in enforcing it. Airlines for America , which represents American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and others, asked Biden in a letter seen by Reuters to “allow air carriers to maintain their existing policies and practices which are aimed at de-escalating conflict in-flight and allowing the aircraft to continue while providing a consequential enforcement backstop on the ground”. Twitter has lifted restrictions briefly imposed on the official account promoting the Russian Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine. The account was restricted for around an hour earlier in the day with a notice saying Twitter had seen “some unusual activity” on the page. “This account was temporarily locked in error by an automated spam filter. This action has been reversed and the account is now fully operational,” Twitter said in a statement. The Sputnik V account said that, according to an explanation from Twitter, the brief shut down was due to “a possible security breach from Virginia, USA”. The account did not provide any further details. 
'Brazilian horror story': internet melts down over sculptor's peculiar waxworks:	The first household name Arlindo Armacollo smothered in beeswax was Mother Teresa. Then came Albert Einstein, Pope John Paul II and a string of global luminaries who the entrepreneur-turned-artist admired. “It might look simple, but to achieve this richness of detail was hard work,” a local television reporter gushed during  a 2015 visit to Armacollo’s waxwork collection  in southern Brazil. “The artist wanted to capture the character as well as the soul of each person.” Whether the septuagenarian sculptor achieved that goal is now a matter of intense international debate, after images of his wax creations went viral on social media – six years after first being displayed in the town of Rolândia. Footage of Armacollo’s startling figures spread like wildfire last week after internet users unearthed – and ridiculed –  the video report  about their exhibition in a local church. The strangely disfigured personalities on show include Nelson Mandela, who has a beefcake’s body, a tiny head and dazzling peroxide hair; Princess Diana, who wears a crazed and terrifying grin; and Marilyn Monroe, who boasts a neck the size of a tree trunk and a seemingly melted face. Nearby, black hairs sprout from unusual corners of Elvis Presley’s shiny wax face. “Brazilian horror story,”  gasped  one of the numerous Twitter users discombobulated by the models. Word of the collection – which reminded some of  Spain’s jaw-dropping botched restorations  – soon spread. Journalists from leading news outlets in Brazil and beyond pursued the previously unknown artist for a reaction to his newfound fame. “I couldn’t care less [about the criticism],” Armacollo, 77, told the Guardian on Tuesday as he was flooded with interview requests and invitations for television appearances he planned to decline. “If it was about making money it might bother me whether people appreciated what I was doing or not. But I do the things I do because I enjoy them. I did this for our town. If people like it, come and visit. If they don’t, don’t,” he shrugged. “Why worry?” Armacollo’s statues, which each involve about 5kg of wax and imported English eyeballs, have moved since their 2015 television debut and are now housed in a nearby museum named after his father. There, Princess Diana has been joined by newer sculptures, including a similarly peculiar portrayal of the Queen. Until recently the exhibition also featured a statue of the corruption-busting judge Sergio Moro with a distinct resemblance to England defender Harry Maguire. But Armacollo evicted Brazil’s former security minister after  he resigned  from government and  took a high-paid job  with a consultancy involved in the judicial recovery of one of the construction giants he once pursued. “It’s all a bit weird, isn’t it?” Armacollo said. Like many in south  Brazil , Armacollo is a supporter of Jair Bolsonaro, and had considered honouring the right-wing populist president with his wax. “But then I thought: ‘I’m going to hold off for a bit to keep an eye on his behaviour.’ For now I’m still behind him and think he’s on the right path – but let’s wait a bit more to see to see if that solidifies.” The artist scoffed at the idea of celebrating Bolsonaro’s leftwing rival, the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. “You’re not in favour of him, are you?” he asked this reporter with a mistrustful laugh. Politics aside, Armacollo hoped “all this commotion” would attract tourists from other cities and abroad. A similar museum in Norfolk achieved cult status as “the world’s worst waxworks”, drawing thousands of visitors with  its un-lifelike lifelikes . Armacollo’s only regret was the reaction of his teenager granddaughter, left distraught by the mocking of her grandfather’s mannequins. “She’s very sensitive. She even cried,” the artist admitted, “but now she’s laughing about it too.”
Covid eruption in Brazil's largest state leaves health workers begging for help:	Health workers in Brazil’s largest state are begging for help and oxygen supplies after an explosion of Covid deaths and infections that one official compared to a tsunami and said could be linked to a new variant. Amazonas, and particularly its riverside capital Manaus, were pummeled by the epidemic’s first wave last April, when authorities  were forced to dig mass graves  for victims. But at a press conference on Thursday, the state governor, Wilson Lima, admitted the situation was now even more dramatic and declared an immediate 7pm to 6am curfew to slow the outbreak. “We are facing the most critical moment of the pandemic, something unprecedented in the state of Amazonas,” Lima told reporters as he announced the restriction. As he spoke, horrific details were emerging of a breakdown in Manaus’s public health system, with reports of many patients dying after public hospitals and emergency care units ran out of oxygen. More than 206,000 people have now died across  Brazil , the second highest total in the world after the US. “This is an unprecedented calamity,” said Jesem Orellana, a local epidemiologist from the Fiocruz public health research centre. “In the coming hours Manaus is going to be the protagonist of one of the saddest chapters of the Covid-19 epidemic in the world.” “There is no [oxygen],” added Orellana, who has been calling for a local lockdown since September. “Colleagues of ours – nurses, doctors and even social workers – are being called in to perform manual ventilation on people. A single human being is only capable of performing manual ventilation for about 20 minutes, so if you want to save one life without oxygen you are going to need at least three or four people per patient.” The director of one of Manaus’s most important public hospitals sent health workers a WhatsApp message pleading for their help. “The Getúlio Vargas hospital has no oxygen and all patients are being  ambuzados  (manually ventilated). If anyone can help rotate the ventilation of the patients in the ICU on the fifth floor, please, we need you,” he told them. “This is the situation. It is critical. Let’s fight. If you can help, please do.” Another health worker at the same hospital told the Guardian employees had been too busy trying to save lives to count the dead. “Manaus is chaos,” they said. “We have no oxygen.” One  video shared on social media  showed a distraught woman emerging from one public clinic shouting: “We’re in an appalling state. The whole unit’s oxygen has simply run out and there are many people dying. Anyone who has any oxygen available please bring it to the clinic [near the airport]. There are so many people dying, for the love of God.” Speaking alongside the governor at Thursday’s press conference, local health official Tatiana Amorim said the  R value  in Amazonas state was now 1.3. “This means that for every 100 people 130 are being infected each seven days. This speed was seen in April and May [at the height of the first wave]. This means that we are truly again experiencing a tsunami.” Amorim said there were three possible explanations for the sudden surge in infections: the relaxation of containment measures, increased transmission during Christmas and end-of-year festivities, and the chance that a new coronavirus variant was circulating in Amazonas. Lima, a 44-year-old television presenter aligned with Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro, claimed the federal government was mobilized “so we can overcome this moment as soon as possible”. “We’re on a war footing,” he said, announcing that coronavirus patients would be evacuated to other states for treatment. Brazil’s vice-president, Hamilton Mourão,  tweeted  photographs of oxygen cylinders being airlifted into Manaus by the air force. But many will see such actions as too little, too late. Infectious disease specialists have spent months urging authorities to impose some kind of lockdown to avoid exactly this kind of situation. Their penultimate petition, on 4 January, warned Manaus was again being “plunged into chaos” and implored: “We need to save lives and not repeat 2020’s health and humanitarian tragedy in 2021.” State authorities only took action on 26 December,  ordering shops to close for 15 days,  before backing away from those measures after street protests from local business people and workers. “Politics kills,” the Getúlio Vargas hospital health worker said on Thursday. Orellana said the number of burials left no doubt the city was facing its darkest hour. “Yesterday, we broke a new record for the fourth day in a row with the absurd total of 198 burials. On Saturday there were 130 burials. On Sunday, 144. On Monday, 150. On Tuesday, 166,” he said. In normal times the average would be about 30. “It is a catastrophe, and the coming hours will be the worst you can possibly imagine.”
UK bans arrivals from South America over Brazilian Covid strain:	The UK government has been accused of putting lives at risk with a botched border policy after it banned arrivals from South America and  Portugal  several days after concerns emerged about a new Brazilian variant of Covid. The transport secretary,  Grant Shapps , announced that arrivals from more than a dozen countries including Argentina, Venezuela, Bolivia and Peru would be halted. He said Portugal had also been included because of its close travel links with Brazil. It is unclear as yet whether the Brazilian strain may be vaccine-resistant. UK citizens and permanent residents will be exempt from the travel ban but they and their families will have to self-isolate for 10 days on arrival. The shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, welcomed the measures as necessary but criticised the government’s failure to implement more systematic checks on arrivals. “This is yet another example of government incompetence, lurching from one crisis and rushed announcement to another. The failure to put in place an effective policy on testing before entry and a quarantine system that is checking only one in 100 people is putting lives at risk,” he said. The new measures came 24 hours after Boris Johnson was pressed by Labour’s Yvette Cooper about why he had not taken more urgent action in response to reports about the Brazilian strain of the virus. Cooper welcomed the travel ban on Thursday but warned: “We know from the first wave of the Covid crisis that focusing just on direct flights isn’t sufficient. We still need a proper testing and quarantine system for airports and ports as other countries have.” She called the government “irresponsible” for delaying its new testing regime for all arrivals to the UK at the last minute, pointing out that the Brazilian strain had been identified in Japan by testing of passengers in airport quarantine. The new testing system, which will require travellers to have a negative Covid test before coming to the UK, has been pushed back from Friday morning to Monday after a backlash from travel companies and tourists who complained the government had failed to provide enough guidance to operate the scheme effectively. The prime minister’s spokesperson defended the last-minute delay, calling it a “grace period”. “We always said we would introduce the regulations on Friday, and the laws still come into force on Friday, but we’ve implemented a grace period over the weekend so that passengers can have a little bit more time to get access to the tests they need that meet our requirements,” he said. The safeguarding minister, Victoria Atkins, had earlier suggested the delay had been made for business reasons. Speaking to Sky News, she said: “There’s a very delicate balancing act here between controlling the virus but also ensuring that we are not putting too much of a burden on the economy.” Travellers will need to present proof of a negative test result to their carrier upon boarding, and UK Border Force will conduct spot checks on arrivals. Arrivals who flout the rules will face a minimum £500 fine, and the operator who transported them will also be fined. Passengers will still have to quarantine for 10 days regardless of their test results. The guidance specifying the type of tests and documentation that would be required was not published on the government’s website until late on Wednesday, making it almost impossible for potential inbound travellers abroad to arrange tests in time for the original deadline. The decision on the travel ban was made at a meeting of the ministerial Covid-O committee on Thursday morning on the basis of evidence from experts on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) on new viruses. Government sources said devolved administrations supported Shapps’s decision, with Wales and Scotland poised to announce similar action. Johnson had hinted at fresh restrictions on Wednesday when he was grilled by MPs about the issue, telling Cooper: “We’re putting in extra measures to ensure that people coming from Brazil are checked: and indeed stopping people coming from  Brazil .” Direct flights between Brazil and the UK were banned last month as the Brazilian government tried to prevent the highly transmissible English variant of the virus arriving on its shores. The UK government has been criticised throughout the pandemic for failing to act rapidly enough to control the borders.
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
The farmer’s boy and the ship of gold: uncovering the treasures of Sutton Hoo:	Basil Brown was a farmer’s boy from Rickinghall in Suffolk who left school around the age of 13 to work on his father’s holdings. He seemed set to spend his life working the land. Brown, who was born in 1888, certainly succeeded in the task – though not through farming. He went on to work the land in a very different way. As a young man, he had nursed a passion: to unearth hidden treasures and reveal the local countryside’s archaeological secrets. And as the  Netflix  film  The Dig , released on 29 January, reveals, he triumphed in stunning style – by discovering the Sutton Hoo treasure in 1939. Beneath a large mound of earth on private land outside Woodbridge in Suffolk, Brown – who is played by  Ralph Fiennes  – uncovered the buried remains of an entire 27-metre-long ship; a secret chamber filled with gold and silver; a sword with a jewelled hilt; shoulder clasps of gold inlaid with garnet; and pieces of iron that were later assembled to create the elaborate, iconic Sutton Hoo helmet. The seventh-century hoard was the richest grave ever excavated in Europe. “Brown uncovered this country’s greatest archaeological treasure and in the process transformed our understanding of English life in the early medieval period,” says Sue Brunning, curator of the British Museum’s Sutton Hoo collection. “Before Sutton Hoo, it was thought Britain had declined badly in cultural and economic terms after the Romans left. But Brown revealed treasures in this quiet corner of England that could be traced from sources across Europe and Asia and showed a vast trade in riches was going on at the time. England was no cultural backwater.” The original decision to excavate at Sutton Hoo was made by wealthy widow Edith Pretty (played by Carey Mulligan). Her estate there was peppered with burial mounds that had been looted in Tudor times. Was there any treasure left, she wondered? Experts at Ipswich Museum recommended Brown – who by this time had taken evening classes while running the smallholding he took over from his father, earned several diplomas, and begun working on local archaeological digs. In 1938, he made a couple of excavations that provided promising results and decided the next year to investigate the largest mound on the property. Not long after he started, Brown uncovered a piece of rusting iron that he recognised as a rivet from the bow of a ship. Very slowly he peeled back the soil to reveal the shape of an entire vessel. The wood had disintegrated but the rivets lay precisely in place revealing the perfect outline of a Saxon longship. It was an astonishing sight: a ghostly image of an ancient vessel imprinted on the Suffolk soil. At the time, virtually all ship burials had been found in Norway and were of Norse origin. But Brown was quick to realise this was not a Viking vessel but an Anglo-Saxon ship from an earlier period. “It is the find of a lifetime,” he wrote in his diary on 29 June, 1939. The dig progressed to reveal a separate burial chamber that was, again, painstakingly excavated. Its treasures proved equally exotic as Brown discovered on 22 July when he was summoned by his team’s excited shouts and found that a hoard treasure had been uncovered. “I never expected to see so much gold in any dig in this country,” Brown wrote that night. “There was a heavy gold buckle, the framework of a beautiful gold purse, in which were 39 gold coins … a belt in solid gold with the finest  cloisonné  work. All the objects shone in the sunshine as on the day they were buried.” The effort and resources involved in dragging a ship deep inland before filling it with treasure and then burying it would have been a remarkable undertaking that brings to mind images of the Old English poem Beowulf with its soaring timber halls and powerful kings and nobles. Brown had helped to repaint our image of early medieval England. At first, no sign of any human remains were found at the site and it was concluded it was meant to be more of a cenotaph than a grave. “However, later excavation indicated decayed organic remains that could have been human,” said Brunning. “For good measure, a huge, ornate sword had been laid out in a way that was consistent with other graves of warriors. So I am confident this was the tomb of a great individual, perhaps even a king.” The identity of that person is not so certain, however. The best candidate remains King Raedwald, who died around AD625, though there is still disagreement among archaeologists about who was interred at Sutton Hoo. As to the immediate fate of Brown’s trove, that was less glamorous. On 3 September, Britain declared war on Germany and the country went into martial lockdown. Sutton Hoo was covered over and its gold and silver taken to Aldwych tube station in London where the British Museum was storing its greatest treasures. After only a few weeks in the sunlight, it was placed in a tunnel that lay 10 times deeper than its original Suffolk resting place and returned to the dark until the end of the war. Today, the hoard has been given its own room at the British Museum. The helmet, which was found shattered in pieces at Sutton Hoo, has been put together and the rest of its treasures put on public display – a monument to the sophistication of our seventh-century predecessors and to Basil Brown who unearthed their glories. “He did an incredible job in excavating the ship at Sutton Hoo,” says Brunning. “He may have been self-taught but he was a remarkable archaeologist. As to the film, I think it does great credit to the man and to the find.”
How Stephen King’s gun essay found new life in ‘Gomorrah’:	A non-fiction essay about gun violence by the American horror writer  Stephen King  will be produced by a tiny publishing house in Scampia, on the outskirts of Naples, known as one of the biggest drug-dealing and arms hotspots in Europe and the setting for the Italian TV drama  Gomorrah . The 25-page essay,  Guns , was written after the 2012 Sandy Hook elementary school shooting in America, when 20-year-old Adam Lanza shot and killed 26 people, including 20 children. “For a small publisher like us, it’s a dream to be associated with Stephen King – most of all because the theme of this essay is the risk associated with widespread access to weapons,” said Rosario Esposito La Rossa, writer and editor of the publishing house Marotta & Cafiero, and owner of Scugnizzeria – the house of the urchins – the only bookshop in Scampia. “ Right here in Scampia,  where guns often fall into children’s hands, we hope this essay can raise our collective consciousness.” Esposito La Rossa is well aware of the sense of anguish in Scampia. “In 2004, they accidentally killed my cousin, Antonio Landieri,” he said, “they” being the Camorra. “He was just 25 years old and disabled. He had cerebral palsy, and they mistook him for a drug dealer. His friends were shot in the legs, but Antonio, because of his slow movement, was the only one unable to flee.” Landieri was one of more than 70 people killed during a feud between Camorra gangs in 2004 and 2005. Many of the victims were innocent bystanders, killed inadvertently or because they were relatives or acquaintances of rival affiliates. King’s agent in  Italy  said that it was precisely the social context in Scampia and the importance of selecting a publisher from the same area that convinced King to release publication rights for the essay, which Esposito La Rossa found on the internet. “At a certain point we had this idea,” said Esposito La Rossa. “We knew we wouldn’t be able to publish any elaborate works by international authors, because obviously the large publishing houses control such acquisitions. We found  Guns , which addressed the issue of gun violence prevention. I thought it was perfect. “I contacted King’s agent straight away. It’s clear that King first wanted to know who we were and why we were interested in the essay. When they informed me that King accepted our proposal, I was beside myself with joy. “But this is only the beginning. We want this to be a springboard to attract other writers.’’ The degradation and violence in Scampia made news around the world when in 2008  Roberto Saviano’s  harrowing book  Gomorrah , was made into an award-winning film directed by Matteo Garrone, and then in 2014, into  an acclaimed TV series . “For too long Scampia has been synonymous with violence and tragedy,” Esposito La Rossa said. “My dream is that this book can mark one of the first steps in transforming Scampia into a neighbourhood synonymous with culture.”
Schwarzenegger used to exemplify politico-showbiz ridiculousness. Now he's our true moral governator:	H ow amazing. Until a few years ago – 2016, in fact – if you asked people for the most absurd example of the politico-showbusiness complex in the 21st-century United States, they would have said  Arnold Schwarzenegger ’s recall election as governor of California in 2003, his candidacy being announced on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno. He was re-elected in 2006, and just about maintained a cheerfully Reaganesque public image of a moderate Republican – uneventfully standing down in 2011 to resume his movie career. We all took the mickey out of the governator. But, right now, he is America’s moral governator with real moral authority. It was the governator who uploaded a video  telling Americans to stay home during the Covid crisis . And now it is the governator who has issued a clarion call for decency on YouTube with his admittedly cheesy but genuinely stirring, heartfelt and relevant rebuke to the Trumpians and their desecration of the Capitol – a desecration that even now many Republicans and many sophisticates on the right cannot bring themselves to condemn fully. In his mature Reaganesque style, Schwarzenegger addressed the nation from a presidential-style desk, with the stars and stripes and Californian flag in the background, and a photo of himself in his bodybuilding pomp. With Hollywood-style music on the audio track, he denounced the complicit enablers of Trump’s fascism – culminating in a hilarious flourish of Conan the Barbarian’s sword. That should have been ridiculous. It should have been silly. But, compared with the seedy rightwingers and Fox News alternative-fact merchants and the giggling cynics who said Trump didn’t matter, Schwarzenegger’s sword was rather glorious. I found myself thinking of Evelyn Waugh’s Sword of Honour trilogy – and, yes, however preposterous, there was something honourable about Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Conan sword. Schwarzenegger called the vandalising of the Capitol (and the killing of Capitol police officer Brian Sicknick) America’s “Kristallnacht”. Like many others, I have seen it as America’s beer hall putsch (and who knows if that may not turn out to be the closer analogy?). But, for the time being, Schwarzenegger is absolutely right. And from personal experience, Schwarzenegger was able to address the openly  Nazi  stylings of the Capitol attackers, with the “Camp Auschwitz” T-shirts, because he grew up in an Austria that, in contrast to Germany, went into fierce denial about its role in the second world war. Schwarzenegger spoke about his angry, depressed and abusive father who beat his children. (Schwarzenegger did not speak in detail, but throughout his governorship much press research went into Gustav Schwarzenegger, the Austrian police chief and Stalingrad military veteran who applied for Nazi party membership in 1938 before the Anschluss, but was not found to have been responsible for war crimes or abuse.) Schwarzenegger’s video today, however schmaltzy and hokey in style, was a real reminder to the fatuous callow right that Nazis and nazism are not just death-metal icons or gamer fantasies. They really did exist, with America-first cheerleaders such as Joseph Kennedy and Charles Lindbergh encouraging their fellow citizens to look the other way. And he also showed us that the immigrant experience can bring wisdom. Arnold’s video is exactly what we all needed.
Carbon capture is vital to meeting climate goals, scientists tell green critics:	Engineers and geologists have strongly criticised green groups who last week claimed that carbon capture and storage schemes – for reducing fossil fuel emissions – are costly mistakes. The scientists insisted that such schemes are vital weapons in the battle against global heating and warn that failure to set up ways to trap carbon dioxide and store it underground would make it almost impossible to hold net emissions to below zero by 2050. “ Carbon capture and storage  is going to be the only effective way we have in the short term to prevent our steel industry, cement manufacture and many other processes from continuing to pour emissions into the atmosphere,” said Professor Stuart Haszeldine, of Edinburgh University. “If we are to have any hope of keeping global temperature [increases] down below 2 degrees C then we desperately need to develop ways to capture and store carbon dioxide.” Carbon capture and storage involves the extraction of emissions from power plants and factories, condensing them and then pumping the resulting carbon dioxide into underground stores. Britain is considered to be well placed to develop and operate such technology given its many depleted North Sea oil fields where this sequestrated carbon dioxide could be stored. Several CCS development programmes have been launched over the past 20 years but have been cancelled as governments have vacillated over funding. However, Boris Johnson – as part of his commitment to fight climate change – has pledged £1bn of public funds to help develop  four major CCS schemes  in Britain by 2030 as part of his plan for a “green industrial revolution”. The aim is to make the UK a “world leader” in the technology and create thousands of jobs. But campaigners at Global Witness and  Friends of the Earth  Scotland said last week that a reliance on CCS was not a reliable way to decarbonise the energy system, and published a paper last Monday from the Tyndall Manchester climate change research centre that they said proved that CCS has a “history of over-promising and under-delivering”. Both groups claimed CCS would not make “a meaningful contribution to 2030 climate targets” despite the investment, and instead urged the construction of more renewable energy plants to be given priority. But the claims were last week dismissed by engineers and geologists. “These claims are quite unfair,” said Michael Stephenson, director of science and technology at the British Geological Survey. “The science behind carbon capture and storage is extremely good. It offers us a genuine solution to some of the problems we face in trying to tackle global warming.” At present, most successes in reducing UK carbon emissions have come from the power industry where renewable energy sources have taken over electricity generation from coal, gas and oil plants. However, some industries – such as steel and cement industries – emit vast amounts of carbon dioxide on top of those produced by generating the power they consume. It will be much more difficult to bring down carbon emissions from these plants even though these industries are vital to the UK’s economic strength. This point was stressed by Haszeldine. “When CCS was first touted, it was seen as a way of cleaning up electricity generated by fossil fuels, in particular those burning coal. But now it is clear it can play a key role in cleaning up other industries. “We just need to push ahead with its development so that Britain can find ways of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The longer we delay then the worst things are going to be and claims that CCS will not work do not help.” Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, was also critical of the green groups’ claims. “The opposition to CCS technology from some campaigners seems driven by a hatred of fossil fuel companies that is preventing a level-headed understanding of how we can stop climate change,” he told the  Observer . “Together with dithering policymakers, they share responsibility for stopping the UK from leading a global effort to develop this technology.”
'Carbon-neutrality is a fairy tale': how the race for renewables is burning Europe's forests:	K alev Järvik stands on a bald patch of land in the heart of Estonia’s  Haanja nature reserve  and remembers when he could walk straight from one side of the reserve to the other under a canopy of trees. Järvik has lived in the Haanja uplands in the southern county of Võru for more than 10 years. His closeness to the forest has shaped his life as a carpenter and the fortunes of the surrounding villages, with their handicraft traditions – a substitute for farming on the poor arable land. Upcountry, travel literature promotes the region to city dwellers, promising its ancient woodlands as a place to rest and reinvigorate the mind. But in 2015, the Estonian government  allowed what is known as clear-cutting   in some parts of the Haanja nature reserve. The practice involves stripping entire areas of mature forest and removing whole tree trunks.  This relaxation of the logging rules came as international demand for Estonian wood soared – not just for furniture or construction, but because of an unlikely culprit: Europe’s renewable energy policies. “Sometimes I can’t bear to go outside,” Järvik says, standing by the stumps left on land stripped by the logging company Valga Puu. The firm is a subsidiary of Graanul Invest Group, Europe’s biggest producer of the wood pellets which are burned on an industrial scale as biomass for heat and light in many of Europe’s former coal-fired power stations. The days Järvik is spared the sound of harvesters have become rare. “You don’t want to leave home, because the landscape has become so impassable, it leaves you feeling anguished. But still the noise comes.” Forests cover  2m hectares  or more than half of Estonia. Around 380,000 hectares (939,000 acres) of that,  including the Haanja nature reserve , fall under the EU’s  Natura 2000  network, which is designed to protect Europe’s forests and offer a haven to rare and threatened species. Haanja is home to 29 protected species, including the black stork, the lesser-spotted eagle and the corncrake.  Natura-protected zones are managed under the legally binding provisions of the  1979 EU birds directive  and the  1992 habitats directive . But logging is governed by domestic laws, and Estonia permits it as long as it does not damage bogs and other special habitats, or fall within bird mating seasons.  Campaigners say   that by allowing intensive clear-cutting in Natura 2000 sites,  Estonia  is in breach of the habitats directive and undermining the EU’s climate goals. Siim Kuresoo of the non-profit Estonian Fund for Nature (ELF) doesn’t just blame the Estonian government. He says there is a direct connection between the subsidised growth in the biomass industry encouraged by EU renewable energy policies and the acceleration of unsustainable Baltic tree-felling.  “There is clear evidence that the intensification of logging is at least partly driven by higher demand for biomass for heat and power,” says a  report  co-authored by Kuresoo for the ELF and the Latvian Ornithological Society. “Given that over half of Estonia’s and Latvia’s wood pellet exports in 2019 went to Denmark, the Netherlands and the UK, ‘green energy’ use in those three countries contributes directly to increased logging in the two Baltic states.” The Council of Estonian Environmental NGOs (EKO), of which the ELF is a member, has made a complaint to the European commission alleging “systematic” breaches by Estonia of its forest conservation obligations. *** To investigate the subsidised European pellet trade and its impact on Baltic forests, we uploaded boundary files for Estonia’s Natura 2000 zones to Global Forest Watch, an online platform for monitoring forests, and found that per-hectare tree cover loss (the removal of the tree canopy rather than outright deforestation) in these areas accelerated after 2015. That was when the government adjusted park conservation rules to allow clear-cutting of up to one hectare at a time in some nature reserves. Across Estonia, between 2001 and 2019, Natura 2000 areas lost more than 15,000 hectares (37,000 acres) of forest cover, an area more than twice the size of Manhattan. The last five years account for 80% of that loss. Further alterations to rules in other Estonian national parks are planned. This acceleration appears to be taking a toll on bird species like the black grouse, woodlark and others. Woodland birds are declining at a rate of 50,000 breeding pairs a year, according to national  records . The clearances are also damaging the ability of Baltic forests to store carbon, and could be undermining climate goals by reducing the chance for Estonia and Latvia to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.  In a country where the overwhelming majority of peoplesay they regard nature as sacred, logging has led to protests or what the Estonian media calls the “forest war”. Residents of Saku, a small town 16 miles south of Tallinn, successfully fought to save an area of forest that was scheduled to be cut down this year by RMK, the state forest management company, which manages  around half  of Estonian forests. “We convert our trees into pellets and sell them to energy plants in your countries,” says Ivar Raig, one of the Saku campaigners. “This is considered to be sustainable, but we suffer.” **** Sustainability goes to the heart of the European renewable energy debate. The drive to replace coal, one of the world’s biggest sources of carbon emissions, with cleaner sources of power, is a top priority in the fight against climate change globally. A switch to burning wood in the form of pellets appears to offer a simple and in theory carbon-neutral alternative to coal-fired power stations because trees take up carbon dioxide from the air as they grow. As long as the burned trees are replaced with new plantings, there is no net addition to the stock of carbon in the atmosphere. However, that process of carbon take-up can take many decades. And in the furnace, burning wood  releases more carbon dioxide per unit of energy than burning gas, oil, or even coal . By accelerating carbon dioxide emissions in the short term, burning wood for electricity could be fatal for states’ ability to meet the Paris Agreement goal of keeping global heating to well below 2C by 2050. Demand for woody biomass or energy from wood as an alternative to coal in power stations took off from 2009, when the  first EU renewable energy directive  obliged member states to source 20% of energy from renewable sources by 2020 and classified biomass energy as carbon-neutral. A flaw in the legislation meant that woody biomass was fully categorised as renewable, even if it came not just from wood residues or waste, but from whole trees. This meant that companies could directly harvest forests for pellets – rather than making pellets from the by-products of timber cut for other uses – in the name of sustainable forest management. As the EU moved in 2018 to double the use of renewable energy by 2030,  scientists   warned  the European Parliament that this loophole in the sustainability criteria of the revised EU legislation would accelerate the climate crisis and devastate mature forests. But against the competing interests of the multibillion euro biomass lobby, it went unamended. Almost all European countries have recorded an increase in logging for energy.  Nearly a quarter  of the trees harvested in the EU in 2019 were for energy, up from 17% in 2000. Biomass, of which wood from forests is the main source, now makes up almost  60 % of the EU’s renewable energy supply, more than solar and wind combined, and a vast cross-border   industry has emerged to meet this demand. Taxpayer subsidies are driving much of the growth in this trade. Between 2008 and 2018, subsidies for biomass, of which wood is the main source, among 27 European nations increased by 143%. In the UK, g overnment support for biomass projects  is expected to total more than £13bn by 2027 – the date at which current subsidy agreements expire, according to the climate thinktank Ember. *** When Raul Kirjanen founded Graanul Invest in 2003, it was just him and his computer in a small office. By 2005 the company had opened its first factory in Imavere, Estonia, compressing sawdust and the waste wood from other processes into tiny pellets that could be bagged up and shipped overseas for burning in everything from domestic heaters to vast power plants to generate electricity. Today the European wood pellet trade is booming. Graanul Invest is the second biggest wood pellet maker in the world and Kirjanen is  one of the richest  people in the Baltics where the Estonian press call him  “the pellet king” . In 2019, the company manufactured 2.5m tonnes of pellets, up from 1.8m tonnes the previous year, across its plants in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the US. Every month tens of thousands of tonnes of wood pellets leave the port of Riga to cross the North Sea on Graanul Invest’s vessel, the MV Imavere. Much of this cargo is bound for the port of Immingham, where it is transported to UK power stations including Drax, which has converted four of its six units from coal to biomass since 2013 and is now the world’s largest biomass burning plant. The UK accounts for more than a third of Graanul’s annual revenue. Denmark, the Netherlands and Italy are also target markets. But electricity production from wood pellets would not be financially sustainable without public subsidies: the British government paid Drax the equivalent of €2.4m (£2.1m) a day in 2019. Drax will have received more than €11.2bn (£10bn) from the UK government since its conversion to biomass in 2012 until subsidies run out in 2027, researchers from the Ember have calculated. The UK is now the biggest subsidiser of bioenergy in Europe, spending more than  £1.9bn in 2019  primarily to pay for burning imported wood at Drax, according to new research by the  Natural Resources Defence Council  (NRDC) and  Cut Carbon Not Forests . Britain is no longer bound by EU renewable energy targets post-Brexit but has set a new target of cutting emissions by 68% by 2030 and is committed to the EU goal of net-zero carbon by 2050.  Other European governments are following suit. In the Netherlands, the government has promised energy companies RWE, Uniper and Onyx (formerly Engie) more than €3.5bn in subsidies to use biomass, making the country one of the biggest importers of wood pellets in Europe. Campaigners are anxiously watching  Germany , where Onyx Power, a subsidiary of the US hedge fund Riverstone, is examining the possibility of converting coal plants to biomass.  “Biomass only exists at the scale that it does because of subsidies,” says Duncan Brack, associate fellow at the London-based thinktank Chatham House. “We’re effectively paying to increase carbon emissions in the atmosphere, which is an absurd use of public money.” Brack says that the 2009  EU renewable energy directive  triggered a raft of subsidies for renewable power generation. “But since then solar and wind have really crashed in price. Now is the time to stop subsidising biomass.” “There’s huge infrastructure employing people and spending money, all based on subsidies,” says Michael Norton of the European Academies’ Science Advisory Council (EASAC). “The original simplistic idea of bioenergy from sustainable forestry suddenly blossomed into an industry achieving the opposite of what it was meant to do.” **** In November 2020 we   visited the Haanja nature park to verify the accelerated felling suggested by satellite data. Travelling south through the park, we passed small villages made up of wooden houses, wide black lakes and cows grazing in pastures. Near Vakari village our van took a left, passing wetlands surrounded by birch trees, and turned on to a stretch of road in a clearing. It was as if someone had carefully cut out rectangles of forest. A sign said the plot was owned by Valga Puu. Since 2016, more than 100 hectares (247 acres) of forest in the Haanja park have been felled on land owned by Graanul Invest Group, a significant increaseon the previous five years, when less than 20 hectares (49.4 acres) was felled, according to Global Forest Watch. We checked their data against our own analysis of high-resolution Google satellite images and corroborated it on the ground.  Graanul Invest collects  84% of its wood  by clear-cutting, according to its 2019 sustainability report. “Clear-cutting is the main harvesting method in Estonia that allows us to renew forests the fastest way,” the company told us. “Most trees in Estonia have quite a short lifespan and harvesting and planting a forest sublot as a whole means that all young trees will be at the same age and can start to grow together.” In practice, the method means leaving mostly stumps in the harvested patch. In the nature reserve, a few trees stand sentinel, part of Graanul Invest’s efforts to maintain biodiversity. The forest portfolio owned by Graanul Invest and its subsidiaries spans  55,000 hectares  (136,000 acres) across Estonia and Latvia and 12% of this is land protected under conservation programmes such as Natura 2000. Graanul has been able to accelerate tree felling on the protected lands because Estonia’s Nature Conservation Act divides it into three  zones : strict nature reserve, conservation zone, and limited management or buffer zone. Human intervention is prohibited in the first two; limited economic activities by landowners, including logging, are allowed in the buffer zones. Clear-cutting in buffer zones must still comply with the EU habitats directive.  Graanul Invest says the adjustment of the rules since 2015 hasn’t changed how much its forest management companies cut down, but makes them “more efficient”. The company also says their forest management companies do not directly harvest wood to be turned into pellets. “The main target is to harvest high-quality logs for sawmills or [the] plywood industry, then to pulp mills. Only material that is not suitable for other industries comes to pellet production,” a spokesperson said. Official literature from its logging subsidiary Valga Puu tells a different story. “Our goals for 2020 are related to the supply of Graanul Invest plants,” the company says in its latest annual report. We put this to Valga Puu’s chief executive, Andres Olesk. “Not the best wording,” he responded . But 40% of the wood that Graanul Invest harvests   on this land comes from whole trees deemed not straight enough or the right size, for such uses such as furniture or construction. This “low-quality wood”, as it is called in the trade, is crushed and turned into wood pellets. Harvesting old and poorly managed forests can increase the ability of the forest to hold carbon and improve the habitat for small birds and mammals,  according to the European commission . This could be the case in Estonia, where much of the woodland grew naturally 70 years ago on farmland left behind by Estonians who were killed or deported from rural areas during the second world war. “The share of low-quality timber in Estonian forests has always been high due to the fact that during the Soviet era the forests were not managed at all,” Marku Lamp, deputy secretary general of the Estonian ministry of the environment, says. “This has in some ways been an opportunity to sell the low-quality stock.” But Almuth Ernsting of climate activist group Biofuelwatch says the term “low-quality wood” is based on economic considerations only: “[It] takes no account of the ecological, climate or cultural value of the trees.” Robert Matthews, a UK climate scientist whose team carried out some of the research underpinning the revised EU Renewable  Energy  Directive, describes the idea of low-quality wood as “the sting in the tail”. “What is low-quality wood? It’s almost like a get out of jail free card.” On paper, Estonia’s forest stock seems to be  stable and even slightly increasing,  according to Estonia’s 2020 Forest Resources Assessment (FRA). On the ground, we found felled areas replanted with small spruces, which count towards forest area, even though the young trees will take decades to absorb the same amount of carbon as the old felled trees. These “temporarily unstocked or recently regenerated” forests have increased more than 20% since 2010,  FRA data says , with serious consequences for the capacity of Estonian land to store carbon. As a result, the Estonian land-use sector, which includes forestry, is expected to switch from being a carbon sink to an emitter of carbon by 2030,  according to Estonia’s National Energy and Climate report  – the same year by which, under the  EU’s updated Renewable Energy Directive,  Europe must have increased its energy from renewable sources to 32%. Graanul Invest  replanted 1.5m trees in 2019 , according to its annual report. Birch, a deciduous tree, is the dominant species across the 55,000 hectares (136,000 acres) in the company’s portfolio, but Graanul Invest replants  1.7 times more coniferous types such as spruce , a fast-growing species that the company says can “improve the carbon sequestration capability” of forests. Even so, it takes years for these tiny spruces to grow large enough to extract or sequester the carbon that is emitted by cutting them down – a problem known as carbon debt. It takes decades or even centuries for whole trees, unlike corn or other biomass crops, to regrow, says Massimiliano Patierno, an environmental engineer at the International Institute of Law and Environment. “If we count a period of, say, 40 years, in which the new trees have cancelled the carbon debt, then yes, that biomass can be seen as carbon-neutral,” he says. “But if we consider a very short period of time, it is likely that the carbon debt will not be cancelled.” Dr Mary Booth at the Partnership for Policy Integrity says that if the wood or forestry residues burned for electricity were instead left to decompose on the soil, they would emit carbon dioxide more gradually. “The accumulated net impact of such emissions likewise speeds warming,” she says. The latest felling in the Natura 2000 part of the Haanja nature park took place recently in a forest that was 70 years old and home to a number of different species, Siim Kuresoo says.  Experts hold that generally, the more diverse the forest, the greater the variety of animals and plants it can host. Žiga Malek, assistant professor in land use and ecosystem dynamicsat Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, says: “The vegetation that was there before protected the soil from being eroded.” Clear-cutting is allowed in Natura 2000 areas as long as it does not conflict with local conservation rules, Malek adds. “In this case it would mean minimum disturbance,” he says. “Which this is not.” Replanted forests can provide climate benefits, he adds, but they cannot fully replace the lost forest ecosystem.  Altering the forest type can also affect the amount of carbon stored in the ground. Mature and closer-to-natural forests sequester more carbon in the long run, due to a healthier ground biomass, Malek says. “Even if the clear-cut area is planted with one fast-growing species, it will not be as effective in terms of carbon sink as the more nature-like forest would in the long term.”  Kirjanen says his company is not doing anything out of the ordinary. In an email, he said that the “awesome” Estonian timber industry is the largest employer in rural areas because it has been able to grow and compete internationally. Almost all Europe’s existing forests are the result of “forest management” of a similar kind. “If we want our forests to be like this in the future, they must be managed,” he said. “Many protected areas in national parks are semi-natural communities, and without maintenance, conservation values often disappear.” *** There are signs that the EU intends to tighten the rules around what wood can be harvested as renewable energy. An  expert group  convened by the European commission recently recommended that biomass should be considered sustainable only if it comes from feedstocks listed in an annexe of the renewable energy directive, including bark and sawdust, and “pre-commercial forest thinnings”, apart from sawn logs.  Graanul Invest says that if there is demand for wood as in other fields, it makes sense to use the waste material both from forestry and the wood industry for useful applications – including energy. But scientists and campaigners say we simply don’t have time to cut down trees for energy production if we are going to meet climate goals.  “The urgency has completely changed in the last 15 years,” Michael Norton says. “We don’t have until 2070 – emissions have to come down sooner. Biomass that increases carbon emissions in the next 10 to 30 years is not compatible with climate change policy.” Back in the Haanja nature park, Kuresoo says it will take many decades for the trees that have been felled to date to grow back to their former size. “This idea of carbon neutrality is a fairy tale,” he says. “Climate change is already happening. We should be planting trees instead of taking them down.” This article is based on Money to Burn, a  cross-border investigative project  led by the Dutch public investigative journalism platform Argos and supported by Investigative Journalism for Europe. Additional reporting by  Catherine Joie ,  Piret Reiljan ,  Paul Toetzke ,  Sophie Blok ,  Ties Gijzel ,  Silvia Nortes  and  Ben Heubl . This article was amended on 14 January 2021. Drax has converted four of its six units from coal to biomass, not four power plants as an earlier version said.
Vaccine scepticism in France reflects 'dissatisfaction with political class’:	I n  France , every child is now obliged to have 11 vaccinations. If parents want their children to attend school, or take part in many extracurricular activities, they must accept. There is no opt-out or concessions made to vaccine doubters. On Monday France’s government and health authorities are speeding up the country’s Covid-19 vaccine drive – a process complicated by widespread scepticism about the inoculation that has encompassed the usual global conspiracy theories. For weeks, polls have suggested up to 60% of French citizens do not wish to be vaccinated. As the government’s vaccine operation enters its third week,  official figures  show that as of Saturday at least 93,000 people had been given the jab – a much lower number than elsewhere in Europe, including the UK, Germany and Italy.  Laurent-Henri Vignaud, a science historian whose 2019 book  Antivax,  co-written with immunology specialist Françoise Salvadori, examines vaccine scepticism in the west since the 18th century, says we should not heed polls suggesting the French will refuse the vaccine. “There’s a very big difference between what the French say and what they do,” he told the Guardian. “And polls whose methodology and questions can seem abstract do not reflect what happens when people know where they will have the vaccine, what it does, the how, when and why.” Vaccine doubters have existed as long as vaccines , but for years polls have suggested France has more than most of its European neighbours – an odd reputation given that immunology pioneer Louis Pasteur was French and is a figure of fierce national pride. Prof Jocelyn Raude, an expert on health behaviour at the École des Hautes Études en Santé Publique who has studied the anti-vaccine movement, says that as recently as 2005 polls showed 90% support for vaccines, “which seems incredible today”. However, by the turn of the 21st century the seeds of doubt had already been sown. In the 1990s, a mass campaign to vaccinate French children against hepatitis B coincided with a jump in multiple sclerosis cases, though studies never found a convincing link between the two.  In 1991, there was a medical scandal not linked to vaccines specifically when it was discovered that health authorities had knowingly distributed blood products contaminated with HIV to haemophiliacs in the 1980s. Several ministers were later charged with manslaughter. However, Raude said it was the 2009 H1N1 scandal, in which the government massively overordered 94m vaccine doses at a cost of €869m (£780m), that fuelled today’s vaccine scepticism. The health ministry later cancelled more than half the order but the damage was done. Opposition parties criticised the waste of public money and accused officials of being in league with big pharma. In the end, 323 people in France died of H1N1, only 6m people were vaccinated and 19m vaccine doses were destroyed. An official estimate put the cost of the debacle at €382m. Raude says the scepticism was amplified when some high-profile French celebrities began expressing vaccine doubts, relayed by newly emerging social media networks. Then came the  Mediator scandal . The diabetic drug, widely but wrongly prescribed to those seeking to lose weight, was linked to between 500 and 1,200 deaths over more than three decades. Mediator’s manufacturer, Servier, was accused of charges including manslaughter, and 12 people ended up in the dock in a criminal trial last year, including officials who were also paid as consultants of pharmaceutical companies. The company and the individuals charged deny wrongdoing. Judgment is expected in March. “It was a tipping point. The Mediator scandal validated in people’s minds the idea of corruption between officials and pharmaceutical companies in France; that it was about business not health safety,” Raude says. Another cause, he says, is the lack of confidence in doctors and scientists. “It’s not new for the French to lack confidence in political leaders, but there is a low level of confidence in the medical authorities in France. The effect of this is if you don’t trust the experts, you don’t follow their advice.” Vignaud says vaccine scepticism is less against the vaccine itself than those promoting it, reflecting  a distrust of “politicians , high-profile doctors and experts and journalists”. “France doesn’t have any more hard and fast anti-vaxxers than anywhere else, what it does have is … a certain dissatisfaction with the political class,” he says. “There is a strong expectation of the state, but we are permanently disappointed: we see this with the vaccine programme: some say it’s too slow, others it’s too fast. Everyone is disappointed.” The  film Hold-Up , a much lampooned and debunked epic claiming Covid-19 is a global conspiracy, has compounded the mistrust and been been shared by influential figures. Among those trying to combat the disinformation with facts and humour is the Facebook site  Les Vaxxeuses . “Vaccines are the biggest medical advance … don’t let lies make you doubt the benefits,” the website says. Over the weekend anti-vaccination proponents were dealt a blow when the far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed course and said she would agree to receive a Covid jab, having previously voiced her opposition. Ministers are confident France’s vaccine programme will catch up in the coming weeks, insisting it is “a marathon, not a sprint”. “Once access to the vaccine becomes a reality people will have the vaccine. They have had enough,” Vignaud says. Raude agrees the government’s “slow steps” strategy appears to be working. “The  government has been slow and careful  so as not to frighten people … when French people see the benefits, they will do it.”
Sri Lanka v England: Visitors need 36 more to win first Test as bad light ends day four – as it happened:	Righto! That’s us done for the day; join me tomorrow for whatever happens happening!  Enjoy the rest of the weekend, such that such thing is possible given the morning.  Here’s Ali Martin’s report... Jack Leach says he found some good rhythm in the afternoon, trying to land it with fizz by bowling as fast as he could.  He’s found it hard this game having not got much cricket behind him, and the wicket’s slow so there’s not much room for error. He’s pleased that he’s improved through the match and still has stuff to think about, and oh yes! He has to “Control the controllables!” You love to hear it. He goes on to talk about the sepsis and illness that have caused him grief lately, then says he’s much happier now that Bairstow and Lawrence have settled things.  I suppose he’ll just give an interview to Sky if not.  Maybe he’ll film it himself.  I already can’t wait for the second Test,  and hopefully someone has the presence of mind to film the chat during which Broad learns he’s being rested.  By the way, this isn’t the only cricketing beauty currently blessing us.  There’s something extremely affirming about how the game has cared for us these last few months.  I’m feeling slightly calmer now, but there’s no greater inquisitor of mettle than Test cricket.  How can your captain, scorer of 228 majestic first-innings runs, get himself dismissed while colliding with the bowler?  It’s the repetitive nature of it I think, and a game that necessarily stops after piece of play, during which everyone has a chance to remind themselves how terrified and excited they are, before doing the same thing again and again and again.  “I’d have sent in Broad at five in this situation,” advises Felix Wood.  “Good for a quick 20 runs to break the back of the chase. Why I’m still not England coach is baffling, to be honest.” Stuart Broad is about the only thing in world cricket that could possibly elevate this incredible situation and I’m going to use you every time I hear an outlandish suggestion that makes perfect sense. “Well, Felix would.” Oh my absolute days, what an absolute day of “Test-match cricket” that was.  Can it be tomorrow already please?  “Imagine supporting any other Test playing nation,” tweets @AsNaturalAsRain,  “knowing they’ll mechanically knock off the 74 runs for perhaps the loss of a single late wicket. God bless this England team; God bless this game!” Amen ve’amen! 16th over: England 38-3 (Bairstow 11, Lawrence 7) Target 74  We’re meant to finish in four minutes, but the umpires can decide on another half hour if they fancy we can finish tonight; I doubt they’ll come to that conclusion, and in fact we’re done for the day.  “TMS link,” says Richard Turner. Why do they hide it?” It’s a test of love.  15th over: England 38-3 (Bairstow 11, Lawrence 7) Target 74  Lawrence is navigating this so well, cutting two, then Embuldeniya hurls him a grenade which he does really well to avoid; to quote the late, great MC Ruff, “Rush, move, step inside”. Not until this day did I realise he was talking about cricket, and the ball rushes away for four leg byes. A single to cover follows, and this pair have done really to calm themselves.  14th over: England 31-3 (Bairstow 11, Lawrence 4) Target 74  Nice from Bairstow, who takes a single to leg, then Lawrence blocks before shovelling in that direction himself. Imagine the state of his neck hairs right now; it’s actually pretty moving to consider. You work your entire life to play Test cricket and suddenly you’re in a situation that is its zenith, apex and apotheosis. I’ve no idea how you process such thing; I’m half gone just thinking about it.  13th over: England 29-3 (Bairstow 10, Lawrence 3) Target 74  Bairstow is actually a pretty useful man to have out there at the moment – good against spin, quick between the wickets, confident in his ability, a point to think he’s proved. He takes two to cover, then a further single to retain the strike.  “I live in Italy and if I remember the last couple of seasons correctly, the overseas link is only available during UK based Test matches,” laments Richard Harman.  12th over: England 26-3 (Bairstow 7, Lawrence 3) Target 74  Bairstow gets down to reverse Perera and the turn takes the ball past bat, pad, shoulder, keeper, and pandemic, racing away for four byes! He’d’ve took it! A single follows via sweep, and this is a huge over for England, er ...  five  from it. Forty-eight required.  11th over: England 21-3 (Bairstow 6, Lawrence 3) Target 74  Eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesh! Embuldeniya has Lawrence dancing, crouching and shaking his tailfeather, properly working him over. First, he wears one on the glove, then he retreats at half-mast as one passes off stump with him nowhere near, then a forward defensive. Maiden, and oh my absolute days, I adore Test cricket.  “ Inspired by your Sounds of Silence and Kim Thonger’s earlier magnificence,” says Brian Withington, “can I offer a humble ode to YDL, the only Essex boy in Galle” ‘Dan get your pads on in time, I know your part’ll go fine Fly down those steps Doh-n-doh-de-doh-n-doh And here you are The only Essex boy in Gal-le.” With apologies to Paul Simon. 10th over: England 21-3 (Bairstow 6, Lawrence 3) Target 74  Dan Lawrence, though; coming in at 14-3 after your captain, scorer of a first-innings doubleton, has been run out in hilarious circumstances. This is what you dream of and he’s looking good out there, missing with a slog-sweep but getting well outside the line so to do; they run a leg bye which brings Bairstow onto strike. And of course he looks to cut hard, missing entirely when Perera extracts some extra bounce; it’s just the way he plays.  9th over: England 20-3 (Bairstow 6, Lawrence 3) Target 74  Embuldeniya has two slips and a short leg as he wheels in; Lawrence knocks his first delivery towards cover, where a field ricket allows him a single. Five dots follow, and we’ve got scope for an extra half-hour when play finishes in 25 minutes, but the light will likely intervene to prevent that.  “What did they put in the drinks at the interval?” asks Charles Sheldrick; I’m not sure but I wish someone had slipped a valium in mine.  8th over: England 19-3 (Bairstow 6, Lawrence 2) Target 74  The fielders are getting progressively louder, as you would, but this is a quieter over in terms of action; Lawrence looks pretty composed out there, and takes a single to leg after Bairstow pokes around the corner. Nothing –  nothing  – comes close to Test cricket like this.  7th over: England 17-3 (Bairstow 5, Lawrence 1) Target 74  I’m standing up! A leading edge from Bairstow drops shy of gully, they run, and a direct hit, he’s gone! But the ball whizzes past the stumps and England have got this under complete control. Tow more singles follow.  6th over: England 14-3 (Bairstow 3, Lawrence 0) Target 74  How are your nerves Daniel Lawrence?!  A glorious moment of pure, uncut England! Bairstow calls Root through for a quick single, he collides with the bowler and is run out well short of his ground. Just when we think we’ve seen it all, they show us that we’ve seen nothing! What more can this team do to amaze us?! 6th over: England 14-2 (Bairstow 3, Root 1) Target 74  Bairstow takes one to leg, then Root clumps a sweep to midwicket........ “Could England snatch defeat from the jaws of victory?” is Ian Foorth’s entry into the OBO’s rhetorical question competition. “There are three recentish precedents for them scoring under 74 in a fourth innings run chase (though the targets were considerably larger on each occasion). NZ, Wellington 1978: target 137, scored 64. WI, Port of Spain 1994: target 194, scored 46. Pakistan, Abu Dhabi 2012: target 145, scored 72.” I don’t know about you, but I’m excited! History has its eyes on us!  5th over: England 12-2 (Bairstow 2, Root 0) Target 74  The ball is doing plenty, but here’s Joe Root, poised to join the list of those to have faced balls on all five days of a Test.  Hello darkness my old friend! Crawley plays a nondescript drive and edges to gully. Because a vision softly creeping, left its seeds while I was sleeping, and the vision that was planted in my brain, still remains. 5th over: England 12-1 (Crawley 8, Bairstow 2) Target 74  Have a look! Embuldeniya absolutely rags one past Crawley’s outside edge; that’s the ball Sibley thought he was getting.  4th over: England 12-1 (Crawley 8, Bairstow 2) Target 74  Bairstow gets underway with a reverse for one; I’m looking forward to his reaction when he seals the win with an edge for four to finish on a 27 not out that really shows everyone. Crawley then pokes a single before Bairstow finds himself totally square in the French cricket fashion – that doesn’t seem like a wise tactic – ticking off one more with another reverse, Crawley doing likewise with an edge.  3rd over: England 8-1 (Crawley 6, Bairstow 0) Target 74  This is a great opportunity for both these batsmen, Crawley seeking to establish and Bairstow to re-establish. Embudeniya’s third ball gets the former face on and he wears it on the pad; there’s an appeal which is rejected. But this is intense stuff now, and Crawley top-edges the next one, which drops to where gully isn’t.  2nd over: England 8-1 (Crawley 6, Bairstow 0) Target 74  Perera deceives Crawley with another which holds its line and he’s nicked it! But Dickwella can’t hang on, and Crawley takes advantage, standing on stilts to drive four through point before gloving past leg slip for one. This is great stuff; it’s a shame Sri Lanka don’t have another 70 or so.  1st over: England 3-1 (Crawley 1, Bairstow 0) Target 74  This is fun!  Hello old friend! After finding healthy turn, Embuldeniya slings down the arm ball and Sibley confidently allows it to go past, losing his off peg in the process! That is extremely well bowled and also extremely amusing.  1st over: England 3-0 (Crawley 1, Sibley 2) Target 74  Given the weather, I wonder if England will try to finish this here and nar, and Crawley takes Embuldeniya’s loosener for one to cover, then Sibley nudges two into the on side.  Back to England’s spinners, we’ll get a truer gauge of where they’re at from the India tour.  But afternoons like this will get them closer to where they want to be for that. Right, here we go... “Given the comment about Sri Lanka’s being one of the worst batting displays he’s ever seen,” says Richard Hirst,  “England have a high (or low) bar to aim for in the second innings, but I reckon they should be up to the job.” Over the years, I’ve had the  naches  of narrating some absolutely sensational collapses, but to do this one would be the rarest of pleasures.  The forecast tomorrow is not good,  by the way.  “Three more wickets in the day and Joe Root has a big incentive to be not out overnight,”  says Phil Russell. Here’s the answer , for once you’ve had a think about what that might be.  “It’s been a couple of Tests now that the TMS overseas link no longer appears at the top of the  bbc.com  live feed,” emails Jem Bosatta.  “The Guardian used to fish it out - has any listener fished it out for you?” Help a brother out?  That’s a really good effort from both sides.  Sri Lanka fought back well but ultimately you can’t get rolled for 135 and expect to get very far. England, meanwhile, came back really well this afternoon, their spinners especially. Both Bess and Leach have a bit of something; can they use what they’ve done and what they’ve learnt to take the next step/  Fifer for Leach! Mathews looks to guide his fifth ball down to third man for one, but instead he feathers a catch to Root at one! I’m not sure the light will stick around for that to be sorted tonight, but even England will struggle to ruin this. Imagine if they do though!  136th  over: Sri Lanka 359-9 ( Mathews 71, Fernando 0)  Wood begins his 21st over with some short stuff from around the wicket. It’s hard to tell from norf Landan, but I’m wondering if the light has dropped so maybe he’s getting it in while he can. Mathews, who hasn’t always looked comfy against short stuff, sends the fourth ball to midwicket for one, and again Fernando survives. Surely we’ll shee Shtuart shoon? Anyway, that’s drinks.  135th  over: Sri Lanka 358-9 ( Mathews 70, Fernando 0)  Mathews is into reverse-sweeping stance as Leach releases the ball, sending four through gully; Leach responds by beating the outside edge and appealing for another stumping, but not this time. Mathews eases his fifth delivery behind square on the off side, and Fernando, with two slips and a short leg crowding his personal space, survives the final ball of the over.  134th  over: Sri Lanka 353-9 ( Mathews 65, Fernando 0)  Mathews is looking to go, having a fat swing then refusing a single after pulling a bouncer to deep square. In commentary they’re still re-umpiring the stumping but it’s pretty clear to me that there was nothing behind the line, while back in the middle, Mathews pulls another short one and this time he does take the run, leaving Fernando two balls to see away; he does.  133rd  over: Sri Lanka 352-9 ( Mathews 64, Fernando 0)  Mathews will sure have to go now. Sri Lanka lead by 66, and even England will struggle to collapse for that. 
Mesut Özil poised to join Fenerbahce as agreement on ending Arsenal deal nears:	Mesut Özil is close to agreeing a settlement with  Arsenal  that would allow him to terminate his contract and join Fenerbahce this month. The playmaker’s future has been a topic for several months and the question has been when, rather than if, he will depart a club where he has fallen dramatically out of favour. Özil’s £350,000-a-week deal at Arsenal ends on 30 June but the two parties are on the verge of confirming an early parting of ways. Talks are understood to be continuing but player and club can now see a clear route out of a situation that has cast a shadow for longer than anyone involved would have liked. Özil was frozen out of Mikel Arteta’s plans after football returned from its Covid-19 hiatus in June and  was then completely cut  from the 25-man Premier League and Europa League squads for the first half of this season. He has become an expensive problem and, among Arsenal’s fanbase, a deeply divisive one. Fenerbahce have emerged  as the frontrunners for Özil’s signature in the event of a disentanglement with Arsenal, with Major League Soccer’s DC United also linked with the 32-year-old. He said in a Twitter question and answer session on Monday that Turkey and the US were the “two countries I want to play football in before I retire” and also explained that he grew up as a Fenerbahce fan, describing them as a Turkish version of Real Madrid. Terms with Fenerbahce are not expected to be a problem and his arrival in Istanbul should be confirmed as soon as the loose ends with Arsenal are tied up, potentially in the next few days. Özil won 92 caps for Germany, where he was born, but has Turkish heritage and has retained strong links with his ancestors’ country. It will draw the curtain on a seven-and-a-half-year spell at Arsenal that began in significant excitement when he  signed from Real Madrid for £42.5m  in September 2013. The spell has not been without its successes, which have included four FA Cup wins, but did not quite herald the fruitful new era Arsenal had hoped for. His first three years at the Emirates were particularly impressive, with a return of 19 Premier League assists in 2015-16 bringing him the club’s player of the year award. Özil’s effectiveness waned, though, particularly after the departure of Arsène Wenger. He was dropped by Arteta’s predecessor, Unai Emery, while several off-pitch issues have caused friction with his employer. Özil was unhappy in December 2019 when, after he publicly criticised the treatment of Uighur Muslims in China,  Arsenal distanced themselves  from his comments.
Jürgen Klopp needs faltering Firmino, Mané and Salah to spark again:	A  fair amount has altered since Mohamed Salah steamed through on David de Gea’s goal to seal  Liverpool’s 2-0 win against Manchester United  almost exactly one year ago. There were 52,916 supporters allowed inside Anfield on that different planet, Alisson could sprint the length of the pitch to embrace the goalscorer without fear of government censure and Liverpool fans finally acknowledged in public that the Premier League title was theirs after a 30-year wait. Of the many changes in Jürgen Klopp’s world since last receiving Ole Gunnar Solskjær at Anfield, it is the dilution of that fierce belief into creeping doubt that will irritate most. According to Klopp, the perception of Liverpool’s current position and form does not tally with reality. Whereas United arrive on Merseyside on Sunday emboldened by leading the Premier League after as many as 17 matches for the first time since 2013, and optimism abounds at Manchester City following seven successive victories in all competitions,  Liverpool  are floundering after three league games without a win despite being sandwiched between their two rivals and three points off the summit. At least that is how Klopp assesses the external mood. The champions, he believes, are being held to last season’s imperious standards and receiving no allowances for the various mitigating factors behind this term’s grind. His team, he insists, have performed poorly twice during the downturn that has offered hope to both sides of the Manchester divide – throughout  the 1-1 draw at Fulham  on 13 December and in the second half of  the 1-1 draw with West Brom  a fortnight later. The Liverpool manager’s views are also open to debate, although perhaps the most misleading theory surrounding the champions’ recent dip is that well-publicised problems in defence are the root cause. The lauded attack that has compensated for defensive holes for much of the campaign is chiefly responsible and Diogo Jota’s absence has been felt more over the past few weeks than even the  seismic loss of Virgil van Dijk . Liverpool’s defensive recovery has been impressive by any standards since  the 7-2 aberration at Aston Villa . That is has followed injuries to Van Dijk, Joe Gomez and Joël Matip, required the inexperienced Rhys Williams and Nat Phillips to partner the midfielder Fabinho in central defence, plus Jordan Henderson, and included the rarity of a struggling Trent Alexander-Arnold underlines the formidable quality of the squad. Having conceded 11 goals in the first four games of the title defence, up to and including the 11th minute of the Merseyside derby when Van Dijk was forced off, Liverpool have shipped 10 in 13 matches subsequently. Only Manchester City have conceded fewer goals – six – than Liverpool have done since losing their key central defender. That resilience has kept them in the hunt and given Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mané, Roberto Firmino and Jota the platform for a combined 29 Premier League goals. Between them, Liverpool’s front four are responsible for 78% of the team’s league goals (United’s main four strikers – Marcus Rashford, Edinson Cavani, Anthony Martial and Mason Greenwood – account for 34% of their total, 13 goals). With the established front three suffering a collective drop-off, Jota sidelined and the supporting cast ineffective, the problems in the final third have been glaring of late. Firmino, Mané and Salah need to spark again and they have made a habit of doing so in decisive contests, for Liverpool to dismiss United as a fleeting challenger and respond to the re-emerging threat from City. The destructive quality that punished Leicester, Wolves and Crystal Palace, when Takumi Minamino started in place of Salah at Selhurst Park, was painfully absent against West Brom, Newcastle and Southampton. Klopp described the performances at St James’ Park and St Mary’s as “good” and “a normal away game” respectively, albeit while criticising a lack of composure in front of goal, poor decision-making and inaccuracy in both. Liverpool have failed to score in back-to-back Premier League games for the first time since May 2018. Having been at  their clinical best in the rout of Palace , scoring seven times from eight shots on target, they have managed seven attempts on target in their past three matches. There was only one at Southampton, from Mané in the 75th minute, their latest for a first shot on target in a league game for more than five years. It is not being wise after the event to question Klopp’s selection for the dead-rubber with Midtjylland Jota has been a telling loss. The Portugal international scored nine goals in 17 appearances following his £41m arrival from Wolves, including decisive winners in successive home league games against Sheffield United and West Ham. His seamless introduction put more pressure on the first-choice front three than Divock Origi or Minamino, allowed Klopp to cover the defensive issues with even more firepower and provided a potent alternative to Firmino during what has been a relatively subdued season by the Brazilian. The striker has yet to resume full team training after sustaining a knee ligament injury in the final Champions League group game at Midtjylland on 9 December. It is not being wise after the event to question Klopp’s selection for that dead-rubber. It was bewildering at the time to see Jota, Alexander-Arnold, Fabinho and Salah start while their manager was railing against the demands on his players, even though he did make eight changes to the team that dismantled Wolves three days earlier. With Salah subsequently complaining about not being captain for that game, when he gave a rare interview to Spanish sports daily  AS , Midtjylland proved a dead-rubber with several avoidable headaches for Klopp. A remedy is available at Anfield on Sunday, however, when the two biggest clubs in the land finally meet in a game with title consequences for both sides. An opportunity for Liverpool to restore belief.
Chelsea v Manchester United: Women's Super League – live!:	21 min:  Earp’s goal kick is long, and a waste of the respite that United require. It’s back to defending Chelsea’s attacking.  19 min:  United really struggling in midfield to stop Chelsea’s attacks. But they are putting in every effort. They need a little bit of respite.  17 min:  Chelsea piling it on now, but Ji’s pass goes astray.  15 min:  ANOTHER Kerr chance. She bursts through, and misses. She chose the outside of her boot rather than her left foot, and that’s a bad miss. Will Chelsea regret that? 14 min:  Another Kerr shot, this time deflected, though oddly the referee gives a goal kick. 12 min:  Kerr escapes for Chelsea, but her pass evades all known teammates, and there were a few candidates for a better ball, with Kirby the prime target. The champions putting the hammer down but Sam Kerr has been profligate.  10 min:  Chelsea on the attack, and Ji gets to the byline, only for the ball to be cleared. Both defences being stretched when they are being put under pressure.  8 min:  Galton’s cross is headed away by Mjelde. Chelsea having to defend deep and being put through their paces. Casey Stoney roaring on her team to chase every ball. It’s working.  6 min:  End to end, and Christen Press looks to have escaped and tries a speculative shot, though an offside flag is waved.  5 min:  Another glimpse of Kerr as Kirby releases her. The shot is screwed wide. United’s defence has wobbled.  3 min:  A howling pass from Chelsea keeper Berger is played straight into United’s hands. It’s eventually cleared and Chelsea go all the way down the other end. Kerr drops the shoulder and drives into the box, and shoots. Mary Earp makes a save with her foot in the style of Pat Jennings or David de Gea in new money.  2 min:  A quiet start, but one in which United have pressed hard. Casey Stoney can be heard to urge on the press.  1 min:  Chelsea get the game underway with the kick-off after the players and staff take the knee.  The teams take to the field at Kingsmeadow  to the tune of the Harry J Allstars’ The Liquidator.  Manchester City stepped off the gas  against Aston Villa, and won 7-0, having led 6-0 after the first half.  Chelsea manager Emma Hayes speaks.  I know I shouldn’t be saying this with all the social distancing and that, but these are the days you want the fans in. This is the message, we will make sure we will give you entertainment. We are both deserving of where we are. It will be a cracker. Too many good players for it not to be. The way the league has gone there’s been three cancellations. I’m just grateful we can get the game underway. She [Casey Stoney] knows what she’s doing, she will be ready for this.  Manchester United manager Casey Stoney speaks.  Every game is a big name and this is not more important than playing Reading. If you want you be in and around the top three you need you win. Earlier in the season, we took a point off Chelsea and beat Arsenal, and that breeds belief. We know we will have to be clean in possession. No different than normal. We’re here to get a win. [First game in 2021]. It’s not ideal preparation but that was beyond our control. I think it’s gong to be about both boxes, defending well in our box and attacking well in theirs.  Both teams have big names  to come off the bench, with Beth England there for Chelsea as Sam Kerr and Fran Kirby start, while Tobin Heath and Lauren James are options for Casey Stoney.  Those teams again: Chelsea:  Berger; Mjelde, Andersson, Bright, Eriksson (capt), Ji, Leupolz, Harder, Cuthdert, Kirby, Kerr. Subs:  Telford, Blundell, Ingle, England, Reiten, J Fleming, Charles, Spence. Manchester United:  Earps; Batlle, A Turner (capt), M Turner, Smith, Ladd, Groenen, Hanson, Toone, Galton, Press. Subs:  Bentley, Harris, McManus, Zelem, Fuso, Heath, James, Ross, Sigsworth. Chelsea are unbeaten in 30 WSL matches , having not lost since January 2019. They are defending their title, of course.  There is much respect between the two managers today , as reported by Louise Taylor. In the other WSL matches being played today , Manchester City are leading Aston Villa 6-0. At half-time, while Everton are leading Bristol City 1-0. Reading v Arsenal kicks off at 2pm as does Birmingham v Brighton and West Ham and Tottenham begin their London derby at 3pm. After last week, it’s good to see the matches being played.  Team news is in! ✍️ Here is your Chelsea team to take on Man Utd! 👊 #CFCW   pic.twitter.com/1QJTq1do80 📋 Our first starting XI of the year — go get 'em, Reds! ✊ #MUWomen   #BarclaysFAWSL   pic.twitter.com/9rdxcO4vKR This is one that could go some way to deciding the destiny of the WSL title. A Chelsea win would put Emma Hayes’ team in the box seat, as they have an extra game in hand. Casey Stoney’s United squad were one of those who made their way to Dubai, but unlike Manchester City and Arsenal returned without any positive tests. After last weekend, all but blank save for one fixture, Chelsea’s 5-0 thumping of Reading, this is the match of the season so far, and two unbeaten records are being placed at stake. United didn’t play last week due to Covid cases among Everton’s players. This is their first match of 2021, in fact.  Kick-off is 2.30pm, join me.
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Sheffield United v Tottenham: Premier League – live!:	Admir emails to say:  “I reckon things would have been better for The Blades had they secured another season of Dean Henderson on loan which would have allowed them to spend those £20m spent on Ramsdale on a reliable goalscorer instead. They have struggled with scoring goals since their return to  Premier League  and no player scored more than six last season. “They are not Barcelona 2008-09 but they are not Derby 2007-08 either.” I am not a huge Ramsdale fan, either. They did spend a lot of money on Brewster but do not play him! Aurier and Kane have made the difference by making the most of mistakes from Sheffield United, who look devoid of confidence.  Sheffield United  need to mix things up or they will be going down with a whimper. 45 mins:  Spurs have an eye on third. (Only one more goal needed now. Hi  @Will_Unwin  2 more goals for Spurs this afternoon and the ‘biggest game of the season’ (TM all of the media) will feature 1st vs 4th. At which point all fans of anyone other than ManUtd and Liverpool might want to invoke the trades description act. 44 mins:  Basham sends in a dangerous cross which reaches Bogle but his vicious shot is blocked by Dier. The England centre-back is showing great commitment today, him and Rodon have put their bodies on the line a few times already.  42 mins:  Spurs are in complete control here and  Sheffield United  look out of their depth, as they have done for most of the season. It’s nice to show faith in McGoldrick but he is, ultimately, a League One striker. Is it not worth giving Brewster a run in the side to boost his confidence? Sheffield United  try to play out from the back but Norwood is dispossessed 30 yards from goal and the ball is played to Kane, who gets it out of his feet and picks out the bottom corner from 20 yards. 38 mins:  Reguilon provides some lovely skill as he dinks the ball over a Blades man, takes it up the pitch and lays it off to Son who hits a cross into the six-yard box where Kane is waiting. A defender, however, reaches it first and knocks it up in the air, allowing Ramsdale to get up off the floor and punch the ball off the line when under pressure from Kane.  36 mins:  Norwood slips in McGoldrick, he cuts back onto his right foot and fires a shot which is blocked by Dier. Fleck is the next to try a shot from distance but he fires it straight into the arms of Lloris. At least it is a sign of intent from the Blades. 34 mins:  Stevens gets the ball a good yard offside but, due to the current regulations, the assistant lets play go. The farce ends due to the fact everyone on the pitch had stopped playing.  Burke gets to the byline down the left and then flashes the ball across the box but there is no one there to reach the cross.  32 mins:  Ndombele slides a pass towards the penalty spot but it is read by Ampadu who glides in to clear.  30 mins:  Ndombele is dispossessed on the halfway, Fleck brings it forward for the Blades but the attack quickly breaks down. Even after a couple of wins,  Sheffield United  look devoid of confidence in the final third. They seem more concerned with what is happening down the other end. 28 mins:  Spurs are dominating possession, unsurprisingly, but  Sheffield United  hold firm on the edge of their own area. They ball is send upfield to McGoldrick, who gets it in front of him but Rodon reads it and takes the ball off him before any danger can occur. 26 mins:  There is an incredibly large gap between the  Sheffield United  midfielder and strikers. I have a feeling they will not be offering much in the final third today. 24 mins:  Kane instigates a break down the middle but his progress is curtailed by Norwood who eventually brings down the Spurs skipper after a couple of nibbles at his ankles, which see the midfielder go into the book. 22 mins:  Rodon brings the ball out of defence and the plays it to a red and white shirt on the halfway line but the Welshman still seems to blame everyone else for his terrible pass. Luckily, for Rodon, nothing comes of it.  20 mins:  Ndombele finds Aurier with a lovely outside-of-the-foot pass, the wing-back then lays it off to Kane who sees his cross easily cleared.  18 mins:  McGoldrick is certainly working very hard, as usual, but he never really looks like scoring, which is quite important for a striker. 16 mins:  Lloris is allowed to ping a pass 60 yards to Aurier without fuss, he plays it into Kane who is then cleared out by Egan. The  Sheffield United  man is lucky to avoid a booking. 14 mins:  Son breaks down the left, gets into the box and drives a cross for Kane but it is intercepted and cleared for a corner. Son’s set-piece does not get past the first man and it is cleared. 12 mins:  The resulting corner finds Basham at the back post, he heads it back across goal but Davies is there waiting to clear. Some positive signs for the Blades, at least.  10 mins:  The Blades will be looking to provide some sort of response and they almost do as McGoldrick slips in Burke, who finds space and slams a left-footed shot towards goal but Dier is there to block it. 7 mins:  Game over? Probably as  Sheffield United  have not scored 10 goals all season in the league. When you are doing as badly as the Blades are, defending set-pieces competently is the bare minimum. Son swings in the resulting corner, which Aurier nods in at the front post, resulting in a shout from a Blades player: “Too f*cking easy.” 4 mins:  Sheffield United providing their usual high energy to press the Spurs defence but the visitors still get out pretty easily.  Bergwijn picks up the ball from Kane 25 yards from goal, gets it out of his feet and drives the ball towards goal, forcing Ramsdale to push the ball over the bar.  2 mins:  As predicted, Spurs have started with three at the back; Rodon on the right, Dier central and Davies on the left. Down the other end, Spurs are looking pretty confident and have already forced the Blades into a couple of blocks.  Sheffield United  a looking very compact. Peep! Peep! Peep! Here we go! Our man at the match, Nick Ames, describes the weather in Sheffield as ‘chilly but OK’.  More insight from him as we get it. I have only ever been to Bramall Lane once but that was to cover their drop into League One, so at least I witnessed a moment in history.  I had fishcakes for lunch but no strawberry Nesquik, so it was not a complete meal.  Something to think about for later ... Do  Sheffield United  have any hope of staying up?  Nope, not at all. At least they can have some fun now they have actually won at match. Wilder will be desperate to at least take a few scalps before the end of the season and Spurs would be a decent one to start with. The lads. The Gaffers. 🤝  pic.twitter.com/NmfhVUvClk Along with Alli, Harvey White also misses on the matchday squad.  The young midfielder was another who looked impressive at Marine but his place on the bench has gone to Gedson Fernandes who has never looked particularly impressive and is needlessly blocking a path to the first team. Sheffield United remembering better times ... Enda & Ozzy combine to find Moose. 👊  pic.twitter.com/11GUd2rwIM Dele Alli is nowhere to be seen for Spurs, which is very telling.  Mourinho does not think he is fighting for a place in the team. Maybe Pochettino will be his saviour and take him to PSG. I thought Alli was decent last weekend against Marine, putting in plenty of effort and showing his quality at the same time. Sadly, for Alli, his manager does not agree. Sheffield United:  Ramsdale, Bogle, Basham, Egan, Ampadu, Stevens, Lundstram, Norwood, Fleck, McGoldrick, Burke Subs:  Jagielka, Foderingham, Sharp, Brewster, Bryan, Lowe, Baldock  Spurs:  Lloris, Aurier, Rodon, Dier, Davies, Reguilon, Hojbjerg, Ndombele, Bergwijn, Son, Kane Subs:  Hart, Alderweireld, Sanchez, Gedson, Lamela, Bale, Lucas, Vinicius, Sissoko Sheffield United  come into this game as the form side, having won an actual Premier League match last time out against Newcastle, which still counts, not to mention knocking the mighty Bristol Rovers out of the FA Cup. They are still doomed to relegation as they only have five points as we sit here in mid-January but at least they are now confident of avoiding the embarrassing 11-point mark of Derby in 2007. Not even a January spending spree will save them, which might explain why they will not be getting one.  Sadly, for the Blades, they are missing seven players for this fixture, which will result in a Chris Wilder re-jig as he looks to come up with the formula to defeat Spurs.  Victory for Spurs could see them go third, albeit briefly, a sign of how tight things are at the top this season. They could only draw last time out against Fulham at home, so José Mourinho will be looking for a bit of a reaction at Bramall Lane, as dropping points in two consecutive games to strugglers would be a worry. They might even change things up a little and let little old Gareth Bale start, which would be fun. Anyway … it should be a fun game for all concerned.  Kick-off 2pm (GMT)
UK shuts travel corridors and requires negative Covid tests to enter:	Boris Johnson  has announced a dramatic tightening of the UK’s borders, with all international arrivals to be forced to quarantine as well as demonstrate they have had a negative Covid test. After months of criticism of the government’s lax border policies, which Labour claimed were “costing lives”, the prime minister said he was tightening the rules to prevent new variants of the virus reaching the UK and safeguard the vaccination programme. “It is vital to take these extra measures now when day by day, hour by hour, we are making such strides in protecting the population,” Johnson told a Downing Street press conference. Despite some tentative signs that infections  may be levelling off , he also underlined the desperate situation facing England’s hospitals, urging the public to think twice before going out at the weekend. “There are now more than 37,000 Covid patients in hospital across the UK and, in spite of all the efforts of our doctors and nurses and our medical staff, we are now seeing  cancer treatments  sadly postponed, ambulances queueing, and intensive care units spilling over into adjacent wards,” he said. The perilous state of the NHS was underlined by a Guardian analysis that showed two-thirds of all  NHS  trusts across England were  treating more coronavirus patients  last week than they did at the peak of the first wave of the pandemic Figures show that in 17 trusts the number of people with coronavirus outnumbered all other patients. On the current trajectory, the number of people being treated for Covid in England’s hospitals could be double that of the April 2020 peak within weeks. With the number of new Covid cases increasing by 55,761 on Friday, and a further 1,280 people reported to have died within 28 days of testing positive, sources made clear the government would await evidence on whether the Covid-19 vaccines prevent transmission before considering laying out a timetable for  lifting lockdown restrictions . However, England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, appearing alongside Johnson, said there was early evidence that the measures put in place in London and the south-east had begun to bear fruit in controlling the virus. “The peak of the infections, we hope, already has happened in some parts of the country particularly in the south-east, east of England and London, where there was initially a really big surge with the new variant, and it is fantastic that that is beginning to happen thanks to what everyone has done,” he said. “Other areas that went into lockdown a bit later, that peak will be a bit later.” As well as announcing the new border rules, Johnson hailed the progress of the government’s vaccination programme, saying that almost 3.3 million had received a jab, including 1.3 million people aged over 80 – 45% of the total – and more than 100,000 older care home residents. The new travel restrictions, which will come into force at 4am on Monday, will mean the suspension of all the remaining travel corridors, which had allowed arrivals from certain destinations to avoid quarantine. A new pre-flight testing regime was already due to come into place on Monday morning. It had originally been meant to start on Friday, but was delayed by the government at the last minute after the Department for  Transport  failed to produce the relevant guidance in time for passengers and airlines to be ready. The government had also already announced that it would  halt arrivals from South America and Portugal  in an effort to prevent a Brazilian variant of the virus reaching the UK. The additional measures, which also include increasing spot checks on members of the public who should be in quarantine, make it the toughest border policy the government has adopted at any time during the pandemic. Quarantine will last for 10 days, the prime minister said, unless arrivals pay to have a Covid test after five days and receive a negative result. The measures will remain in place at least until 15 February. Johnson faced a grilling this week from the senior Labour backbencher Yvette Cooper, who had urged him to take precautionary measures to prevent  new variants  of the virus arriving in the UK. Cooper chairs the home affairs select committee, which has repeatedly highlighted shortcomings in the enforcement of travel restrictions since the onset of the pandemic. It is unclear as yet whether the Brazilian variant of the disease that is causing concern, or other new and emerging variants, could be vaccine resistant. Business groups were taken by surprise by the new border measures. Joss Croft, the chief executive of UKinbound, the trade body for the overseas tourism industry, said his members would need financial help from the government. “Consumer safety is paramount and although the removal of all travel corridors is regrettable, given the current trajectory of the virus it’s an understandable decision. With our borders effectively closed, the government needs to provide urgent, tailored support for the inbound tourism industry,” he said. The shadow transport secretary, Jim McMahon, said: “Unfortunately this announcement was inevitable. However, it is closing the door after the horse has bolted.” He added: “The government urgently need to put in place a forward-looking strategy [for] testing on borders and wider controls, while also delivering on the long-promised sector-specific support for those industries who will be so hard hit by this news.”
Cake, Pot Noodles, roast dinner: foods your parents didn’t know could be vegan:	 Chas Newkey-Burden  Fri 15 Jan 2021  16.17 GMT   Last modified on Fri 15 Jan 2021  16.18 GMT   Once upon a time, your parents labelled you the fussy eater of the family. But look at them now: so scared of vegan food you’d think you were asking them to eat sand. The benefits of plant-based eating are clear: according to a  study  by researchers at the University of Oxford, eating a plant-based diet can reduce your carbon footprint by up to 73%. Even skipping meat for just one day a week can reduce your annual carbon footprint by as much as not driving your car for a whole month. So, now’s the time to prove to your parents they’re more vegan than they realise with this handy menu of plant-based foods they already know and love, whatever the occasion. Marmite on toast  Sceptics often ask how vegans get vitamin B12 in their diets. Well, Marmite is bursting with it and your parents’ generation has been eating it all their lives. The iconic spread is also packed with other healthy vitamins including B1 (thiamine), B2 (riboflavin) and B3 (niacin). Croissants   Want the buttery taste without the actual butter? Jus-Rol’s ready-to-bake croissants get the tasty flakiness just right – or try La Boulangere vegan croissants. Roast dinner  With all the nut roasts and imitation meats available, there are many options to make a plant-based Sunday roast. The even better news is that no one needs to miss out on the all-important finishing touches because Bisto Onion Gravy has long been plant-based. Curry  Who wants to miss out on curry? Nobody, we can assure you. And now you won’t have to with Bol Malaysian Laksa Curry. A fresh and modern take on a traditional Malaysian classic, this protein-packed meal combines a creamy coconut curry with black turtle beans and spiced chickpeas. Your parents won’t be opting for their usual chicken tikka masala on the next curry night, that’s for sure. Beans on toast The ultimate comfort food, Heinz baked beans on toast is entirely vegan – and you can even mix things up with Birds Eye Potato Waffles, which are made out of freshly mashed potatoes. Ice-cream  What? An ice-cream made out of oats? Keep up, people: plant-based ice-cream is just as good as the traditional variety. Oatly’s impressive ice-cream range includes chocolate fudge, strawberry, vanilla, hazelnut swirl and salted caramel. So there’s something for everyone! Biscuits  Lotus Biscoff caramelised biscuits are so beautifully moreish that there should probably be a law against them. They are the perfect accompaniment for your parents’ morning coffee – and entirely vegan. Cake  When your mum and dad were growing up they probably saw the adverts that boasted that Mr Kipling makes “exceedingly good” cakes. Well, it turns out he also makes exceedingly good vegan treacle tart. Popcorn  They may not “Netflix and chill” much any more (take a moment to block that image out of your head), but your parents probably still enjoy some popcorn when watching a film. Many leading brands – including Tyrrells, Metcalfe’s and Propercorn – have plant-based popcorn, or you can make your own with an air popper. Crisps  Did you think vegans miss out on the bacon flavour? They sure don’t. Get an instant hit of the crackling meat with Tesco’s plant-based rashers, This Isn’t Bacon Rashers. Your parents won’t be able to tell the difference between the real thing. Crackers  Ritz Originals are salty, savoury and will melt in your mouth. Top with vegan cheese and feel good that absolutely no animals were harmed in the making of them. Win-win. Pot Noodles When your mum and dad were your age, there’s a good chance that Pot Noodles formed a big part of their food intake. That’s just how students lived in those days. Surprisingly, even the Brazilian BBQ Steak, Chinese Chow Mein, Piri-Piri Chicken and Beef and Tomato flavours are all vegan. Stout Vegans used to have to avoid stout because animal products were used as finings to help filtration. However, in 2018, this process was phased out and the black stuff is now cruelty free. There are also countless vegan lagers, wines and spirits. We’ll cheers to that! Need help talking to dad about milk? Visit  oatly.com/helpdad
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales  health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the  NSW Health website . Anyone who was in the following section of the below clinic at the listed time is a  close contact who must immediately get tested and self-isolate for 14 days regardless of the result : Wentworthville:  Wentworthville Medical and Dental Clinic (in the dental, physio and imaging waiting room only), Friday, 15 January, 11.30am to 1.15pm. Anyone who attended the following venue at the time listed must  monitor for symptoms  and, if they occur, get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received: Auburn:  Auburn Centrelink, Thursday 14 January, 3pm-4.15pm Anyone who used any of the following train services should also  monitor for symptoms , and if they occur, get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received: Warwick Farm to Auburn, Thursday 14 January, 2:20pm-2.56pm  Auburn to Warwick Farm, Thursday 14 January, 8:27pm-8.58pm  Warwick Farm to Auburn, Friday 15 January 10:40am-11.12am  Auburn to Warwick Farm, Friday 15 January 1:44pm-2.16pm  Warwick Farm to Auburn, Friday 15 January 4:28pm-4.58pm All previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
I can't help being cynical when my future is in the hands of uncontrollable forces:	Name:  Michelle Lim Age:  23 Dreams of:  Being a social worker Last month, I sat in my course’s “town hall” forum on Zoom. It was just an open forum hosted by social work faculty staff about 2021 and the arrangements for this year. I was really only interested in one section of information: placements. Even before starting my semester at the end of August last year, I’d already heard about reduced work placements for social work students. The Australian Association of Social Workers (AASW) sets the industry standard for placement hours for students to be accredited as a social worker. A thousand hours is the standard but because of Covid-19, they’ve lowered it to 800 hours. But I’ve heard some students are struggling to meet even this because agencies won’t accept students anymore. I’ve also found out that some students do their placements online, which I’m not sure is the same as doing a placement physically. Semester one in 2021 is going to be online. This means all the induction and pre-placement work that I’m supposed to complete will be done online. The open forum and placement information materials online say that I may not be guaranteed a placement because of priority for graduating students and that I may have to defer. I can’t afford to defer. Deferring means that I would graduate by 2023, and that’s assuming I can get a full-time placement. I don’t want to have to rely on Centrelink when I’m in my mid 20s or live at home without a steady income. What drew me to social work was the possibility of a full-time job at the end of the degree. I’ve heard that social work and services is a growing industry and that there’s always work in this field. Now with reduced placement hours, it feels like the attraction – and security – is fading. I went to a social work end-of-year drinks with a bunch of graduating students in mid-December, and I asked them how job hunting was. Some got offers, some were still looking. They told me the job market wasn’t looking good; one told me she had secured a job but was on probation for six months. My biggest fear is that when I do get my first job, I’ll screw up because of my lack of experience. This wouldn’t be just a project deadline that I missed, or a typo on a document. I would be dealing with people’s lives, and their problems and wellbeing. What if I misjudged or incorrectly assessed someone and I led them to a worse-off place? What if my inexperience is because of a lack of a meaningful placement opportunity? With the new degree costs kicking in this year, I worry what it’d be like for the future pool of graduates and myself. The government is discouraging those to enter degrees that are considered “irrelevant” and noncompetitive for the future job market. If I started university in 2021 or 2022, I wouldn’t be able to afford the arts degree in international relations that I have. I have no interest in Stem or anything of the like, nor am I good at it. The federal government is making decisions they think is best for the future, but they’re stifling opportunities for young people. This series is called  Dreams interrupted , and I’m telling you dreams will be interrupted when this policy is enacted. Instead of making tertiary education accessible for everyone, it’s only available to the few who can afford it. There’s a tinge of fatalism that jobs will be difficult to come by for those with just an arts degree. But we don’t do an arts degree for a job, we do it because we’re passionate about what we’re studying. I’m lucky that I enjoy my social work degree, and even luckier that it offers work placement. Being able to pivot to a different field is a luxury that not many young people can afford. Since the last time I wrote, I’ve applied for a number of jobs in social services. I fit the selection criteria, but my resume is only filled with volunteering and leadership experience. Nothing paid. They say volunteering is best when you can’t find paid work, but it doesn’t feel like that. Stacking shelves at a supermarket seems more impressive than volunteering at Red Cross to employers. I sound cynical, but I guess one can’t help being cynical when your future lies in the hands of others and uncontrollable forces. So far my optimism about securing a job depletes when I open a dreaded email of rejection. It’s difficult to find solace in an email which says you were incompatible with the requirements when you had thought that you were the perfect fit. Just like a steam engine, it’ll take a bit time to recover from the wounds of rejection but when I do, it’ll be full steam ahead.
Indian court suspends new agriculture laws after mass protests:	India’s supreme court has suspended a series of controversial new agriculture laws that had prompted hundreds of thousands of farmers to stage a months-long protest in Delhi over fears their livelihoods were at stake. Since November,  upwards of half a million farmers had marched to the peripheries of Delhi  and occupied roads and highways going into the capital, setting up a 24-hour protest camp and refusing to move until the new laws were repealed. Farmers, mainly from the states of Punjab and Haryana, had argued that the new laws were passed by the government without consultation, had exposed them to the mercy of large corporations for crop prices and put them at greater risk of poverty and losing their land. The farmers’ protests have proved to be  one of the greatest political challenges to face prime minister, Narendra Modi , since he came to power in 2014. It was one of the first times the government had been forced to the negotiating table following mass agitation and, despite eight rounds of talks, had remained in deadlock. After two days of deliberation, the supreme court ruled on Tuesday to suspend the laws. Judges ordered the creation of a four-man committee to look into farmers’ grievances over the laws, saying they were “extremely disappointed” with how negotiations had gone so far. The judges also expressed concern at the lack of consultation with farmers when passing the law. “These are matters of life and death. We are concerned with laws. We are concerned with lives and property of people affected by the agitation. We are trying to solve the problem in the best way. One of the powers we have is to suspend the legislation,” SA Bobde, the chief justice, told the court. While many politicians who had expressed anger at the farm laws celebrated the ruling, it was met with derision by farmers’ leaders who said “now is not the time for a committee”. Farming  unions reiterated that they would not participate in any court-ordered committee process and would not call off their protest until the new legislation was repealed. “The members of the supreme court-appointed committee are not dependable as they have been writing on how agri laws are pro-farmer. We will continue our agitation,” said farmer leader Balbeer Singh Rajewal at a press conference. The farmers said they still intended to go ahead with a planned protest tractor rally through Delhi on India’s Republic Day on 26 January. So far 60 farmers have died while taking part in the protests, which have involved camping out in make-shift tents in icy winter temperatures. Some described the ruling as a setback for Modi, who can usually rely on the backing of the supreme court, which is widely seen as favourable to the ruling government. However, other observers noted that the court’s decision to suspend the farm laws gave the government a way out of the negotiation deadlock without appearing to have bowed to the demands of the farmers.
Up to 1m Hindus gather in India as festival goes ahead amid Covid fears:	Up to a million Hindu pilgrims have gathered on the banks of the River Ganges in northern  India , marking the start of a major religious festival that is taking place despite the risks of Covid infection. Millions more are expected to descend on Haridwar in the coming weeks for  Kumbh Mela , one of the world’s biggest religious gatherings. Pilgrims bathe in the Ganges in the belief that the sacred waters will cleanse them of their sins. Officials have said measures to prevent a surge in Covid infections include pre-booking to control numbers, strict social distancing and colour-coded bathing areas. “The pandemic is a bit of a worry, but we are taking all precautions,” said one of the organisers, Siddharth Chakrapani. Most of those walking into the freezing river on Thursday morning were not wearing masks and social distancing was hard to maintain. Senthil Avoodai K Raj, a senior police official, said thousands of security forces were present and fines could be imposed for breaching Covid regulations. India has recorded more than 10m Covid cases – the second highest number in the world after the US – and has recorded more than 150,000 deaths. On Saturday, the government will launch a  vaccination drive , aiming to inoculate 300 million people by early August. Healthcare and frontline workers will be vaccinated first, followed by people over 50 and those with underlying health conditions. Some pilgrims in Haridwar dismissed the threat from the virus. “India is not like Europe … when it comes to immunity we are better,” said 50-year-old Sanjay Sharma. “It’s really sad to see people not gathering at Kumbh in the same numbers as they would earlier … The greatest truth on Earth is death. What’s the point of living with fear?” Unesco has recognised  Kumbh Mela  as intangible cultural heritage. According to Hindu mythology, gods and demons fought a war over a sacred pitcher containing the nectar of immortality. Drops fell at four different locations, which now alternate as hosts. Several other religious festivals are taking place in India this week, including the Gangasagar Mela in Kolkata, where officials expect about 15,000 people. Madurai in the southern state of Tamil Nadu is due to host a bull-chasing carnival known as  Jallikattu , where revellers grab hold of the beasts’ horns as they run through crowds of people. Many religious gatherings across the world have been cancelled or scaled back because of Covid. Only a few thousand Muslims took part in  last year’s hajj , the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, compared with more than 2 million in normal years. The pope celebrated midnight mass on Christmas Eve with fewer than 100 participants instead of the usual 10,000. In nearly all countries, Christians, Muslims, Jews and those of other faiths have curtailed or cancelled events marking religious festivals in the past 10 months.
Global immunisation: low-income countries rush to access Covid vaccine supply:	T here are triumphant scenes as lorries leave a vaccine plant in Pune, India, loaded with boxes that will prevent thousands of deaths. Adar Poonawalla, the owner and chief executive of the  Serum Institute of India , poses on the tailgate of a truck, making the most of his company’s “proud and historic” moment as the potential saviour of the nation – and even a large chunk of the world. Poonawalla’s factory, the largest vaccine manufacturing complex in the world, is the best hope for immunisation for people in Africa and some low-income countries elsewhere – which could save them from the ravages of the coronavirus pandemic. The Serum Institute has been contracted to supply the UN-backed Covax initiative, which subsidises low-income countries, with 200m doses of Covid-19 vaccines with an option on 900m more. For a heart-stopping moment last week, it seemed that vaccine nationalism within India might slam the door. On 4 January, just after the Serum Institute got approval from the Indian regulator for the vaccine – made under licence from  AstraZeneca  – Poonawalla was reported as saying there was a condition attached, which was that only India could have the vaccine for the time being. The following day, he clarified the “confusion in the public domain” on Twitter, saying “exports of vaccines are permitted to all countries”. But the lorries are headed across  India  for now and the episode underlines the tension as every country with cash wades into the fight for vaccines, putting manufacturers under unprecedented pressure to deliver for them. As affluent Europe and North America scramble to deploy the Covid vaccines they have pre-bought – amid accusations that immunisation programmes are too slow and the wrong people are getting the jabs – there has been not a single shot in the arm in many countries elsewhere. Three vaccines have been approved in the west. Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna are expensive and need long-term storage at -70C.  Pfizer  offered to sell the vaccine to South Africa at a 50% discounted price of $10 a shot, but was told the cost was still prohibitive. But Oxford/AstraZeneca’s vaccine is stable at fridge temperatures of 2-8C and AstraZeneca has promised not to make a profit for the duration of the pandemic. It aims to provide 3bn doses this year, made in factories around the world under licence. It is the mainstay of  the Covax initiative , which has now bought a total of 1.97bn doses of four different vaccines to distribute when they become available. The AstraZeneca vaccine accounts for most of it. The Serum Institute has promised to make 100m doses for Covax of the AstraZeneca vaccine and a further 100m of the Novavax jab – if and when that is approved. Covax has an option on a further 900m doses of one or the other of those vaccines. Deliveries could start as early as February, said a spokesperson for Gavi, the vaccine alliance which is a partner in Covax. “We anticipate being able to provide each participating economy with the first tranche – enough to protect approximately 3% of the population – in the first half of 2021. This process could begin as early as February, pending favourable regulatory outcomes and the readiness of health systems and national regulatory systems in individual participating economies. “In terms of which vaccines will be rolled out to which countries, as well as timeframes, we hope to be able to share more on that very soon.” Seven countries have now given emergency authorisation to the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine or the Serum Institute version: the UK, India, Argentina, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico and Morocco. The Carlos Slim Foundation in Mexico is licensed by AstraZeneca to supply 150m doses to Latin America. These countries could take delivery right away. But other countries without a regulatory body will be waiting for the  World Health Organization  to give the green light, which is said to need data from the Serum Institute. In what sounded like a nudge, the director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said on 11 January it looked forward “to Serum Institute of India submitting full datasets for rapid assessment so WHO can determine whether we can recommend their AstraZeneca vaccine for international use”. The AstraZeneca vaccine will also be manufactured by SKbioscience in Korea, BioKangtai in China, Siam BioScience and the local conglomerate SCG in Thailand and CSL Behring in Australia. The Fiocruz Institute in  Brazil  has signed a deal for 100m doses of the Serum Institute vaccine, which it will put into vials in a process known as “fill and finish”. In an attempt to queue-jump, the Brazilian president,  Jair Bolsonaro , wrote to the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, on 9 January. “To enable the immediate implementation of our national immunisation programme, I would appreciate … the supply to Brazil, with the possible urgency and without jeopardising the Indian vaccination programme, of 2m doses,” Bolsonaro wrote. Brazil is also now buying 10m doses of the Russian Sputnik vaccine. It is late to the party. At the very end of last year, Argentina took delivery of 300,000 doses and has been immunising healthcare workers. The Russians claim it is 92% effective, but the data has not been published. A few middle-income countries have started vaccination programmes using the Pfizer/BioNTech jab. Mexico took delivery of 3,000 doses in December. Chile and Costa Rica have also started using the vaccine. Mexican officials have been to talk to their counterparts in Argentina about buying Sputnik. Chinese vaccines are also beginning to be used. Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates both gave emergency approval to the  vaccine made by Sinopharm  in December, which the manufacturers say is 86% efficacious, although – as with the Russian vaccine – the full data has not been made public. Turkey has bought the Chinese vaccine, and Morocco, Egypt and Nigeria have all been in discussions. There are other promising jabs on the way. Novavax aims to make 2bn doses for global use – but has not yet finished its trials. Covax has an option on 500m doses of the Janssen vaccine, which has the advantage of being one shot, but although  results from phase 3 trials  are expected within weeks, there are said to be manufacturing delays. It could be a major player, however. “Johnson & Johnson aims to provide global access to Janssen’s Covid-19 vaccine candidate, if proven to be safe and effective. We have committed to producing 1bn vaccines doses a year starting in 2021 and have expedited manufacturing scale-up to reach this goal,” said a spokesperson. “We are leveraging a global supply base for our vaccine candidate, including facilities in the United States, Europe, Asia and Africa.” David Salisbury, associate fellow of Chatham House’s global health programme and director of immunisation at the Department of  Health  until 2013, said that even if the amount of vaccine distributed across the world increased, not all countries would be able to run vaccination programmes for everyone who needed it. “There’s a huge gap between a desire to have vaccine and political statements that your country will have vaccine – and actually having contracts either in place yourself or on your behalf and the ability to pay for it – and much more, the ability to implement it,” he said. The vaccination against Covid-19 is not like running childhood vaccination programmes, but more similar to the effort to immunise against the seasonal flu. Most low-income countries do not have enough clinics or databases to tell them how to access those at risk. Countries that get enough vaccine for 20% of the population, which is what Covax hopes to provide eventually, will not be able to stop transmission. They will be in an “endless cycle”, said Salisbury – vaccinating health workers and those most at risk of dying, with more people getting older and moving into the at-risk groups all the time. The coronavirus is not going away, especially in low income countries. It could be argued the vaccines are just a temporary fix. “Predicting the future for vaccine campaigns in all parts of the world is something many of us are already thinking about. Will this become institutionalised as an annual vaccination programme for industrialised countries? Unless this virus goes away I think the answer is yes,” said Salisbury. “But what will the appetite be in low-income countries for resources that are already under huge pressure to be used for prevention of coronavirus?”
Indonesia earthquake: dozens dead after tremors and landslides hit Sulawesi:	At least 37 people have been killed and hundreds injured following a strong earthquake that shook the island of Sulawesi in  Indonesia  early on Friday morning, prompting landslides and destroying houses. Thousands of people fled their homes to seek safety when the 6.2-magnitude earthquake hit just after 1am local time on Friday morning. The epicentre was 6km north-east of Majene city in West Sulawesi. Hundreds of buildings were destroyed or damaged, including a hospital, which collapsed with more than a dozen patients and staff trapped beneath it. “The hospital is flattened,” said Arianto, who like many Indonesians goes by one name, from the rescue agency in Mamuju city, near Majene. Rescuers were also trying to reach a family of eight buried beneath the rubble of their destroyed home, he told AFP. At least 37 people have been killed in Majene and Mamuju, and rescue workers fear the death toll will rise further. “Many of the dead are buried under rubble,” said Ali Rahman, the head of the local disaster mitigation agency in Mamuju. In Majene, 637 people were said to be injured. The full extent of the damage caused by the quake, which was 10km deep, is still emerging. Accessing affected areas is a challenge: roads are blocked, bridges have fallen and the local airport in Mamuju has also been damaged. Electricity is cut and phone lines are down. Videos shared on social media showed panicked residents rushing to safety and collapsed homes brought down by the quake. In one video, a father could be heard asking people to help rescue his children buried under rubble. “My children there … they are trapped inside, please help,” he said. Footage released by the national disaster agency showed a girl trapped in the wreckage of a house crying out for help. Her mother was alive but unable to move out, she said. “Please help me, it hurts,” the girl told rescuers. Busrah Basir Maras, 36, a teacher, was sleeping at home in Malunda, Majene, when the earthquake struck. His family woke him and they fled on a motorbike. “It took six hours for me to drive my motorcycle [away from] the epicentre. But it was hard because there were many landslides. I was crying and I am still crying,” he told the Guardian. His family were safe but the head of his village was killed by a collapsing building. Many people had died, he said. “They were sleeping and then buried in the collapsed building.” Survivors who were still stuck in rubble at the epicentre needed medical attention, he said. The earthquake was felt strongly for about seven seconds. It did not trigger a tsunami warning, but people along coastal areas fled to higher ground as a precaution. The head of Indonesia’s Meteorology, Climatology, and Geophysical Agency (BMKG), Dwikorita Karnawati, told a news conference that strong aftershocks could follow, and that another powerful quake could still trigger a tsunami. In 2018, the city of Palu in Sulawesi was struck by a  devastating 6.2-magnitude quake  and tsunami that killed thousands of people. At least 26 aftershocks have been recorded in the area over the past day. The same district was hit by a 5.9-magnitude quake on Thursday afternoon, which damaged several homes. Indonesia is a nation of high tectonic activity. It is often struck by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and tsunamis because it lies on the Ring of Fire, an arc of volcanoes and fault lines in the Pacific Basin. The response to latest quake will be complicated further by the coronavirus, which Indonesia has struggled to contain. It recorded its biggest daily increase in coronavirus cases on Friday with 12,818 new infections. So far there have been 25,484 confirmed deaths from Covid-19. “One of our biggest fears is exactly what’s going on right now – what happens when there’s a major event during a pandemic? It’s a perfect storm,” said Jan Gelfand of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. “If you have people who are evacuated, the risk [of infection] for those people goes up tremendously,” said Gelfand. “You don’t want to put people in more danger than they are already in.” More than 15,000 people have been displaced as a result of the earthquake, according to the national disaster agency. Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this story
India begins world's biggest Covid vaccination programme:	India  has begun one of the world’s biggest Covid-19 vaccination programmes, the first major developing country to roll out the vaccine, marking the beginning of an effort to immunise more than 1.3 billion people. The first dose was administered to a health worker at All India Institute of Medical Sciences in Delhi, after the prime minister,  Narendra Modi , kickstarted the campaign with a national televised speech. “We are launching the world’s biggest vaccination drive and it shows the world our capability,” Modi said. He implored citizens to keep their guard up and not to believe any “rumours about the safety of the vaccines”. It is not clear if Modi, 70, has been given the vaccine like other world leaders as an example of its safety. His government has said politicians will not be considered priority groups in the first phase of the rollout. India has registered more than 10.5m coronavirus cases, the second highest in the world, and 151,000 deaths. The government has been preparing for the vaccine rollout for weeks, and over the past few days shipments were sent to more than 3,000 sites set up for injections. The Indian health ministry has drawn up plans for 300 million people, almost the equivalent to the population of the US, to be vaccinated by August. Frontline healthcare workers, police and the army have been given priority, with those over 50 and with co-morbidity conditions to follow, all free of cost. Maharashtra, home to Mumbai and the state worst hit by coronavirus, plans to vaccinate 50,000 healthcare workers on the first day of the vaccine rollout. Across the vast country, more than 200,000 vaccinators and 370,000 team members have been trained for the rollout. Large-scale trial runs have been conducted in at least four states and authorities have readied 29,000 cold storage units to transport and hold the vaccine safely. Two vaccines have been given emergency approval for India’s immunisation programme; the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, known in India as Covishield, and a domestic product, Covaxin, developed by the pharmaceutical company Bharat Biotech. The approval of Bharat Biotech’s vaccine, which was co-sponsored by an Indian government body, has proved controversial. Covaxin is still in phase 3 human trials and a full dataset on its efficacy has not been released or peer-reviewed, unlike the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine or the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines which have been authorised in the UK and the US. India’s drugs controller general, VG Somani, insisted Covaxin was “100% safe”. The government has ordered 5.5m doses of Covaxin and 11m doses of Covishield. Boxes of Covishield were dispatched bearing the message “may all be free from disease”. Significantly for ease of availability and low cost, both vaccines will be produced domestically. The Serum Institute of India, one of the world’s biggest vaccine makers, has already produced and stockpiled around 50m doses of Covishield. The institute has billions in pre-orders from countries around the world also desperate for the vaccine. The Indian government is negotiating how much stock to release for export, given fears that it could lead to a domestic shortage. The government faces another challenge of growing vaccine opposition in India. According to a survey of more than 8,000 people carried out by Local Circles, 69% of Indians are hesitant about receiving the vaccine.
Japan's suicide rate rises 16% in second wave of Covid, study finds:	Suicide rates  in Japan have risen sharply in the second wave of the Covid-19 pandemic, particularly among women and children, even though they fell in the first wave when the government offered generous handouts to people, a survey found. The July-October suicide rate rose 16% from the same period a year earlier, a stark reversal of the February-June decline of 14%, according to the study by researchers at Hong Kong University and Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology. “Unlike normal economic circumstances, this pandemic disproportionately affects the psychological health of children, adolescents and females (especially housewives),” the authors wrote in the study published on Friday in the journal Nature Human Behaviour. The early decline in suicides was affected by such factors as government subsidies, reduced working hours and school closure, the study found. But the decline reversed – with the suicide rate rising 37% for women, about five times the increase among men – as the prolonged pandemic hurt industries where women predominate, increasing the burden on working mothers, while domestic violence increased, the report said. The study, based on health ministry data from November 2016 to October 2020, found the child suicide rate rose 49% in the second wave, corresponding to the period after a nationwide school closure. Japan’s prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, this month issued a Covid-19 state of emergency for Tokyo and three surrounding prefectures in a bid to stem the resurgence. He expanded it this week to seven more prefectures, including Osaka and Kyoto. Taro Kono, administrative and regulatory reform minister, told Reuters on Thursday that while the government would consider extending the state of emergency, it “cannot kill the economy”. “People worry about Covid-19. But a lot of people have also [killed themselves] because they have lost their jobs, they have lost their income and couldn’t see the hope,” he said. “We need to strike the balance between managing Covid-19 and managing the economy.“ In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email  jo@samaritans.org  or  jo@samaritans.ie . In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at  www.befrienders.org .
Hello, Mr Resident: Is Palm Beach ready for the Trumps to move in?:	The men sported tuxedos, the women extravagant evening gowns. They crowded into Donald Trump’s  Mar-a-Lago  resort, unmasked and without any pretence at social distancing. After cocktails and a luxurious dinner, the partygoers danced in the new year to the live music of rapper Vanilla Ice and Beach Boy veterans. “We shouldn’t be caged in our homes,” said Amber Gitter, a local estate agent who attended. No government should “tell you that you have to stay in and can’t work”. Once Trump leaves the White House this week, the two-times impeached president is expected to reside at Mar-a-Lago in Palm Beach,  Florida . It’s an unhappy prospect for many Palm Beachers who fear Trump’s presence and maskless Mar-a-Lago soirees will undermine the tiny town’s tranquility and its fight against the pandemic. The display of unbridled wealth and partying at Mar-a-Lago highlights the awkward and ugly reality of a rich elite that continues to party while its poor working-class neighbours struggle to survive. Nestled on an island off the coast of Florida, Palm Beach is a fixture for America’s 1%. Tree-lined South Ocean Boulevard, which runs past Mar-a-Lago, is nicknamed billionaire’s row, the site of some of the world’s ritziest beachside mansions. Residents include cosmetic heiress Aerin Lauder, billionaire financier Stephen Schwarzman and, notoriously, the now-deceased convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Trump is not even the wealthy community’s first experience with presidents – John F Kennedy used his family’s property as a winter White House. Trump divides his future hometown’s residents, as he does all Americans. While he won the town’s vote in the 2020 presidential election and more than 500 followers paid a reported $1,000 a ticket to attend the Mar-a-Lago new year party, the president has feuded with neighbours and local officials. In 2006, Trump erected a giant flagpole at Mar-a-Lago, which violated local zoning rules. The town began fining him $1,250 a day. Trump sued and kept his flagpole. Mar-a-Lago declined to comment on either the dispute or its maskless parties. During Trump’s Mar-a-Lago presidential visits, dozens of police and secret service officers protected the property. Barricades blocked off the main road, creating traffic jams. A group of angry neighbours has sought legal advice to block him from living at Mar-a-Lago full-time, the  Washington Post  first reported. Trump bought the baroque Moorish-style mansion overlooking the ocean in 1985. When he turned the estate into a social club in 1993, Trump agreed to ban members from staying at the compound for more than 21 days a year. Residents are demanding that the town government enforce this agreement. Palm Beach town manager Kirk Blouin told the  Observer  that the council will review the matter during next month’s meeting. Covid has driven another schism between Trump and locals. Unlike the president, town officials took the pandemic seriously from the start. They began keeping tabs on the virus as early as January last year, says Blouin. When it proliferated in mid-March, the town imposed a curfew, shut restaurants, shops, beaches, and apartment pools. Even Mar-a-Lago was shuttered. We wanted “to bang the pots and pans to alert people and our neighbouring cities that the virus is coming – and it’s going to be really bad,” Blouin added. “Many thought we’d overreacted.” The hardline action saved lives. Despite an elderly population – two-thirds of the town’s residents are over 65, according to the US Census – Palm Beach counted only  26 confirmed Covid-19 cases  and two deaths during the pandemic’s first two months. By contrast, despite its young population, working-class Palm Beach County counted a similar proportion by population of casualties: 5,429 confirmed cases and 315 deaths, according to data from the Palm Beach Civic Association. “There has been, from the beginning, one pandemic for the rich, and one for everyone else,” complains Omari Hardy, a Democratic state lawmaker who represents swathes of Palm Beach County. While Palm Beachers hunker down in their luxury homes, poorer Floridians need to go out to work. “My constituents have to choose between two evils,” says Hardy. “If they can work, they are exposing themselves to the risk of contracting the virus. If they can’t go to work, they cannot earn an income.” There has been, from the very beginning, one pandemic for the rich, and one pandemic for everyone else. At Lupita’s, a taco restaurant across the water in Lake Worth, co-owner Roberto Alvarez says he is “struggling”. He dipped into his personal savings to pay his staff last week. In contrast, Palm Beach’s luxury real estate market has boomed. During the first quarter of 2020, as millions of Americans filed for unemployment, sales of single-family homes in Palm Beach soared to a  record $416m, a 168% increase  over the same period in the previous year, according to a study. Just before New Year, Sylvester Stallone reportedly paid $35m for a seven-bedroom, 12-bathroom estate. Big-bucks buyers fled Covid-infested areas like New York City for the sunshine and beach, says local estate agent Scott Gordon.  Trump’s 2017 tax reforms , which raises tax on wealthy individuals in states like New York, turns Florida and its low tax rate into an enticing home. During the pandemic, Palm Beachers have quarantined in luxury. When the beachfront Four Seasons hotel closed in March, Citadel Securities rented the entire establishment for its stock traders. Only employees of the firm or hotel were allowed inside, with private security guarding the property. Ten months later, the resort remains guarded. The hotel will only begin taking reservations in early April, a hotel spokesperson said. Now, though, this pandemic paradise is fraying. Since Florida’s Trump-supporting governor Ron DeSantis lifted most restrictions in September, Palm Beach shops, restaurants, and bars have opened, for indoor and outdoor seating, and they draw big crowds. Since November, the town has recorded a faster rise in cases than in Palm Beach County, according to local government data. The local population of 8,800 soars in winter, as northerners escape the cold, raising the chances of contact and infections, according to Blouin. He also blames “corona fatigue”, explaining that some residents are fed up with rules and restrictions. “We’re social animals,” he concedes. Mar-a-Lago is ground zero for breaking the rules. It hosted a maskless, indoor election night party, a fashion show, and a rowdy young conservatives party. After the new year party, county officials sent a warning letter last week to Mar-a-Lago for a “breakdown in enforcement” of the mask mandate. But few believe Trump will listen. “A strongly worded letter will not do anything to get the president and his businesses to comply,” Hardy said. “He’s shown nothing but disdain for our rules.”
'I’m facing a prison sentence': US Capitol rioters plead with Trump for pardons:	Jenna Ryan, a Texas real estate broker who took a private jet to Washington to join the attack on the US Capitol, has pleaded with  Donald Trump  to pardon her after she was arrested by federal authorities. After surrendering to the FBI on Friday, Ryan said: “We all deserve a pardon.” “I’m facing a prison sentence,” she told CBS11 at her home. “I think I do not deserve that.” Turning to look into the camera, she said: “I would ask the president of the United States to give me a pardon.” On Wednesday, Trump was impeached for inciting the attack on 6 January that left five people dead, including a police officer, and sent lawmakers fleeing for their lives. Ryan said she had been “displaying my patriotism”, adding: “I listen to my president who told me to go to the Capitol.” Ryan left a trove of information online.  Court papers show  she posted a picture of herself taking a private jet to Washington DC the day before the riot, subsequently posing on the steps of the Capitol and beside a window smashed as the pro-Trump mob broke in. “We’re gonna go down and storm the Capitol,” Ryan said in a video posted to Facebook. “They’re down there right now and that’s why we came and so that’s what we are going to do. So wish me luck.” During a live Facebook video at the scene of the incursion, Ryan stated: “We are going to fucking go in here. Life or death, it doesn’t matter. Here we go.” She climbed the steps of the Capitol, then promoted her real estate business to camera: “Y’all know who to hire for your realtor. Jenna Ryan for your realtor.” Later, Ryan posted on Twitter: “We just stormed the Capital [sic]. It was one of the best days of my life.” Trump has largely used the presidential pardon power to benefit political allies. Ryan is the latest person to request a pardon over the Capitol attack. A lawyer for Jacob Chansley, an Arizona man who wore horns, animal skin and face paint while carrying a spear and entering the Senate chamber, said Trump should do the “honourable thing and pardon those of his peaceful followers who accepted the president’s invitation”. Albert Watkins said his client had no criminal history and was an “active practitioner of yoga”. He also mentioned Chansley’s diet, which has caused him to reject non-organic meals in federal custody. Chansley faces six federal charges. On Friday, a judge  ordered  him held without bail.
Trump saw the economy was his ticket to a second term – then Covid struck:	No time to waste. That was the message from Joe Biden as he announced plans for a $1.9tn (£1.4tn)  stimulus package  only days before his inauguration as US president next week. Combatting the health and economic crises he will inherit from Donald Trump will be top of the agenda for his administration. The latest jobs figures highlight the problem. In the latest week, the number of  new unemployment claims  rose by 181,000 to 965,000, the highest weekly figure since August. Record Covid-19 infection rates during the winter months have led to curbs on activity being strengthened, partly as a result of action by individual states and partly because individuals have become more cautious. As a result, growth has slowed and the improvement in the labour market that followed the initial pandemic shock last spring has gone into reverse. Biden has some experience of this sort of situation because the economy was in similarly poor shape when he became Barack Obama’s vice-president in 2009. Certainly, the economy Trump bequeaths to Biden bears no comparison to the one left to him by Obama. Trump had seen the economy as his ticket to a second term. At last year’s  World Economic Forum  in Davos he told assembled members of the global elite: “America is thriving, America is flourishing, and yes, America is winning again like never before.” Most incumbents tend to be re-elected. Before Trump, the only presidents since the the second world war to have won one election but not a second term were Jimmy Carter and George Bush senior. Sitting presidents who preside over even a moderately well-performing economy tend to win with some ease. And that’s the way it looked like panning out for Trump when he pitched up in Davos. At that point, with unemployment at its lowest since the US was first putting men on the moon in the late 1960s, few would have put much money on Biden capping a long political career with the presidency. Trump’s determination to focus on the economy meant he downplayed the seriousness of the virus and action to prevent its spread was delayed. But by March, businesses were closing, unemployment was threatening to return to the levels of the 1930s and the markets were crashing. As a result, the economy under Trump was divided into two parts: the generally successful first three years followed by a disastrous 2020. By the time he lost to Biden in early November, the US had actually recovered most of the ground lost during the early stages of the pandemic but by then it was too late. In Trump’s first three years in office, growth averaged 2.5% – a solid if by no means exceptional performance. Despite Trump’s assertions, the  US economy  had been growing steadily under Obama from the middle of 2009 onwards, with an average annual expansion of 2.25% a year. If the big boost to defence spending under Trump is put to one side, the growth rates under the last two presidents would be pretty much identical – up to the end of 2019 at least. Figures are not yet in for 2020 but the US looks to have contracted by about 4.5%. The jobs picture looks similar. Under Obama, the jobless rate had more than halved and it was assumed by the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve, America’s central bank, that it could go no lower without inflation picking up. Trump was sceptical about this view and was proved right. Unemployment continued to fall, reaching 3.5% by the end of 2019. The number of jobs created each year was slightly slower than in Obama’s second term, but a tighter labour market meant firms had to pay higher wages and offer jobs to those who had previously found it hard to find work, such as those with poor skills or disabilities. The black unemployment rate fell below 6% for the first time since modern records began in the early 1970s. Real household median income – one guide to living standards – rose by $6,000 in the first three years of Trump’s presidency. In the previous decade and a half it had gone up by little more than $250. These trends ended abruptly with the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate surged to 14.7% and while the trend is once again downwards, at 6.7%, the jobless rate is still almost double its pre-crisis level. There are about 5 million more people unemployed than when Trump came to office. All of which opens up a new chapter in the “what if” school of history. What if the election last November had been held a year earlier? What if the battle for the presidency had been put back a year to November 2021? Would the result have been different? The fact that the election was so close suggests it might well have been. Trump secured almost 47% of the vote and would be on course for a second term had a few thousand members of the public in a handful of swing states switched their votes to him. But he could not prevent Covid-19 from causing serious damage to the economy and he could not delay polling day. Had he accepted defeat gracefully, Trump might have been viewed as a president who, with the benefit of vaccines and the expected strong recovery in 2021, could have turned things round for an autumn election. He might have been seen as an unlucky president rather than a bad loser.
All adults in UK to be offered Covid vaccine by September, says Raab:	All adults in the UK should have been offered the Covid vaccination by September,  Dominic Raab  has said, setting a clear timescale for the first time. The vaccination programme is focusing on four priority groups at the moment, including the over-80s and care home residents, and ministers are increasingly confident that the mid-February deadline for completing  that first phase  will be met. Speaking to BBC One’s The Andrew Marr Show, the foreign secretary was asked about reports that all other adults could be vaccinated by the end of June. “The plan is to get the first 15 million most vulnerable people vaccinated with the first dose by the middle of February,” he said. “We then want to get, by early spring, another 17 million. At that point we’ll have 99% of those most at risk of dying of coronavirus administered their first jab, and then the entire adult population we want being offered a first jab by September. That’s the roadmap.” He added: “Obviously if it can be done more swiftly than that, then that’s a bonus.” Raab said the government hoped to ease the lockdown restrictions in England in March. “When we get to a situation in the early spring, perhaps March, if we succeed in hitting those targets – … we can start to think about the phased transition out of the national lockdown. “It won’t be a big bang, it will be done phased, possibly back through the tiered approach that we had before.” In an interview with Sophy Ridge on Sky News, Raab was unable to guarantee that all of those who have already received a first dose of vaccine would get their second within the recommended 12-week timescale – though he said he was “quietly confident” it could be done. “If we follow the roadmap and the supply chains … we ought to be able to deliver on that,” he said. “But right the way through this pandemic we’ve had to adapt to all sorts of different things. We’re just focused on making sure we deliver on the roadmap we’ve got.” The government had already stretched the  gap between the two doses , on advice from the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation, in order to give protection to as many people as possible, as soon as possible. Ten new mass vaccination centres are expected to open on Monday as the programme steps up, in locations including Bournemouth, Blackburn and Slough. Sir  Simon Stevens , the chief executive of NHS England, underlined the speed of the vaccine rollout on Sunday, telling Marr that “140 jabs a minute” were being delivered. Official data showed that by Saturday, 3.5m doses of the Covid vaccines had been delivered, with 424,327 of those being second doses. Stevens said that meant the  NHS  was “vaccinating four times faster than people are newly catching coronavirus”. However, he also highlighted the strain the NHS was under. Asked by Marr whether the health service had ever been in a more precarious position, he said: “No.” “Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” he said. “Since Christmas Day we’ve seen another 15,000 increase in the inpatients in hospitals across England. That’s the equivalent of filling 30 hospitals full of coronavirus patients and, staggeringly, every 30 seconds across England another patient is being admitted to hospital with coronavirus.” 
Experts remain divided over merits of mass Covid tests in schools:	The education secretary, Gavin Williamson, has put mass testing for coronavirus  at the heart of his strategy  to reopen schools after the lockdown. It is a controversial strategy that has divided scientists. Some believe mass testing can help reduce outbreaks at schools, while others argue it could make matters worse by giving teachers and pupils false reassurance. Mass testing relies on lateral flow tests, or LFTs, which contain antibodies that bind to the virus. When a nasal swab is tested in an LFT, any virus present in the sample sticks to the antibodies and produces a dark band, a bit like a pregnancy test’s indicator. LFTs are not as accurate as the standard NHS lab-based PCR tests, but they are cheap and produce results fast – within 30 minutes. The downside of LFTs is their performance.  In a pilot trial in Liverpool , mass testing failed to spot more than half the people who were infected but had no symptoms. The tests missed nearly a third of asymptomatic people who had high viral loads and were at highest risk of spreading the disease. Another issue with LFTs is that their accuracy falls in the hands of amateurs. Given that teachers and parents will be administering the tests, this could reduce their value further. In an interim evaluation of the kits, researchers at the University of Oxford and Public  Health  England’s Porton Down lab found the tests picked up 79% of cases when used by skilled lab scientists, but only 58% when used by self-trained members of the public. Jon Deeks, a professor of biostatistics at the University of Birmingham, argues that LFTs are not fit for many of the purposes the UK government has in mind, mass testing in schools included. Because the tests miss so many infections, a negative test would not mean a teacher or pupil is virus-free. The danger is that teachers and pupils are falsely reassured and, thinking they are safe, put others at risk. The problem is compounded by letters to parents and guidance for teachers that claim the tests are “very accurate”, he adds. It is not the only concern. Deeks believes that repeated, ineffective testing is a harmful diversion of resources, and risks traumatising children, particularly those with learning difficulties and mental health problems. Not all scientists are opposed to the testing, however. The Independent Sage committee – not to be confused with the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies – concedes that mass testing is not a panacea and will not, on its own, make schools safe. But they back mass testing as a means to find cases of coronavirus, rather than deciding whether or not people are infected. “A negative test should not be taken as an indication that someone is not infected or to relax other mitigations at either an individual or collective level,” the group said in its  “safe schools policy” report . Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol, has made a similar point, saying LFTs are “red light tests” not “green light tests”, meaning that testing negative does not mean a person can behave as if they are virus-free.
Questions will be asked over timing of closing UK travel corridors:	The announced  closure of all international travel corridors  to the UK marks the end of another week of changing policy, with the timing and implementation dismaying many. Travel corridors will be axed in effect from Monday morning. The corridors, which exempted inbound travellers from the requirement to quarantine for 10 days, may make little practical difference to the airline and travel industry in the current context. Schedules have been slashed and comparatively few people are likely to have travelled to or from the majority of the few dozen destinations remaining on the corridor list: some obscure, some no longer linked by flights to the UK, others barring British travellers. Holidays are banned; a few Caribbean destinations with longer-staying visitors are the most likely to have affected travellers, with the likes of Dubai already recently removed from the list. The industry has said it accepts the overwhelming public health case for the move. The suspension of all corridors will coincide with the requirement for pre-departure testing for all arrivals – a policy that many airports and airlines had called for months ago, if globally coordinated, as an enabler of safer travel. Both the UKinbound tourism body and Airlines UK, which represents UK carriers, have urged the government to make it clear the measure is temporary and, until it is lifted, to provide  more financial support  to a sector that is in effect in the deep freeze. While the government will point to the emergence of new variants, questions will again be asked on the timing, coherence and implementation of the rules. Boris Johnson imposed a ban  on flights from Brazil this week  – almost three weeks after UK flights were barred by Brazil. Enforcement of negative Covid tests for travellers arriving in England  had to be delayed  from 4am on Friday after the government only published the requirements late on Wednesday evening – a matter of hours before affected flights could have departed, leaving passengers perplexed and some paying hundreds of pounds for unnecessary paperwork. Even now, the Business Travel Association is warning the government has yet to issue detailed information on where those travelling for work can get acceptable tests. Essential workers – medical researchers, energy suppliers and humanitarians – must, it suggests, be able to travel with confidence in procedures and in the knowledge they can return home. There is a sense of deja vu after the similarly botched introduction of the  “test to release” scheme  – which still allows people arriving in the UK to apply to exit quarantine early after five days with a further negative Covid test. That scheme also had a lengthy period between announcement and implementation – and then arrived with a list of suppliers that could not deliver, to the cost and frustration of many who ended up out of pocket and in isolation. The bigger question may yet prove to be why public health measures at the borders first promised by ministers a fortnight ago have taken two weeks to introduce, should new variants from abroad be discovered in the UK. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, joked on Friday he was the last person to give advice on whether people should book travel – a reference, no doubt, to the travel corridor to Spain  he axed while on holiday  there last year. Unfortunately, no one is better placed to answer than Shapps.
First fruits of vaccine rollout 'should be seen in weeks':	Analysts are involved in an urgent effort to gauge the impact of Britain’s mass Covid-19 vaccine campaign and to pinpoint dates when lockdown measures can be eased. More than 3 million people – most of them elderly or vulnerable individuals or health workers – have already been given jabs. Now researchers are trying to establish when the first fruits of the mass vaccination programme may be seen as the government heads towards its target of immunising more than 13 million people by 15 February. Most agree that the impact of the vaccine may vary widely regionally and among different groups. Nevertheless, it is expected the first indications of the jab’s success should become apparent in a few weeks. “We won’t see numbers of cases drop significantly in the next few weeks but we should see the vaccine having an impact in our analyses of cases, then not long afterwards hospitalisations and then deaths should decrease noticeably,” said Professor Adam Finn, of Bristol University. One analysis released last week by the Covid-19 Actuaries Response Group – set up last year by actuaries, epidemiologists and longevity experts to study the disease’s impact on the UK population – painted a graphic picture of what lies ahead. Written by actuary John Roberts, it predicts that material reductions will be seen in hospitalisations starting from mid-February, and reported deaths in early March. In contrast, the impact on numbers of cases is likely to be seen sooner, according to the group’s analysis. However, the reduction there is likely to be smaller. Several key factors will influence the impact of the vaccine, says Roberts: the prevalence of the virus in the population, the effectiveness of each vaccine, and the take-up of the vaccine. If the virus is widespread, and the vaccine is not as effective as expected, then the programme will take longer to have an impact.  Refusal to be vaccinated could also affect case reductions. Nevertheless, several key forecasts can be made, he states. Firstly, over the next few months, the vaccine will only cause overall numbers of cases to drop by 10%-15% of current levels – because that decline is proportionate to the numbers being vaccinated However, it is in the second category – hospitalisations – that the mass vaccination rollout will have a noticeable impact, and that is because the programme has been specifically targeted at the old and the vulnerable – those most likely to need treatment in a hospital. As a result, hospitalisations are likely to start to decline at the end of January and reach 40% of current levels by the middle of March. This decline will be less apparent for those admitted to intensive care units (ICUs). Once in hospital, the very elderly are generally not selected for such treatment, and so ICU admissions are likely to drop to only 65% of current use by early April. However, it is the impact on death rates that will show the greatest effect of vaccinations, it is thought. The rate will not start to drop noticeably until late February but once the decline starts it should accelerate quickly until, by mid-April, death rates linked to Covid-19 will be reduced to below 20% of current levels. This reduction – in hospitalisations and deaths – suggests that the NHS, while still facing continued severe stress over the next few weeks, can expect to achieve stability by spring. This optimism was shared by England’s chief medical officer,  Chris Whitty , who told Friday’s Downing Street press conference he thought there was “a reasonable chance things will be a lot better in the spring”. •  The government is today urging the public to join a “national effort” by helping friends and family over 80 to sign up for vaccinations. The NHS has vaccinated about 45% of over-80s in England so far. Now  Matt Hancock , the health secretary, is asking the public to sign up to three pledges to support the effort – to “help out” those over 80; to “join up” to clinical trials for Covid-19 vaccines and treatments; and to “stay informed” by keeping up to date with the latest NHS advice.
Coronavirus live: Brazil faces row over emergency vaccine approval; UK restrictions 'possible' next winter:	Water cannon and mounted police have been used to break up a demonstration in Amsterdam against lockdown measures and the government’s handling of the pandemic. Thousands of people gathered in Museumplein a public space in teh museum’s quarter of Amsterdam. Dutch police had said they were limiing the number of participants to 500 people and moved the protest to another location, Westerpark, but thousands still turned up. One of the organisers of the protest - billed as ‘The Netherlands in Resistance’ - told the Dutch broadcaster NH that he did not agree with the decision to restrict the event. “From day one I consulted with the municipality and the police. I did what they asked. And that was really a lot. I didn’t want to budge on two points, namely that we were allowed to stand on the Museumplein and the number of people,” said Michel Reijinga did not agree with this decision. The protest comes in the wake of the resignation of the Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte and his entire Cabinet on Friday over a scandal involving investigations into child welfare payments that wrongly labeled thousands of parents as fraudsters. In a nationally televised speech, Rutte said he had informed King Willem-Alexander of his decision and pledged that his government would continue work to compensate affected parents as quickly as possible and to battle the coronavirus. NH, has footage here of events a little earlier in Amsterdam, and their aftermath. Police have been breaking up anti-lockdown demonstrations in Amsterdam. Images and video are coming through on Twitter. There was this from Manya Koetse, a Dutch journalist covering China:  Chaos in Amsterdam right now at  #Museumplein , in front of Van Gogh Museum, as people protest against the covid19 measures in the Netherlands and its leadership.  pic.twitter.com/csSSRWs60f Dutch authorities have been using social media to urge people to go home. De driehoek kondigt per direct een noodbevel af. Dit betekent dat het voor niemand is toegestaan om op het Museumplein te verblijven.  Ga naar huis en houd daarbij 1,5 meter afstand. France is considering demanding Covid-19 tests for passengers from Ireland including truck drivers operating on a logistics route that has become key since Britain’s exit from the European Union, Ireland’s transport minister has said. “They have indicated that they are looking for... anyone coming into France from Ireland would have to have” a PCR test, Irish Transport Minister Eamon Ryan told RTE radio, referring to a type of Covid-19 test that can take several days. “They may go further. What they are looking at is the possibility that hauliers... would require an antigen test,” Ryan said, referring to another type of Covid-19 test that can give results in minutes.  An  Australian Open  tennis player  has been warned for breaching strict isolation rules  by “opening his door” to talk to his friends, as players complain about “insane” quarantine requirements ahead of the tournament. Four people have now tested positive for Covid-19 on charter planes bringing players in for the competition, which has forced 47 players into strict isolation where they cannot train for 14 days. However, tournament director Craig Tiley has confirmed the year’s first Grand Slam will go ahead from 8 February despite anger from players forced into hard quarantine. “We are reviewing the schedule leading in to see what we can do to assist these players,” Tiley told the Nine Network on Sunday.  “The  Australian Open  is going ahead and we will continue to do the best we possibly can do to ensure those players have the best opportunity.” Earlier on Sunday, multiple players   said they were misled about the rules for the tournament, were promised they would be allowed to train, and are risking injury ahead of the competition. The Michelin Guide will tomorrow reveal its annual pick of  France’s  top restaurants despite criticism over its decision to hold the awards while establishments remain closed in the Covid-19 pandemic. But three-star chefs can rest easy after Michelin said none will be demoted as the health crisis rages, the AFP news agency reports. The industry bible’s boss Gwendal Poullennec defended inspections that led to 57 new stars overall, even though restaurants remain shuttered after lockdowns imposed last spring and again since October. “It’s an important decision to support the industry, despite the current situation and perhaps even because of the situation,” Poullennec told AFP. “All the establishments that have kept their star this year or won one are restaurants that fully deserve it,” he said. Michelin has drawn fire for bestowing its verdicts as chefs rack up losses while adapting their menus for takeaway or deliveries - and food fans have little chance of booking tables anytime soon, with or without face masks. The rival Best 50 list, based in Britain, cancelled its 2020 ranking last year, while France’s La Liste said this month that instead of rankings it would honour innovative chefs who have persevered amid the pandemic. Michelin called off the lavish gala ceremony that was to be held in Cognac, southwest France - the first time outside Paris - and instead will announce the 2021 winners in a YouTube broadcast from the Eiffel Tower. Michelin  was challenged on social media  about how the results would be formulated Mais les restaurants en 2020 ont été fermés plus de la moitié de l'année ! Les résultats reposent sur quoi ? A leading British epidemiologist has criticised the  UK  government’s “pretty lax” approach to quarantining foreign arrivals and contacts of coronavirus cases, as ministers pledged to “beef up” checks. Professor John Edmunds, a member of the Government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said that if there is a quarantine policy it should be made “as effective as you possibly can”. The Sunday Times reported that ministers were considering introducing quarantine hotels and using technology to ensure people isolate, amid concern over new strains of coronavirus arriving from overseas. But Prof Edmunds told Times Radio: “If you’re going to have quarantine then you should probably make it as effective as you possibly can.” “Ours has been rather lax, not just for visitors coming into the UK the vast majority of whom do not have covid but we’ve also been rather lax with our quarantine of individuals who have been in direct contact with a case; indigenous cases. We’ve been pretty lax about that.” That’s it from me,  Caroline Davies.  Thank you for your time. Handing back now to my colleague  Ben Quinn .  Lebanon  finalised a deal with Pfizer on Sunday for 2.1 million doses of the coronavirus vaccine amid surge in infections that has overwhelmed the country’s health care system, Associated Press reports.  The doses are to arrive in Lebanon starting early February, according to Lebanon’s health ministry. The government’s statement said the Pfizer vaccines will be complemented with another 2.7 million doses from the U.N.-led program to provide for countries in need. It gave no date for when those doses are expected to arrive but said the agreement was signed in October. People in  Wales  have been urged to stick to coronavirus lockdown rules as the “significant task” of vaccinating adults continues. Dr Eleri Davies, incident director for the coronavirus outbreak response at Public  Health  Wales, said people should adopt the “same mindset” for the current lockdown as they did in March 2020. In a statement released on Sunday afternoon, Dr Davies said: “Vaccinating the adult population of Wales, to protect people from severe disease, is a significant task and the vaccine will take time to reach everyone “The effects of the vaccines may not be seen nationally for some time and we must continue to follow the advice on keeping Wales safe.” It comes following criticism of the Welsh government over the past week for vaccinating fewer people in proportion to its population than the other home nations. The House of Commons Welsh Affairs Committee heard on Thursday that the ratio of people receiving the first dose of the vaccine per 100,000 was 3,215. This compared to 3,514 in Scotland, 4,005 in England and 4,828 in Northern Ireland. In the  UK,  half of all over-80s have been vaccinated against coronavirus, health secretary Matt Hancock has Tweeted. I'm delighted that over half of all over-80s have been vaccinated. Each jab brings us one step closer to normal. Stay at home. Protect the NHS. Save lives. Joe Biden will sign a series of executive orders in his first days in office, attempting to roll back damage done  at home  and abroad by Donald Trump, whom the Democrat will replace as president on Wednesday. Biden, 78, has already outlined plans to send an immigration bill and a Covid stimulus and relief package to a newly Democratic-controlled Congress. On Friday he said he would  shake up the delivery of vaccines  against Covid-19, mired in chaos under Trump. Biden plans to return the US to the Paris climate accords and the Iran nuclear deal, overturn Trump’s travel ban against some Muslim-majority countries, restrict evictions and foreclosures under the pandemic and institute a mask mandate on federal property. In a memo  released on Saturday , incoming White House chief of staff Ron Klain said: “These actions will change the course of Covid-19, combat climate change, promote racial equity and support other underserved communities, and rebuild our economy in ways that strengthen the backbone of this country: the working men and women who built our nation. “While the policy objectives in these executive actions are bold, I want to be clear: the legal theory behind them is well-founded and represents a restoration of an appropriate, constitutional role for the president.” Read more: Restrictions are “possible” next winter if other countries don’t reach sufficient vaccination levels, a  UK  leading scientist has warned. Imperial College’s Prof Azra Ghani told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: It is possible. We are very much hoping that the vaccine will enable us really to go back to as normal a life as possible but we have to remember that the virus is still circulating globally and even if the UK is fully vaccinated, it is likely that we will get importations continue and that’s why it is also incredibly important that we support wider efforts to ensure vaccination is available to all countries.” She said that cases in the UK are coming down: We have started to see a small decline in cases in some areas and that certainly is positive news that the current restrictions that are in place are having the effect that we hoped.”  Asked if the restrictions which have brought this drop in cases are the national lockdown or previous Tier 4 rules, she said: Both will have had some effect in slowing the growth in cases. The most important thing that we’re seeing now is actually a decline in case numbers and that’s what we really need to accelerate as far as possible because it is of course saving people’s lives and avoiding unnecessary illness for all of these individuals who have been infected.” She also warned that the vaccine rollout may need to ramp up further: We have obviously exceeded levels of around two million a week that we were initially aiming for and the hope is that the most vulnerable will be protected in the near term. We have to remember that once we get towards springtime, we also have to give those second doses out so essentially the numbers will need to double to ensure that people become fully protected.” Today is a crunch day for  Brazil  with its health regulator set to decide whether to approve the emergency use of two vaccines that could help control one of the world’s most deadly coronavirus outbreaks. Anvisa’s five directors will vote on whether to permit the use of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and Sinovac’s CoronaVac shot at an extraordinary session starting at 10am local time   (1pm GMT). The meeting, which could last up to five hours,  will be broadcast live on social media  in an indication of its massive political importance. The decision comes at a critical moment. More than 209,000 Brazilians have died because of Covid-19, the second highest number after the US, and Brazil’s far-right president Jair Bolsonaro is facing growing public anger over his response and failure to begin any kind of vaccination campaign. Latin American neighbours such as Mexico, Chile and Argentina have all started administering shots but Brazil has failed to do so, despite boasting a world-renowned immunisation program.  Last week’s deadly oxygen crisis in the Amazon city of Manaus has sparked renewed calls for Bolsonaro’s impeachment and loud pot-banging protests in major cities. On Saturday, on the eve of Anvisa’s vote, demonstrators  projected Bolsonaro’s image  onto the regulator’s headquarters alongside slogans demanding the removal of a president they described as a “genocidal devil”. Sunday’s decision puts Bolsonaro in a political fix. He had hoped to start vaccination next week using the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot - and had reportedly planned to do so at a ceremony in the presidential palace. But Brazil has failed to import those vaccines from India, despite trying to send a plane there last week. That means Bolsonaro’s only option, if it is approved today, will be to use the CoronaVac shot, which has been championed by his main presidential rival João Doria. Bolsonaro has repeatedly tried to undermine what he calls the “Chinese vaccine” but now may have no choice but to use it.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Journeys of hope: what will migration routes into Europe look like in 2021?:	I n 2020, tens of thousands of migrants crossed desert and sea, climbed mountains and walked through forests to reach what has become an increasingly inhospitable Europe. Many of them died, overwhelmed by the waves, or tortured in the  detention centres of Libya . More were displaced after the  flames of Moria refugee camp  in Greece burned everything they had. As a new year begins, so do the journeys of tens of thousands more people seeking a new life overseas. The Guardian has spoken to experts, charity workers and NGOs about the challenges and risks they face on the main migration routes into  Europe . Migrants walk in protest to the Serbian-Hungarian border near Kelebija, Serbia, in February 2020. They seek a passage to the EU. Photograph: Bernadett Szabo/Reuters In July last year, seven north African men climbed into a shipping container in a railway yard in Serbia, hoping to emerge a few days later in Milan. Three months later, on 23 October,  authorities in Paraguay found their badly decomposed bodies  inside a shipment of fertiliser.  Violence from security forces in the Balkan states  has pushed people to take even greater risks to reach Europe. After the Serbian border with EU countries became virtually impassable in 2018, refugees began trying to reach Croatia via Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) instead. The path usually begins in Turkey, from which migrants attempt to reach Bulgaria or Greece, then North Macedonia or Serbia, then Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia, from where they can finally reach Italy or Austria. The final leg of the Balkan route, which crosses mountains and snow-covered forests and lacks facilities for migrants, is one of the most perilous and gruelling, made worse by the  brutal pushbacks  carried out by squadrons of Croatian police who patrol the EU’s longest external border. Between January and November 2020, the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) recorded 15,672 pushbacks from Croatia to BiH.  More than 60% of cases reportedly involved violence . The humanitarian situation for those entering Bosnia and Herzegovina remains unacceptable and undignified “The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 has decreased migration flows along the western Balkan route,” says Nicola Bay, DRC country director for Bosnia. Last year, 15,053 people arrived in BiH, compared with 29,196 in 2019. “But in the absence of real solutions the humanitarian situation for those entering BiH remains unacceptable and undignified.” In December, a fire destroyed a migrant camp in Bosnia, which had been built to contain the spread of Covid-19 among the migrant population. The same day the International Organization for  Migration  declared the effective closure of the facility. The destruction of the camp, which was strongly criticised by rights groups as inadequate due to its lack of basic resources, has left thousands of asylum seekers stranded in snow-covered forests and subzero temperatures. When countries in the region begin to ease Covid-19 restrictions this year, Bay says it is highly likely there will be a surge of arrivals to BiH, which remains the main transit point for those wanting to reach Europe – a scenario for which the EU and the region remain unprepared. Carrying children and their few possessions, migrants flee in Moria camp on the island of Lesbos, Greece. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images On the night of 8 September, the Moria refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos, the biggest of its kind in Europe,  burst into flames . The government announced a four-month state of emergency on the island, as thousands of vulnerable asylum seekers were displaced. “This was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece,” says Stephan Oberreit, head of mission for Médecins Sans Frontières in Greece. “The combination of violence, Covid pandemic and the continued harmful policies of containment on the islands have led to several breaking points and eventually to the fires that have destroyed Moria.” 2020 was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece After the blaze,  the EU said there would be no more Morias . But more than 15,000 men, women and children are still trapped in miserable conditions on the Greek islands and the policy of containment continues. People using this route generally come by dinghy from the Turkish town of Ayvalik, aiming to reach Lesbos. Oberreit says that while arrivals have decreased this year, reports of illegal pushbacks have increased “in a concerning way”. “But let’s be realistic, people will continue to try to cross and risk their lives in the absence of other safer and legal options.” Oberreit says the pandemic “has been used by Greek authorities to accelerate their agenda to create closed centres on the Greek islands and to increase the border controls”. It’s hard to predict what will happen this year, “but the signs we have today give us little hope that the situation for the people who manage to arrive on the Greek islands will improve. Or that the EU will abandon its approach based on deterrence and containment,” he says. Migrants are rescued by members of the Spanish NGO Proactiva Open Arms after leaving Libya on an overcrowded dinghy in November. Photograph: Sergi Camara/AP In mid-November, four shipwrecks in the space of three days  claimed the lives of more than 110 people  in the Mediterranean, including at least 70 people whose bodies washed up on the beach of al-Khums, in western  Libya . Taking advantage of good autumn weather, people smugglers sent hundreds of migrants to sea. Many of the journeys ended in tragedy. Last year, at least 575 people died taking the central Mediterranean route. The  International Organization for Migration  (IOM) says the real number is considerably higher. People using this route usually depart from Tripoli or Zuwara in Libya, or from Sfax in Tunisia, and make for the Sicilian island of Lampedusa or Malta in small boats. At the start of the pandemic, Italy and Malta declared their ports closed. Rome established “quarantine boats” – ferries on which migrants are placed under quarantine for 14 days, which have been  criticised by human rights groups . There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries ... human rights are practically revoked “There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries that these people badly need and not even legal assistance,” says Oscar Camps, founder of Proactiva Open Arms. “In such a situation, human rights are practically revoked.” Open Arms is now the only NGO rescue boat operating along the central Mediterranean route. Many other rescue boats are blocked in Italian ports because officials refuse to  authorise their departure . Camps says he would like to see a planned civil or military rescue operation along the route this year, similar to  Operation Mare Nostrum , which Italy ran in 2013–2014. “It should be an operation aimed at dismantling Libyan armed groups, falsely called coastguards, financed by the EU, whose only mission is to intercept boats and bring them back to a country at war,” says Camps. “However, considering the way things are going, we would settle for them stopping the criminalisation of rescue operations carried out by humanitarian ships.” A migrant climbs into the back of a lorry bound for Britain at the entrance to the Channel tunnel in Calais, November 2020. Photograph: Denis Charlet/AFP/Getty Images Several thousand people attempted to cross the Channel to reach Britain last year. London has repeatedly pressed Paris to do more to prevent people leaving  France . In November, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, said they wanted to make the route unviable and signed a new agreement aimed at curbing the number of  migrants crossing the Channel  in small boats. More than  8,000 people  made the crossing in small boats last year, up from almost 1,900 in 2019. “The difficulties faced by women, men and children will in many ways remain the same as before,” says Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty’s refugee and migrant rights programme director. “Clearly, there is no will among the two governments – particularly not the UK – to directly address the needs and circumstances of these people to ensure they have access to asylum.” Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France on family reunification is uncertain According to experts, the future of the Channel migration route is linked to the continuing pandemic lockdowns and whether the UK participates in EU migration policies, specifically the EU family reunification programme. “Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France in relation to this particular matter is uncertain,” says Valdez-Symonds. “All that can be said, as things stand, is that almost the sole formally sanctioned option for at least unaccompanied children with family in the UK to seek asylum here is  about to close .” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
