Sri Lanka v England: second Test, day one – as it happened:	Get your report on the opening day right  here : 87th over: Sri Lanka 229-4 (Mathews 107, Dickwella 19)  Warming to the task, Dickwella glances Anderson for four. Whisper it, but Sir Jimmy has bowled a bad ball. And that’s stumps, with Sri Lanka inching back on top. They’ve done seriously well to recover from 7-2, and Angelo Mathews fully deserves a hundred to go with his 71 the other day.  For England, Anderson has done a Broad with three for 24 off 19 overs of expert elder-statesmanship. Wood kept smiling magnificently through the longest spell he has bowled since his Test debut. But the spinners, who were flattered by their big hauls in the first Test, have found the going tougher, taking none for 120 from their 40 overs. “Control the rate, control the game,” is this England’s mantra. They’ve controlled the rate, largely thanks to Anderson, but they’re not in control of the game, which remains in the balance. It’s been a slow day, though not a dull one. Thanks for your company and we’ll be back at 4.30am UK time tomorrow. 86th over: Sri Lanka 225-4 (Mathews 107, Dickwella 15)  Curran’s ability to make things happen hasn’t shown up in this spell, and after Wood’s marathon, Root has no other seamer to turn to.  85th over: Sri Lanka 223-4 (Mathews 105, Dickwella 15)  Anderson, who is sweating profusely, persuades Dickwella to mis-time a drive. It would be a catch at silly mid-off if there was one, but no way is it carrying to sensible mid-off. The ground is a picture now – the sun out, the shadows long, big dark clouds gathering over the sea. “Woke up from my afternoon nap back here in India,” says Abhijato Sensarma. “And lo and behold, a competent batting display from the Sri Lankans! Can’t fault their performance today, and it’s certainly made England realise the toil they’ll need to go through while bowling in the subcontinent. Patience is the key here – wickets fall in clumps even when you’re down in the dumps.” Today’s clump came very early on. 84th over: Sri Lanka 223-4 (Mathews 105, Dickwella 15)  Just the single off Sam Curran’s over, when he would surely rather give away a flurry of fours in exchange for a wicket.  83rd over: Sri Lanka 222-4 (Mathews 105, Dickwella 14)  Mathews, seeing it like a beach ball, clips Anderson’s inswinger for four and simply ruins his figures, which are now 17-9-20-3. 82nd over: Sri Lanka 217-4 (Mathews 101, Dickwella 14)  Curran swings his first ball too, but it’s a floaty one outside off and Dickwella can ease it through the covers. Giving chase, and saving two with a flick back, is... Anderson, 38 years young.  “Just tuned in after teaching in Naples,” says Colum Fordham, “to see Sri Lanka in a fairly dominant position. Anderson is clearly a cut above the rest but we have cause for concern on the spin front. Having watched them in the first Test and a had a quick glimpse this morning, Bess and Leach do not look like they have the subtlety and variation that are going to pose problems for India’s top batters. “As an off-spinner myself, it’s not just a question of landing the ball on the right spot although Bess might benefit from more consistency. Given Adil Rashid’s unavailability, England surely have to look to Moeen for the India tour or, if they want to be bolder, consider Amar Virdi. Just had a quick look at him bowling on Youtube and he strikes me as a really promising, talented spinner and probably better than Bess. Not sure about his batting though.” 81st over: Sri Lanka 214-4 (Mathews 101, Dickwella 11)  So it’s Jimmy Anderson, and first ball he’s not only on the spot but  swinging it away . Mathews is equal to it, with a dead bat, and when Anderson repeats the trick he lets it go. Set up for the nip-backer, then, and here it comes, swinging back sharply – but Mathews is expecting it and there’s that dead bat again. Good over, good contest.  The new ball is being taken, naturally,  but there’s a delay while Mathews is treated for cramp. 80th over: Sri Lanka 214-4 (Mathews 101, Dickwella 11)  Root finally makes a change – Bess for Leach. Dickwella plays his first good shot, a cute lap-sweep for two. 79th over: Sri Lanka 210-4 (Mathews 100, Dickwella 8)  Everyone assumed Wood was going off, but here he is for an  eighth  over. Mere italics are not enough. And he’s still smiling: you couldn’t find a more admirable character. He tries a yorker to Dickwella, makes it a slower ball too, but still can’t get that second breakthrough. Is it safe to assume that’s him done now? The new ball is one over away. 78th over: Sri Lanka 209-4 (Mathews 100, Dickwella 7)  After reaching his 11th Test century, and his first at home for five years, Mathews plays a textbook forward-defence to Leach. Is he settling in for another one?  Angelo Mathews has never made a Test hundred in Galle – until now! Leach drops short again, Mathews doesn’t time his cut but still gets the quick single he’s looking for. It’s been about as effortless as a Test hundred can be on a boiling hot day. 77th over: Sri Lanka 207-4 (Mathews 99, Dickwella 6)  A  seventh  over for Wood, still running in, red-faced. He may have thought he was taking Jofra Archer’s place here, but at the moment he’s having to be Ben Stokes. Mathews doesn’t mind who it is: he just waits for something on his legs and tucks it away for a single to go to 99, which may well be what Wood would like to eat right now, if only Mr Whippy was in town. Wood still has enough in the tank to beat Dickwella outside off. “Unbelievable Woody, well done,” says someone on the stump mike. 76th over: Sri Lanka 206-4 (Mathews 98, Dickwella 6)  Leach gets an eighth over on the trot as Root declines to vary the menu in the last few overs before the new ball. Leach is a touch too short and the batsmen help themselves to a few singles. 75th over: Sri Lanka 201-4 (Mathews 95, Dickwella 4)  Root asks Wood for a sixth over in this spell. He’s accurate but, understandably, not hostile, and Dickwella picks up two with a deflection to long leg.  74th over: Sri Lanka 199-4 (Mathews 95, Dickwella 2)  Leach to Mathews and that’s a maiden. It’s an achievement to a batsman poised for his hundred, but it’s only the fourth maiden in 37 overs today from the England spinners. Anderson, who has eight in his 15 overs, may be tut-tutting in the outfield. 73rd over: Sri Lanka 199-4 (Mathews 95, Dickwella 2)  A pair of singles off Wood, an inside edge from Dickwella and a crisp pull from Mathews. Guy Hornsby is back, answering my question from the tea interval. “I’m in my *cough* middle years,” he confesses. Aren’t we all? “So it’s Tuffers and Embers, with a smattering of Hemmings, likely a touch of Salisbury, even a soupçon of Such and Croft. The glory years.” Ha.  72nd over: Sri Lanka 197-4 (Mathews 94, Dickwella 1)  Dickwella finally gets a go. He’s watchful against Leach, taking just a single – and it’s off the the last ball, so he’s not worried about Wood. 71st over: Sri Lanka 196-4 (Mathews 94, Dickwella 0)  That three came off the last ball of the over, so Mathews was protecting the new batsman, Niroshan Dickwella, from Wood. This is a maiden but not a threatening one, as Wood goes too legside.  70th over: Sri Lanka 196-4 (Mathews 94, Dickwella 0)  Mathews, unperturbed, clips Leach for three. The balance of power now rests with him: if he goes big, Sri Lanka’s spinners will be able to wheel away with weight of runs on their side; if he only gets a baby hundred, England will be on top.  69th over: Sri Lanka 193-4 (Mathews 91)  And that is  drinks,  with England’s morale about three times as high as it was two minutes ago. They’ve brought an end to a fine innings and an excellent partnership of 117.  Got him! No nick, and no doubt – it was smacking into leg stump. Not a yorker though, just a length ball angling in, maybe reversing a touch. Wood’s first wicket of the series, and it could hardly be more deserved. Wood gets the yorker right this time, and it looks plumb unless there’s a nick. 68th over: Sri Lanka 192-3 (Mathews 90, Chandimal 52)  Where is a wicket going to come from? The best bet may be a run-out, and Anderson has a sniff of one in this over from Leach, but he fumbles the pick-up at mid-on. Fair enough: it would have blown his chance of a ten-for. 67th over: Sri Lanka 190-3 (Mathews 89, Chandimal 51)  Wood has given up on the bouncer for now, perhaps feeling the ball has gone too soft. He tries to york Mathews, but gets the line wrong, allowing a tickle for four and a tuck for two. When he reverts to length, Mathews pulls for two more. With 13 overs to the new ball, Root surely needs to toss the old one to himself.  66th over: Sri Lanka 182-3 (Mathews 81, Chandimal 51)  Chandimal opens the face, glides for a couple, and that’s his  fifty  – just deserts for digging in after getting a couple of twenties in the first Test. If they feel like it, these two could bat till February. 65th over: Sri Lanka 180-3 (Mathews 81, Chandimal 49)  Anderson comes off, after a discussion with Root, who opts for another burst of Wood. He’s bowled really well in this series and has none for a hundred to show for it. This over goes for just a single, a nurdle from Chandimal. 64th over: Sri Lanka 179-3 (Mathews 81, Chandimal 48)  Another moral victory for Leach as Mathews goes back and misses a cut. Or does he?Root wonders whether to review, but Buttler isn’t interested. Meanwhile the batsmen have brought up their  hundred partnership.  It’s been a story of calm accumulation, a stand-in captain and an ex-captain both playing a captain’s innings.  63rd over: Sri Lanka 175-3 (Mathews 78, Chandimal 47)  Anderson goes for a single! Mathews, tiring of all these dots, plays a gentle straight drive.  62nd over: Sri Lanka 174-3 (Mathews 77, Chandimal 47)  In an unexpected development, everyone has got the giggles – Wood, Root, even Chandimal. I can’t work out why, so I feel like the sort of teacher who says “if it’s so funny, you can share it with the class”. Maybe it’s a cunning plan, because a moment later Leach, bowling to Chandimal,  gets a ball past the bat . From nowhere he finds a bit of turn, a bit of bounce, and a bit of hope. 61st over: Sri Lanka 173-3 (Mathews 76, Chandimal 47)  Anderson to Chandimal: more dots than an email from Shreyas Das. There’s that hint of reverse again, but in this heat Anderson is only around 80mph, which gives the batsman time to adjust. 60th over: Sri Lanka 173-3 (Mathews 76, Chandimal 47)  Again, Anderson’s parsimony persuades the batsmen to pick up runs at the other end. Chandimal gives Bess the charge and collects two, and then Mathews cuts for four, craftily, well in front of square. 59th over: Sri Lanka 166-3 (Mathews 72, Chandimal 44)  Yes, Anderson has changed ends. It makes no difference: he just resumes bowling dry to Mathews. Shreyas Das is pondering the England spinners. “Leach and Bess’s inconsistent line and length should be really worrying Joe Root….ahead of the tough India tour…..” Bess has been a bit better today, but yes, England may need to turn back to Moeen Ali. Also, impressive number of dots there – are you, by any chance, an ageing swing bowler?  58th over: Sri Lanka 166-3 (Mathews 72, Chandimal 44)  Root takes Anderson off, which is interesting unless it’s a change of ends. Back comes Dom Bess, bearing singles, three of them – one of which he’ll be grateful for, as it comes off a half-tracker. That is Bess’s Achilles heel. 57th over: Sri Lanka 163-3 (Mathews 70, Chandimal 43)  Starved by Anderson, Mathews decides to tuck into Leach, chipping over mid-on for four. 56th over: Sri Lanka 158-3 (Mathews 65, Chandimal 43)  Those clouds are only there for show, not making the ball swing, so Anderson is bowling a fifth-stump line, daring the batsman to have a nibble. Mathews is not for tempting until there’s just enough width to punch a single into the covers. One seasoned pro, seeing off another. 55th over: Sri Lanka 157-3 (Mathews 64, Chandimal 43)  Leach continues, immediately goes for two singles, then silently yells “Won’t get milked again!” and delivers four dots. 54th over: Sri Lanka 155-3 (Mathews 63, Chandimal 42)  It’s a change of ends for the old boy, and he’s even greeted by some clouds, as Galle bends over backwards to be more like Burnley. Bowling to Mathews, he starts with a dot, another dot... and four more dots. After that unbelievable last over that cost eight runs, Jimmy Anderson is himself again. This session could be a long one,  as England have only managed a rather dismal 53 overs. It will begin, like its two processors, with a bit of Anderson.  “Definitely into the hard yakka now,” says Guy Hornsby,  “stuff of my junior years, long-wave radio in the ear at 5am as England toiled in the sun. Just as Sri Lanka are digging in, so must our bowlers. Expect no help, try and land it in the same spot. Bess and Leach can learn a lot here.” Are you sure about that, Guy? Landing it in the same spot is what you do when there’s something in the pitch, to make things happen for you. On a track like this, I would have thought the variations have to come from the bowler, as Wood has been busting a gut to show. That said, I love the long-wave radio in the ear at 5am, and I’m wondering which era you’re harking back to – who was doing the toiling, Tuffers and Embers? Gifford and Underwood? 53rd over: Sri Lanka 155-3 (Mathews 63, Chandimal 42)  Better from Leach, and that’s  tea . The past hour belongs firmly to Sri Lanka, who have added 47 without loss. Only Wood, with his pace and hostility and hint of reverse, looked like breaking through, and he couldn’t quite manage it. For a seam bowler, the only way to get a wicket on this pitch is to be 38 years old. See you in a quarter of an hour. 52nd over: Sri Lanka 154-3 (Mathews 62, Chandimal 42)  Decent from Bess, but decency doesn’t look like taking wickets. Anderson has three for 14, while the rest of the bowlers have none for 139. And one of them, Wood, has bowled very well. That’s how flat this pitch is. 51st over: Sri Lanka 152-3 (Mathews 60, Chandimal 42)  Leach’s turn to be milked, and the partnership has risen without trace to 75. 50th over: Sri Lanka 147-3 (Mathews 57, Chandimal 40)  Better from Bess, who gives it more flight and restricts Mathews to a single. “Good over this, Bessy,” says Jos Buttler, one Somerset exile to another.  49th over: Sri Lanka 146-3 (Mathews 56, Chandimal 40)  A couple of singles off Leach. 48th over: Sri Lanka 144-3 (Mathews 55, Chandimal 39)  If Bess and Leach are having a Branderson-style thrift contest, Bess has been winning it today, but now he goes for five singles as the batsmen realise that, on this flat pitch, he’s there for the milking.  47th over: Sri Lanka 139-3 (Mathews 53, Chandimal 36)  Root gives Leach only one close catcher, himself at slip, so there’s no pressure on Mathews. Or on Leach, who begins with a maiden.  46th over: Sri Lanka 139-3 (Mathews 53, Chandimal 36)  A single to each batsman off Bess, and sure enough, Wood is taking a breather – here comes Jack Leach. 45th over: Sri Lanka 137-3 (Mathews 52, Chandimal 35)  Wood is having one last go at Chandimal. He changes his tune from chin music to rib music, and it very nearly works – Chandimal fends, the ball pops up... but short leg has gone deeper, a rare case of a funky field-placing costing a wicket. Chandimal celebrates his reprieve with a cut for two and a flick for a single. That’s probably that for this spell from Wood, which goes down in the book as none for 21, when it could easily have been two for 15.  44th over: Sri Lanka 132-3 (Mathews 52, Chandimal 30)  Chandimal needs something to cheer him up, so he dances down the track to Bess and lofts him for  six . 43rd over: Sri Lanka 124-3 (Mathews 51, Chandimal 23)  Another good bouncer from Wood, drawing a top edge from Mathews – but it loops over Buttler’s shoulder for four. And that’s Mathews’  fifty , his second in succession. He once made 160 against England, and he could do it again here. Wood tests Chandimal with yet another bouncer, the best of the three, super-quick, but he’s ready for it and gets a more decisive duck in this time. Wood follows up with the yorker, and there’s a vague appeal for a catch by Zak Crawley at short leg as Chandimal inside-edges. The umpires call for a review but it’s a bump ball. Or an ump ball. 42nd over: Sri Lanka 117-3 (Mathews 44, Chandimal 23)  Mathews drives down the ground for a single off Bess, who gets away with a long hop to Chandimal. 41st over: Sri Lanka 116-3 (Mathews 43, Chandimal 23)  Chandimal takes on Wood, driving for four and clipping for two, and then Wood hits back with a bouncer that  strikes him on the grille . He ducked into it, then took his eye off it, but the blow was only glancing and after a quick check from the physio, he’s OK to continue. The stump mike sadly fails to replay the conversation. “What day is it, Chanders?” “Groundhog Day, obviously.”  40th over: Sri Lanka 109-3 (Mathews 42, Chandimal 17)  A maiden is beckoning to Bess when he drags one down and is lucky to get away with a single. Here’s Felix Wood, picking up on Daniel’s remark in the 29th over about bowling depth. “I’m not sure that England do have such an embarrassment of bowling riches,” he argues. “Rotating Broad and Anderson to lessen chances of injury speaks to me of a lack of confidence in the other options. None of the others offer the same control, and I do worry that our bowlers will be taken to the cleaners in India and Australia. If either series is anything like as good as those two duking it out then it will be a good year, pandemic be damned.” It will! But I’m not sure the rotation is designed to avoid injury. In Sri Lanka, there’s only room for one trad right-arm fast-medium bowler, however distinguished. You need two spinners, one paceman and something a bit different. 39th over: Sri Lanka 108-3 (Mathews 41, Chandimal 17)  Wood bangs it in to Chandimal, then brings out that inswinging yorker again. Chandimal copes with both but looks ruffled, as well he may. “Good from Wood,” says Rob Key, for the second time in a few minutes. And that’s  drinks,  with England ahead on points. They had the better of that hour by virtue of a single delivery, the one from Anderson that moved just enough to get rid of Thirimanne. 38th over: Sri Lanka 108-3 (Mathews 41, Chandimal 17)  Bess keeps it tight until the last ball, when he floats it up outside off, an invitation to Mathews to square-drive for four.  37th over: Sri Lanka 103-3 (Mathews 37, Chandimal 16)  Anderson has to go after being so embarrassingly expensive. Back comes Mark Wood, who tries a yorker to Mathews and gets it to jag in late, targeting the toes. Mathews’ eye is in, so he’s able to glance it for a single, but that’s an encouraging sign for Wood, and for the rest of the day: a bit of reverse swing. 36th over: Sri Lanka 101-3 (Mathews 36, Chandimal 15)  Joe Root goes back to spin, and Bess whizzes through a maiden to Chandimal. Slow bowling isn’t slow when you’re writing about it.
Covid vaccine acceptance rising across Europe but falling in parts of Asia:	Covid vaccine acceptance is rising across  Europe  as inoculation programmes slowly advance, according to a survey, with the proportion of people saying they are willing to have the jab improving sharply over the past two months. YouGov tracker data  shows double-digit percentage point increases in coronavirus  vaccine acceptance  rates in eight of the nine European countries surveyed since mid-November, with one country, Sweden, recording a rise of 21 points. The picture was less positive outside of Europe, however, with people in several countries in Asia appearing no more willing now – and in some cases even slightly less willing – to get vaccinated than when they were asked late last year. Europe’s drug regulator, the European Medicines Agency, approved the Pfizer/BioNTech shot on 21 December and the Moderna vaccine a fortnight later, and it is expected to authorise the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab next week. But national vaccination programmes have been uneven, with some EU members such as  Denmark  and Malta having inoculated more than 3% of their populations and others such as the Netherlands and France at barely 1%. The work has been hampered by logistical problems, vaccine shortfalls and time-consuming administrative and consent procedures. The EU has set member states a target of vaccinating 70% of their adult populations by the end of the summer. Brussels has signed six vaccine contracts to eventually deliver more than 2bn doses. Last week Pfizer announced a temporary reduction in supplies, but the European commission has said full distribution should begin again next week and the backlog will be made up in February. The UK, by contrast, which approved the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine nearly a month before the EU and has since also authorised the AstraZeneca shot, has so far administered at least one shot to nearly 7.5% of its population. YouGov said about 66% of Swedes and 81% of British respondents said in mid-January that they would be willing to have the jab, compared with 45% and 61% respectively two months ago. Italy recorded a 19-point increase from mid-December, to 71%. There were also increases since mid-November in Denmark (up 13 points, to 80%), Germany (up eight points, to 59%),  Finland  (19 points, 69%), Spain (18 points, 71%) and Norway (13 points, 70%). Perhaps most encouragingly, the figures in  France , Europe’s most vaccine-sceptical country, also rose sharply. YouGov said 32% of its French respondents said they were willing to be vaccinated against Covid-19 in mid-November and just 24% in mid-December, rising 46% by 20 January, including the few who had already had the jab. Outside Europe, vaccine acceptance appears to be rising less sharply or even falling. In the US, where YouGov has been tracking attitudes since July, 51% of people now say they are happy to receive the vaccine or have already done so, up nine points. In Asia, however, people appear slightly less willing to be vaccinated. The most notable shift was in Hong Kong, where vaccine acceptance was 15 percentage points down, at 36%. Acceptance rates were also down in Malaysia and Thailand (both by four points) and the Philippines (five points). In Saudi Arabia, vaccine acceptance have improved from 42% to 51%.
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
Portugal's health system 'very close to limit' – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Brazil  had 33,040 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 551 fatalities, the first day in six the death toll has been below 1,000, the health ministry said on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 8,488,099 cases since the pandemic began, and the official death toll has risen to 209,847, according to ministry data. It is the world’s third worst outbreak behind the United States and India. Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the  NHS  in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. Stevens said the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” Stevens said on Sunday. Over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the  UK  government has announced. More than 3.8 million people – including over-80s, care home residents and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will begin to be offered to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups but sites that have enough supply, and capacity to vaccinate more people, will be allowed to offer jabs to the next two cohorts. Ghana ’s Covid-19 infection rates are skyrocketing and include strains of the virus not previously seen in the country, threatening to overwhelm the health system, President Nana Akufo-Addo said on Sunday. Since 5 January, the number of active cases has risen to 1,924 from about 900 , Akufo-Addo said in a speech. There are now  120 severe cases, up from 18 a week ago . The president said that some people arriving from abroad had tested positive for “new variants” of the virus. Last week, Gambia recorded its first two cases of the highly infectious UK variant, in what appears to be the first confirmation of its presence in Africa. Ghana is not yet close to the peak seen during the first wave of infections in the middle of last year, but could quickly reach that level if cases keep rising at the current rate. If they do, the president said he would impose another partial lockdown, despite worries about what that would do to one of west Africa’s largest economies. “Our Covid-19 treatment centres have gone from having zero patients to now being full because of the upsurge in infections,” the president said. “At this current rate ... our healthcare infrastructure will be overwhelmed.” Across Africa, a second coronavirus wave is infecting twice as many people per day than at the height of last year’s first wave  and has yet to peak, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The rise has raised concern across the continent where, unlike in  Europe  and the United States, cash-strapped governments have been unable to secure supply deals with vaccine manufacturers, putting the onus for now on containment. Akufo-Addo said details about access to vaccines and a rollout plan would be announced “very soon”. Schools in  Malawi  will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday. After reporting no positive cases for almost two months, the country has seen a sudden resurgence in coronavirus cases since the middle of last month. The country of 19 million people has reported 12,470 cases of Covid-19 and 314 deaths since the pandemic began last year. Chakwera said  a third of those deaths were reported in the past 16 days , forcing the government to seek additional funding to contain the pandemic at a time when the country is in 4.1tn kwacha ($5.37bn) of debt. The new measures concerning schools and bars will take effect from Monday. Chakwera also said the government has allocated an additional 1.6bn kwacha ($2.1m) in funds to be spent on recruiting frontline healthcare workers, 1,000 intensive care unit beds and 1,000 oxygen cylinders among other requirements. Last week the government reported that two senior cabinet ministers and two other high-profile members of the government had died from Covid-19. Workers in  Melbourne  are expected to return to city offices in large numbers on Monday, with research indicating most feel safe and ready to return after nine months of remote working. Private workplaces in  Victoria  are able to return to 50% capacity from Monday, with public service offices permitted to ramp up to 25%. A Roy Morgan survey of 503 city workers from late November to mid-December shows almost two-thirds were either willing to return to their central  Melbourne  workplaces (44%) or had already (15%). The most commonly cited factors making workers feel safe to return were Covid-safe plans and adherence to health measures. France  reported a further 141 deaths from coronavirus on Sunday, taking the cumulative toll since March to 70,283, the public health authority said. It also reported 16,642 new infections within the previous 24 hours. The infection figures on Sundays are usually lower because fewer tests are taken. The number of daily cases has been hovering around 20,000 for the last week. The health ministry said in a separate statement that 422,127 people had now been vaccinated, up from about 413,000 on Saturday. Eurostar  has said it is facing an existential threat, as business leaders pleaded with the government to step in and save the “vital link” with Europe. A 95% drop in passenger numbers  has brought the cross-Channel train service to its knees, and the company reiterated on Sunday that while government loans had been extended to aviation, international high-speed rail had also been severely affected by the pandemic. Here’s a graphic showing the number of vaccine doses US states have administered, courtesy of ourworldindata.org  Portugal ’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. “Our health system is under a situation of extreme pressure,”  Health  Minister Marta Temido told reporters on Sunday afternoon after a visit to a struggling hospital. “There is a limit and we are very close to it.” The health system, which prior to the pandemic had the  lowest number of critical care beds per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe , can accommodate a maximum of 672 COVID-19 patients in intensive care units (ICUs), according to health ministry data. The number of people in ICUs with COVID-19 reached 647 on Sunday, according to health authority DGS. The Portuguese Association of Hospital Administrators said the number of coronavirus patients needing hospitalisation was likely to dramatically increase over the next week. Three days into a nationwide lockdown, the country of just 10 million people reported 10,385 new cases and 152 fatalities on Sunday, bringing the total number of infections to 549,801, with the death toll increasing to 8,861. According to  ourworldindata.org , supported by Oxford University,  Portugal had the highest number of coronavirus cases in Europe per capita over the last seven days . Most new cases were concentrated in Lisbon, where many patients at the city’s public hospitals have already been transferred elsewhere, including to health units in the country’s second biggest city Porto. The  UK  variant of the coronavirus has killed three residents at a retirement home in northwestern  Belgium  and infected 111 people including 39 staff members, its director Jurgen Duyck told AFP on Sunday. The cluster represents two-thirds of the residents of the De Groene Verte home in the  western Flanders city of  Houthulst  near the border with France. Belgium has suffered one of the worst per capita death rates in the world during the epidemic with its nursing homes representing more than half of overall deaths from the disease, according to the Public  Health  Institute. Mayor Joris Hindryckx said the outbreak prompted a halt to “all social and sporting activities” in the town of around 10,000 people. The source of the contamination is unknown, but the mayor said the infection must have been “indirect” as none of those testing positive was known to have travelled to Britain. Brazil ’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. The vaccines produced by Oxford/AstraZeneca and China’s Sinovac will both now be permitted in South America’s biggest country, which has the world’s second highest Covid death toll with more than 209,000 deaths. The decision was taken on Sunday afternoon after three of Anvisa’s five directors voted for the move. The ruling is a major victory for Brazil’s 212 million citizens - reeling from one of the worst epidemics in the world - but a stinging political defeat for the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro. Bolsonaro has failed to acquire any doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and as a result vaccination with Sinovac’s CoronaVac is likely to begin on Sunday in São Paulo state. São Paulo is governed by one of the president’s biggest political rivals, João Doria, who has championed the Chinese vaccine. Doria will reportedly offer the first shot to a local intensive care nurse called Mônica Calazans on Sunday, making a high-profile pronouncement he hopes will cement his image as Brazil’s Covid saviour in the public imagination. “Brazil is in a rush to save lives,” Doria tweeted on Sunday afternoon. Bolsonaro’s Twitter account remained silent.
The preparation for an inauguration like no other – a photo essay:	A  presidency like no other ended in an inauguration like no other. The twin forces of Covid-19 and domestic terrorism bent the event – and its  host city  – out of shape. There were no cheering crowds on the Mall and this was no “shining city on a hill”. Instead Washington DC was wrapped in perimeter fencing, road barricades and security checkpoints. Meanwhile 20,000 troops from the national guard patrolled a Capitol that had been sacked two weeks earlier by  insurrectionists  wishing to overturn the election result. We asked the photographer Jordan Gale to record this extraordinary inauguration – he has been in the city since Saturday – and he captured these sombre images that reflect a city, and country, in the grip of terror and anxiety. –  John Mulholland
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Grave matter: Germans seek new ways to talk about dying:	O n a plane tree-lined shopping street in Berlin’s fashionable Gräfekiez neighbourhood, two children are glued to the front of a brightly lit ground-floor office space, decorated with the understated minimalism of a design agency. The object of their curiosity is a Lego window display, showing a miniature cemetery and a coffin carried by four tiny pallbearers, complete with black top hats. “I love this”, says their mother as Birgit Scheffler, the co-owner of funeral home Das Fährhaus (The Ferry House), steps out of building’s front door. “It would be nice if death becomes less of a taboo for my kids’ generation than it was for my own.” Das Fährhaus’ inviting exterior is a deliberate contrast to traditional funeral parlours, who usually have “blacked out windows or drawn blinds, and maybe a dead fly lying on the window sill”, as Scheffler put it. Specialising in alternative or bespoke funerals, her undertaker’s business is one of several ventures that are currently brightening up a German way of death that used to be considered one of the gloomiest, most ritualised and rigidly regulated in  Europe . “In postwar  Germany , our grief culture was shaped by the legacy of the two wars”, said Scheffler, 43, who used to work in marketing and distribution for a media company before retraining in 2017. “In a culture that was focused on building something new from the ruins, death was pushed aside.” The psychoanalyst couple Margarete and Alexander Mitscherlich famously diagnosed Germany with an “inability to mourn”, a phrase that was amplified by the 1968 student movement and has since echoed through the country’s postwar history. Coronavirus, however, is proving a catalyst for a new way of talking about mortality. “Death is suddenly at the centre of our lives”, Scheffler said. “The first thing many of us do when we wake up is look at the number of people who have died in the last 24 hours.” A national conversation about dying has captured the radio waves and television screens. In My Perfect Funeral, a critically acclaimed new series for radio broadcaster Deutschlandfunk, interviewees describe how they want to be put six feet under. Netflix’s recent  The Last Word , meanwhile, stars German comedy star Anke Engelke as a widow who reinvents herself as a eulogy speaker. “There is no wrong way to mourn”, says Engelke’s voiceover in the concluding episode. “Death is only terrible if you take it seriously.” Scheffler and her co-owner Sahra Ratgeber opened Das Fährhaus in August, at a time when neighbouring shops were struggling with social distancing requirements and losses incurred during the spring lockdown. New hygiene rules have also proved a burden for undertakers, limiting the number of people allowed to attend funerals and requiring embalmers to wear additional PPE. Open-casket funerals have been banned; the bodies of those who have died of or with Covid-19 are buried in body bags. Yet among bereaved families the lockdown has inspired creative new ways to send off the departed. This year, Das Fährhaus has organised a funeral in which mourners were allocated time slots to adorn the grave with painted stones rather than the conventional flowers. At another, family and friends dropped chocolate bars rather than sand onto the coffin of a deceased chocaholic. Her business offers mourners the opportunity to build their own coffin or work with a ceramicist to make a bespoke urn. “The more elements of the funeral relatives or friends can create themselves, the better.” Increasingly, she said, people were getting in touch to put down specific instructions for their own funeral in writing: one woman dreamt of being buried in her wedding dress, a composer wanted to make sure some of her works were burned alongside her. A heightened sense of one’s own perceived uniqueness may be associated with the much-derided “snowflake generation” of the 2010s, but Scheffler said she has noticed a change across all ages. “Even people in their 70s and 80s are becoming more creative.” Outside the German capital, with its high tolerance threshold for alternative lifestyles, more traditional last rites still prevail, said Louise Brown, who presents the My Perfect Funeral podcast. A Hamburg-based journalist for print and radio, Brown has since 2015 also worked as a  Trauerrednerin , a freelance “mourning speaker” for those who don’t want a eulogy to be spoken by the clergy. While the tradition of such “free speakers” goes back to the free religious movement of the 19th century, other aspects of the typical German funeral remain unusually heavily steeped in tradition. The country is one of the few in the world where coffins or urns must be buried in a cemetery, the so-called  Friedhofszwang,  and where scattering the ashes of the cremated or dividing them between family members is banned. “Most Germans still have a small-c conservative attitude to death”, said Brown, 45, a dual British-German citizen. “The organ music at the start of the funeral, the church bells on the walk to the grave: to many people these rituals still matter”. What was changing, she said, was the bandwidth of what could be said in a eulogy: “People want more personalised speeches, and they no longer want me to skirt around the conflicts and the difficult phases in a person’s life.” Interviewing family and friends in preparation for her speeches, said Brown, was like leafing through a photo album: “Often the funniest, most honest and authentic pictures are filed loosely near the back pages. The pictures that were taken on the fringes of the official photo session on a holiday, after an award ceremony or a 50th birthday. The pictures no one tried to pose for, the ones we thought were too blurry or out of focus. In a funeral speech, these are often the images that the bereaved most identify with.” The pandemic has also constrained the jobs of mourning speakers, forbidding not only communal singing but also the customary post-funeral meet-up over coffee, which Brown says can be more important than the funeral itself. “After the body has been laid to rest, there is usually a moment where the bereaved are both still very vulnerable and very open with each other. The intimacy of these gatherings isn’t something that you can recreate in a Zoom call.” In times of Covid-19 families are increasingly opting for cremations, in the hope they can postpone the communal get-together until after the pandemic is over (urns, unlike coffins, can be put into storage for up to six weeks): according to Germany’s national association of undertaker’s, cremations now make up 70% of all funerals. But even before Germany’s severe second wave and the ensuing Christmas lockdown squashed hopes of get-togethers in the near future, many had started looking for alternative new rituals. Graphic artist Anemone Zeim started her “remembrance workshop” Vergiss Mein Nie (Forget Me Never) seven years ago, helping bereaved people to come up with creative projects that conserve memories of their lost ones: films cut together from old Super 8 footage, scarves recycled from a late grandmother’s favourite jumper, or lampshades patterned with a deceased friend’s handwriting. “You can’t solve your grief with a checklist”, said Zeim. “You need to get creative to find individual solutions. You need to use your hands to stop you getting trapped in your brain. That’s what we help with.” In recent months, requests for her agency’s services have doubled, with emails flooding in not just from the Hamburg area where her business is based, but from across Germany, Austria and Switzerland. So-called “grieving tools” sold via Forget Me Never’s website, such as funeral cards, an “anger capsule” for writing down unresolved feelings towards the deceased, or “flower tears” containing bulbs and a clump of soil, have been in high demand. “We’ve been working flat out”, said Zeim, “not necessarily because more people have died because of coronavirus but because people who have suffered a loss have been shacked up in their own four walls. There are advantages to that too: you don’t have to deal with the social stigma of grieving in public. But the danger is that you can become wrapped up in your sorrow.” Zeim said she expected demand to keep on rising in the new year. “The process of mourning can take months or years, and not just individuals can mourn, but societies too. We as a society are already grieving for the toll that this pandemic has taken of us. We just haven’t realised yet.”
Kevin Lasagna and other footballers with surnames that are tasty dishes:	“Udinese have a player named Kevin Lasagna,”  notes Yuval Hyman.  “Do you know of any other players with a tasty dish as a surname?” Finding specific delicious meals in a footballer’s surname is no easy feat (or treat) but Tim Postins jumped at the opportunity to combine a few ingredients and serve up some choice dishes on the back of this question. “Adam Curry (currently on loan to Alfreton Town from Hull) would operate well with Declan Rice (West Ham 2016-present). And then there’s Mark Fish (ex-Bolton and Charlton) but only if Worthing’s striker James Lemon is putting the squeeze on. Plus the former Margate defender Paul Lamb who’d go well with a dash of Scott Mint(o). Or maybe you’d prefer a Patrick Berger with a portion of Jonas Fries?” Milton has written in with a menu that has a distinctly Mediterranean flavour. “The last name of  Víctor Espárrago , a winner of Libertadores and Intercontinental Cups, and coach of many teams in Spain, means ‘asparagus’ though it is debatable whether that counts as a tasty dish.”  If Yotam Ottolenghi’s cooking, then yes it probably does . “In Spanish there are the last names Zarza (blackberry) and Piña (pineapple) – Barcelona’s Clàudia Pina and former Mexico forward Enrique López Zarza are two examples.” If Frank Leboeuf was given a roasting he could be served up for Sunday lunch and Real Madrid’s wing-back Nacho would count as a dish if he had former Bristol City forward Paul Cheesley melted down and served up alongside him. And sticking with the cheesy theme, who can forget Massimo Maccarone at Middlesbrough? “Football Weekly posited that Erling Haaland and Alexander Sorloth may be the tallest strike partnership ever, both being 6ft 4in,”  writes Dylan Kenny.  “However, I think Jan Koller and Vratislav Lokvenc could be an even taller ‘big man, big man” duo. Did they ever play together? Is there a taller pair of forwards out there?” “It seems that Jan Koller (6ft 7 1/2in) and Vratislav Lokvenc (6ft 4in) did play together at least once – during the Czech Republic v France game at Euro 2000,” writes Nicholas Mandalos. “Lokvenc joined the fray just after half-time. I can’t be bothered to work out what overall height this gives them but I’m sure some anorak will [12 ft 11 1/2in – Knowledge Anorak Ed].” Tom Leonard thinks he can reach higher. “I’m not sure you could ever call them a ‘strike partnership’ but Peter Crouch (6ft 7in) and Nwankwo Kanu (6ft 5in) played more than a few games together at Portsmouth.” Two games together – against  Milan  and Heerenveen in the 2008-09 Uefa Cup – counts as a strike partnership in our book, Tom. Their combined height is a lofty 13ft. Can anyone take us higher? “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,”  reports Alex Crane.  “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” There are hundreds of cases of father and son playing professionally, so it’s only logical that there should be a few refereeing examples. “Scottish referee Andrew Dallas is the son of Hugh,” writes Keith Legg. “Both refereed in the Scottish top flight, so have been at all the current SPFL Premiership grounds, as well as some European and international ones too.” Chris Matterface also has a cracking tale to tell. “In 2009, Clive Oliver took charge of the League Two play-off final between Gillingham and Shrewsbury at Wembley,” he writes. “The following day his son Michael, then aged just 24, was the man in black for the League One play-off final between Millwall and Scunthorpe on the same ground. The older Oliver was arguably instrumental in Gillingham gaining promotion when he awarded a corner in the last minute from which the only goal was scored; replays showed it should actually have been a goal-kick. Mind you, as a Gills fan I am not complaining!” “A while back  there was a question and answer  about who would be Premier League champions if boxing rules were used,”  mails Michael Avilés. “Just wanted to share that I did some number-crunching and spreadsheet-reading and came up with a list of champions on a running basis. As a high-school chemistry teacher I tend to be a little familiar with number crunching, and  this  was a nice little micro-hobby to help pass time over Christmas break. A few things that jumped out at me: Manchester United never actually held the title when they won the Treble; and the game where Steven Gerrard slipped and Chelsea ended up winning also cost Liverpool the title under these rules!” “Steve Kabba has scored for Crystal Palace, Grimsby Town and Sheffield United this season,”  wrote Andy Holt way back in January 2003.  “Not counting own goals, what is the largest number of teams any player has scored for in a single season? I can’t imagine it would be many more than Steve’s achievement.” “Didn’t Tony Cottee score for four teams in four different divisions a couple of seasons ago, those being Leicester, Norwich, Millwall and Barnet,” mused Martin Smith. Although he was on the right track, Martin was wide of the mark. While Cottee  played  for four different clubs in four different divisions in 2001 (doubling up as Barnet’s hapless gaffer and steering them to relegation into non-league football for good measure), he blew his chance of making history by scoring only for Norwich and Barnet. “Cameroon international goalkeeper Fabrice Ondoa, 25, has played 44 times for his country since 2014, yet has only made a total of 38 league appearances,” writes Andrew Blackburne. “Is there anyone else who has more international caps for fewer domestic outings?” After Roma's debacle tonight, has any team ever lost a match by default after making too many substitutions before? Also, what's the shortest gap between red cards awarded for separate incidents - can anyone beat the 41s managed by Mancini and Pau Lopez tonight? “Some years ago I read a newspaper story of an ill-disciplined non-league team the rest of teams in the league refused to play, therefore allowing them to claim all points. As a result they were promoted and no longer a problem for the division. Any thoughts on who this was?” asks Chris Davis. @TheKnowledge_GU   @oilysailor  who was the oldest u21 international cap? Surely someone played at age 23 and 364 days. “With Tom Cairney not getting game time, Joachim Andersen is currently captaining Fulham,” writes Jim Miles. “Has there ever been an occasion where a loanee was the full-time captain?” Newport vs Brighton ended at 10.30pm last Sunday, surely the latest a match has ever ended on that day. But what's the latest in the evening a domestic match in the UK has ever finished? “A work colleague alerted me to the fact that Obafemi Martins is still playing, and while verifying this by checking his Wikipedia page, I noticed Martins only played six times for Birmingham and yet scored one cup final winner (the 89th-minute gift in the 2011 League Cup final). He featured in about seven minutes of League Cup action for Birmingham and scored the competition-winning goal. Can anyone boast such an impressive games- or minutes-to-cup-final-winning goal ratios?” wonders Michael Pilcher. One for  @TheKnowledge_GU , surely there can't have been many goals scored directly from a goal kick in England's top four divisions? @TheKnowledge_GU  Brazil have never won the World Cup when they have been drawn in the group stages with Scotland (1974, 1982, 1990 & 1998). Can any other pairing of countries beat this? •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
FA Cup fourth round, transfer latest and Zidane's Covid positive – live!:	Tonight’s opening  FA Cup  fourth-round game is merely hours away.  Chorley ‘shocked’ Wolves on the one previous occasion they met in the FA Cup. Then again, was it really a shock? Wolves were a fourth division side at the time (1986/7) and this was in round one. In addition, the 3-0 win came in a second replay after a pair of 1-1 draws so doubtful this was first up on Match of the Day. Or Sportsnight. Some Opta stats for tonight’s game: Here’s Pep Guardiola revealing the Kevin De Bruyne injury news. 🗣 "We have to adapt." Pep Guardiola confirming the bad news about Kevin De Bruyne's injury  pic.twitter.com/BeW8XLRcUT Klopp also squeezed in his thoughts on Sunday’s game against Manchester United at Old Trafford.  It’s a 5pm kick-off which messes with my eating times but hey ho.  We want to win the game, that’s clear. It’s a cup game - the game will be decided on the night. We want to win this game. That’s how we will make the line-up. We have to work on the details. We have to play football, we have to create, defend and score. We know that. We will try to do that on Sunday. We want to go through and for that we have to play really well. United are in a really good moment. They are getting the results they wanted. We have to be ready - 100%. Doesn’t look as if Klopp wanted to stick around.  However, he did have this to say on any possible transfer dealings. Of course somebody else is making the decisions. It was always like this. We discuss on a daily basis, I make recommendations but I cannot spend the money. That’s not how it is. I don’t make those decisions and I never did. Could we improve something or not? I don’t make these decisions, I never did. Is that news? I don’t want to confuse anyone. I just said what I said. Hopefully we can clarify it now. That has to be the shortest pre-match press conference Jurgen Klopp has ever done at Liverpool. Less than 5 minutes. With Liverpool struggling and Manchester United still to convince most that they could go all the way, surely the door is wide open for Manchester City . This doesn’t help though... 🚨 BREAKING 🚨 Kevin De Bruyne will be out for 4-6 weeks with a hamstring injury  pic.twitter.com/ycsC1qTVd3 Jürgen Klopp is now speaking to the press ahead of Sunday’s  FA Cup  showdown with Manchester United.  Words coming shortly. Liverpool’s form looks horrible but it’s not unprecedented in the Klopp era. Back in 2017, they had this run from January 2 to February 4: DDLDWLLLDL That stretch of five losses, four draws and a single win included a 0-0 home draw with Plymouth and a 2-0 defeat at Hull. Thanks very much Tumaini. It’s all getting a bit heavy in Frank Lampard’s press conference, so let us lighten the mood with an  FA Cup  song.  This has most of the classic elements. Maybe not the awkward swaying but they’re dressed in tracksuits holding footballs so that’s good. This is Coventry on Blue Peter in 1987. Anyway, that’s all from me this afternoon.  Thanks a lot for following and Dave Tindall will take over now. After yet another question about his job, Frank Lampard got a little irritated:  “Their confidence would be shot if they were to read some of the pieces you write at the minute. I read some of them and some of the confirmation bias you always reflect on games with, almost like a social media pundit to try and get a reaction in a negative way. I read the pieces when we were doing well, as well, and they didn’t go both ways. So I think for a journalist to be objective would be a start because players do read it.” Frank Lampard is speaking with the media and unsurprisingly his future is one of the big talking points.  Asked whether it is difficult to hear other managers being discussed as successors to him: “I don’t listen to it. It’s only everywhere if you scroll through social media or something like that - I don’t do that. I’m not stupid. I know what the pressures are that come with managing a top football club but I can only do my job so it doesn’t matter to me.” "If we can carry our form into the Cup, why can’t we go all the way? I know we get Liverpool or Man Utd if we go through but let’s try to put a run together because if we get to Wembley let’s try and win something for this Club" 🗣  @_DeclanRice  has high aspirations in the Cup 💪 The North and South divisions have been suspended for two weeks. National League Statement | Two-Week Suspension to North and South Season ➡️  https://t.co/PuFLkDG6XR   pic.twitter.com/ZgcdsYkSOo One of the most beautiful own goals. Scott Parker scored twice for  @CAFCofficial  in a 𝓬𝓵𝓪𝓼𝓼𝓲𝓬 London derby  #OnThisDay  in 2003  pic.twitter.com/39XGVA8UPE Manchester United Women sign Maria Thorisdottir of Norway from Chelsea. There will be a fair amount of football this weekend. Watch 1️⃣1️⃣ live  #EmiratesFACup  fourth round matches across BT Sport! ✅ Friday ✅ Saturday ✅ Sunday ✅ Monday ✅ Tuesday It all starts tonight in Lancashire as Chorley welcome Wolves 🙌  pic.twitter.com/cvuRTBbE74 For those who missed it, Zinedine Zidane’s coronavirus diagnosis was preceded by one of Real Madrid’s worst losses in recent times. Bettoni, his assistant at Madrid, says he has spoken to Zidane and he is feeling very well, despite the diagnosis. Mikel Arteta says he will not be loaning out Calum Chambers,  who continues to look for consistent playing time since returning to full fitness after rupturing his ACL: “I don’t think that is going to happen. I am really happy with Calum. He has gone through a really difficult period. He has worked so hard.” “He has looked really good in the last few weeks in training. He is not even thinking about his knee right now. We want to give him minutes when we can because he is a player that we believe in.” via PA. Throwback to a 16-year-old Martin Odegaard's first press conference as a Real Madrid player in 2015 ⏪  pic.twitter.com/31PTt1aeyz Ben Fisher spoke with Doncaster’s Andy Butler,  who combines playing for the men’s team with managing the women’s team. Dominic Calvert-Lewin is back in training after suffering from a hamstring injury.  He has not played since Everton lost to West Ham on January 1st. Back in training! 🔙 🦋  @CalvertLewin14   pic.twitter.com/OfUrtMW2gb Wolves boss Nuno Espirito Santo says that Marcal has undergone abdominal surgery after injuring himself against Tottenham last month. “First, he has to be free of pain, then we will start integrating and getting his fitness levels again. There will be some more weeks in front of him yet. It was in the game against Tottenham, he had a slip on his left leg, he felt a really strong pain in the abdominal area, so that required treatment and an operation to solve the problem.” via  wolves.co.uk All the best to Zinedine Zidane. Zinedine Zidane has tested positive for Covid 19 Ødegaard was open to re-join Real Sociedad... when Arsenal bid ‘tempted’ him. Martin decided with his family to give priority to Arsenal.  #AFC  and Real Madrid now in direct contact to complete the deal - Real only want a simple loan. ⚪️🔴 Arsenal are really ‘confident’. 🇳🇴 To the surprise of nobody, Brighton manager Graham Potter hopes that his team will approach the coming fixtures one match at a time.  Brighton face Blackpool in the  FA Cup  tomorrow. “We’ve got to get into a mentality just to focus on the next match and try to win the next match, which is Blackpool,” he said. “We did that against Newport. We picked the team that we thought was going to be the right team to play against Newport, some of those guys played against Manchester City (three days later), quite a few of them did. “We know we need to be at our best, we know we need a bit of luck, and we have to play well to go through against Blackpool, it’s as simple as that. “As soon as you start looking too far ahead, you cause yourself a problem. “We will try to pick a team that can give us a good chance to win the game - that’s what we want to do, to win the game and go through.” (via PA) Mick McCarthy is close to being named the new manager of Cardiff City and a deal is expected to be confirmed in the coming days.  From PA: McCarthy, the former Republic of Ireland, Sunderland and Wolves boss, will succeed Neil Harris, who left the club on Thursday after suffering six straight defeats.  The 61-year-old parted company with APOEL on January 6 after just nine games and two months with the Cypriot champions.  McCarthy’s previous job was his second spell with the Republic, which ended last April after the coronavirus pandemic caused the Euro 2020 play-offs to be postponed and Stephen Kenny replaced him.  His last post in club management was a six-year spell at Ipswich between 2012 and 2018.  Cardiff’s hierarchy have turned to the experienced McCarthy after slipping to 15th place in the Sky Bet Championship, closer to the relegation zone than the play-off places which they are 13 points adrift of. Chorley FC are 9th in National League North, with 6 losses so far this season.  Their route to tonight’s  FA Cup  fourth round meeting with Wolves: Round one: Wigan 2-3 Chorley  Round two: Peterborough 1-2 Chorley  Round three: Chorley 2-0 Derby Two League One scalps and a Championship upset. Be careful, Wolves. 🤦‍♂️ Worst save success rate in Ligue 1 since 2018/19 (20+ apps) 🇮🇸 Runar Alex Runarsson - 57.8% 🤦‍♂️ Worst save success rate in the Premier League this season (10+ apps) 🇦🇺 Mat Ryan - 47.1% 📝 Arsenal have signed them both this season...  pic.twitter.com/om9oyQiaJt According to Jacob Steinberg, West Ham intend to reward David Moyes with a new contract at the end of the season. 😍 What a stop btw, remembering this stunner from  @MatyRyan ! 👏 #BHAFC  🔵⚪️  pic.twitter.com/eRTxHaAbhw Spare a thought for poor Alex Rúnarsson, whose one terrible performance against Manchester City was enough for Arsenal to quietly seek out a No 2 goalkeeper. Arsenal sign Brighton goalkeeper Maty Ryan on loan until the end of the season.  It is fair to say that this one went slightly under the radar.  👋 Welcome to The Arsenal,  @MatyRyan ! The  @Socceroos  keeper joins us on loan from  @OfficialBHAFC  until the end of the season 🤝 Thirty five years ago, Chorley scuppered first division Wolves 3-0 in the  FA Cup  first round.  There is no complacency from Nuno Espírito Santo today: “We don’t have to go much further back, recent history in football tells you - especially in this competition - things can happen. We have to be aware of the responsibility we have. “We will approach it exactly the same as any game, with the search for detail. The difference of the divisions doesn’t show you the game so we have to compete and play. “We are going to find a pitch which is not in the best condition, we know an effort has been made to preserve the pitch but with the weather conditions it will be very difficult to play football on. We have to adapt. “The next game is always the opportunity to improve on what you did wrong before.” (via PA) No regrets for Dean Smith after he was charged by the FA for using abusive/ insulting language after Aston Villa conceded against Manchester City due to a controversial goal that was not deemed to be offside.  Here is how he previously described his comments before: “I got a yellow card [from Moss] for saying I think you’ve had juggling balls for Christmas. What I said for the red card doesn’t need to be censored, it wasn’t swearing. He came over and said I’m interpreting the laws of the game, and I said you should’ve done that earlier in the game.” Aston Villa head coach Dean Smith says he 'reluctantly' accepts an FA charge for using abusive or insulting language towards officials during his side's defeat at Manchester City.  pic.twitter.com/jUK6RYUvGU Not ideal.  🤯 Liverpool have had 𝟴𝟳 shots since they last scored a Premier League goal  😬 From those attempts only 5 have been clear-cut chances  pic.twitter.com/2SpO6ek22z Mikel Arteta had some empathetic words for Frank Lampard: “I have known Frank for a few years and I spent some time with him and I would like the club to support him and give him a chance,” he said. “He has huge experience as a player, he is an icon over there and he has done some really good things. “You need time, and something we have not had in this calendar year is time to work on anything.” Derby County player Jordon Ibe says that he is suffering from depression. From his statement on Instagram yesterday evening: “I want to apologise to all my fans around the world. I’ve found myself in a dark place, due to suffering with depression. It’s no scheme for the media or to have my name in your mouths, I just find things hard truly. I appreciate all the love and messages from everyone. Times are hard in general due to this pandemic... I have the full support from my family and Derby County football club. I will fix myself and this situation, which I’m 100 per cent committed to. Not only for my family, close friends or my beauteous daughter but for me. Much love to every single person.” Despite currently having eight players unavailable due to injury, Ralph Hasenhuttl was in a confident mood ahead of two fixtures against Arsenal in four days.  (via PA) “I’d prefer winning both to be honest, if it’s possible we’ll do it, but I know it’s tough,” he said. “Yes, we have the chance to I think. On our day we can beat any team in the league, we’ve shown this, especially at home. “I think this is the goal we have. Yes, tough like always, but not impossible.” Will Smallbone, Nathan Tella, Michael Obafemi, Oriol Romeu, Mohammed Salisum Moussa Djenepo, Jannik Vestergaard and Nathan Redmond are all injured for Southampton. Another big loan deal to watch out for. Arsenal pushing ahead with Odegaard deal. Growing belief that he will pick Arsenal, but sources still saying work to be done before anything is concluded. Real Sociedad still hopeful on Odegaard, as far as they're concerned negotiations still ongoing and player's first choice would be to go back. Arsenal pushing hard though and there's an acceptance that offer could be more attractive to Real Madrid. Fikayo Tomori heads to Serie A leaders AC Milan on loan with an option to buy. Nick Ames spoke with Andy Preece and Irfan Kawri, assistant manager and coach of Chorley.  Their team square off against Nuno Espírito Santo’s Wolves tonight. It will be a rare match between teams with senior Black and south Asian staff in the technical area. There is already plenty to read this morning.  Here are 10 things to look out for this weekend.  Hello! As the weekend approaches once more, welcome to another Friday countdown. For the next few days, the leagues will take a back seat as the  FA Cup  fourth round beckons. Tonight will see Wolves travel to Lancashire to face National League North side Chorley. Tomorrow’s games include Southampton versus Arsenal, Brighton against Blackpool and Manchester City at Cheltenham.  On Sunday, Chelsea will host Luton Town, Fulham will face Burnley, Leicester will travel to Brentford and, of course, Manchester United square off against Liverpool at Old Trafford. In this strange, unique year, we have already seen ample cup upsets, both  in England  and  abroad . Let’s see what this round brings.
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
Binged Bridgerton? Find your next lockdown watch with our TV quiz:	 Stuart Heritage  Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.00 GMT   Last modified on Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.03 GMT   Lockdown three is a nightmare for television viewers. All the good stuff – the stuff you really wanted to watch – was wolfed down in the first two lockdowns, and now chronic indecision has set in. You now spend your evenings scrolling endlessly through streaming menus, from Netflix to Disney+ to iPlayer, desperately looking for something – anything – to fit your mood. Well – fear not. Take this personality quiz and, based on your answers, we will provide you with the perfect series to watch, and some wild cards, too. Grab a pen and paper, and enjoy.  A.  Approximately 125 hours B.  Approximately 56 hours C.  Approximately 26 hours D.  Exactly 22 hours and 32 minutes A.  A bit of fun escapism B.  An excuse to laugh C.  An opportunity to demonstrate my intellectualism D.  A chance to witness the relentless cruelty of humanity A.  That we are decent people who usually do the right thing B.  That we are flawed and messy, but often bound by a common cause C.  That we exist to be exploited by larger interests for money D.  That we are meaningless pawns destined to be slaughtered by our indifferent masters A.  Wacky, inspirational, occasionally melancholy B.  Gross, offensive, borderline illegal C.  Sophisticated, luxurious, aloof D.  Dry, gruelling, genuinely horrific A.  Candid and earnest B.  Obnoxious and loud C.  Knowing and superior D.  I don’t understand. What is a ‘laugh’? A.  Trippy imagery and a thumping electronic theme B.  Ironic wholesomeness C.  High-end glamour D.  Just loads and loads of burning human faces, if possible A.  James Corden B.  Josh Groban C.  Monica Bellucci D.  General Hasso von Manteuffel A.  My children B.  My partner C.  Nobody D.  The group of ghosts who live in my house A.  “Hate is always foolish, and love is always wise” B.  “I am untethered, and my rage knows no bounds” C.  “Who wants good news in this ocean of misery and drama?” D.  “Down this road on a summer day in 1944, the soldiers came. Nobody lives here now” A.  Happy, uplifted, slightly frustrated about declining quality B.  Happy, dirty, slightly frustrated about declining quality C.  Happy, intelligent, continental D.  Completely, irreparably depressed Answers Mostly As: Doctor Who You need something bright and fun to distract you from the relentless drudgery of lockdown, and ideally something family-friendly. This is a perfect opportunity for you to watch all 167 episodes of Doctor Who currently available on iPlayer; every new-Who episode ever made. True, it won’t all be plain sailing, because Doctor Who is lumpy by nature, but what else are you going to do with your time? Wild cards:   Chilling Adventures of Sabrina  (Netflix) | The Great Pottery Throw Down (All4) | The Vicar of Dibley (iPlayer) | Absolutely Fabulous (Britbox)  Mostly Bs: It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia You want comedy, and lots of it, which is why you should watch  It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia , 14 seasons of which are on Netflix. If you haven’t seen it, you have missed out on one of the grimiest, most amoral sitcoms in television history. One episode is called Mac Kills His Dad, for instance. But even if you have seen the show, it’s worth rewatching from the beginning, if only for the scene where Danny DeVito crawls out of a sofa naked.  Wild cards:   Pls Like  (iPlayer – series three released on 24 Jan) | Chewing Gum (Netflix) | Crashing (All 4) | Ramy (Amazon Prime) Mostly Cs: Call My Agent! OK, we get it, you’re a smartypants. Your favourite TV show of all time is Mad Men, but a part of you is upset that it was performed in a language you speak. Behold  Call My Agent !, a Paris-set comedy-drama about a talent agency in crisis. This isn’t just great TV, it’s great TV brimming with highbrow cinematic and literary references. You want a show where Jean Cocteau is cited for a punchline? This is for you. Better yet, a new series comes to Netflix this week. Get started now and you’ll be all caught up in plenty of time. Wild cards:  Trigonometry  (iPlayer) |  Pretend It’s a City  (Netflix) | The Bureau (Amazon Prime) | Succession (Sky Atlantic/Now TV) | Mostly Ds: The World at War You dislike fiction, and lightness, and fun. Therefore the only option for you is  The World at War , ITV’s 26-part 1973 monolithic documentary about the causes and consequences of the second world war, narrated in doomy tones by Laurence Olivier. In all honesty, everyone should watch this landmark series at least once. That said, everything is terrible at the moment and this will probably make it worse. The full series is on UKTV Player right now. Just pick your moment, OK? Will you be watching our lockdown picks? And which other unexpected TV treats have you discovered of late? Have your say in the comments. 
Biden and Harris dress to reassure that normal service is restored:	There were a number of concerns about what might happen at the 59th presidential inauguration, but what  Joe Biden  would wear was never one of them. With reassuring predictability, he was sworn in as the 46th US president wearing a navy blue, single-breasted suit by that most wholesomely all-American of designers, Ralph Lauren. In contrast to his predecessor’s erratic approach to proportions, it fitted him perfectly. His sky blue tie was of a normal length. The message: normal service is restored to the White House.  The optics of this inauguration were serene, respectful and quietly joyous. Biden and his vice-president,  Kamala Harris , the rock stars of the hour, presented as humble public servants, not as celebrities. They dressed to reassure that their administration would serve all of America, instead of revolving around the attention-seeking theatrics of individual politicians. “Today we celebrate the triumph not of a candidate but of the cause of democracy,” the president said. A capital city in semi-lockdown, in a country where Covid-19 has claimed 400,000 lives, is no place for a catwalk show. American designers who were asked to submit inauguration day sketches and suggestions for Harris and the first lady,  Jill Biden , were told that neither woman wished to convey a “fashion” message. Instead, both chose to promote independent, purpose-driven American brands. The vice-president chose a purple coat and dress ensemble by two black American fashion designers, Christopher John Rogers and Sergio Hudson, for her big moment.  Rogers, who is from Louisiana and based in Brooklyn, is just 27. He was named the American Emerging Designer of the Year at last year’s CFDA fashion awards. He declared his team “honoured and humbled to have played a small part in this historic moment”. Hudson, who is based in Los Angeles, also designed Michelle Obama’s claret suit for the occasion. While both the president and the first-ever “second gentleman”, Doug Emhoff, wore Ralph Lauren, the women in the spotlight chose instead to promote small labels.  Jill Biden wore an ocean-blue tweed coat and matching dress designed by Alexandra O’Neill, whose Markarian brand, established in 2017, makes clothes to order to minimise wastage, with production taking place in New York City. O’Neill told Womenswear Daily that her six-strong team had been “all hands on deck” since December to create the pearl- and crystal-embellished two-piece look. It was not until Jill Biden appeared in front of the cameras on the morning of the ceremony that she knew her design had made the final cut. Harris also wore her signature pearls, an accessory with a classic heritage in the iconography of Washington power dressing. They have been favoured by first ladies Jackie Kennedy and Michelle Obama, but have personal significance for Harris as a symbol of solidarity with Alpha Kappa Alpha, the first black Greek-letter sorority, whose members are each given a badge decorated with pearls upon initiation. The stand-out colour of the day was not Democratic blue, but purple. The theme of the inauguration was “America United”, and purple – which represents common ground between red and blue on the colour wheel – was a visual flag for the message of unity, which featured repeatedly in Biden’s speech. The vice-president’s choice of a purple two-piece, with tonal blueberry leather gloves, was echoed in Hillary Clinton’s vibrant purple outfit. Laura Bush’s decision to join Jill Biden and Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, in wearing blue could be seen as another nod to bipartisan symbolism. It was left to the performers to bring the glamour, which they did in some style. The joy and relief felt by many of the audience watching the ceremony around the world found expression in the sunshine yellow jacket, scarlet silk Prada headband and diamante-studded mask worn by the young poet Amanda Gorman. Lady Gaga wore a red silk ballgown skirt of fairytale proportions, and a gilded peace dove on her fitted navy jacket. Lady Gaga’s look was custom-made by the avant-garde Paris fashion house Schiaparelli, currently designed by an American, Daniel Roseberry. Roseberry called the ensemble “a love letter to the country I miss so dearly”. Jennifer Lopez wore diamond-white Chanel, while Garth Brooks rocked blue jeans and a stetson. The internet also enjoyed Bernie Sanders’ parka and knitted mittens, which was dubbed “Vermont dadcore”. Sanders   explained his clothing choices to CBS News. “You know, in Vermont, we know something about the cold,” he said. “We’re not so concerned about good fashion. We want to keep warm.” The morning departure of the Trumps stood in stark contrast. None of his family wore masks for their appearance. (The inauguration was conscientiously masked up.) Melania Trump looked, as ever, like an ice-sculpture of a first lady – one so frosty that she has not melted, even in four years.  Her clothes were all-black, staggeringly expensive, and pointedly non-American. Her jacket was by Chanel, her dress Dolce & Gabbana, her shoes Christian Louboutin. The crocodile Hermes Birkin that she carried has a price tag of about £30,000. When the couple arrived in Florida, Melania had changed into a more relaxed ensemble – a colourful Gucci kaftan.  For the Covid memorial on inauguration eve, Harris wore a camel coat by Kerby Jean-Raymond of Pyer Moss, a black designer who last year transformed his New York studio into a donation centre and led fundraising for minority and female-owned small businesses hit by the pandemic. At that event, Jill Biden wore a mulberry coat, amethyst gloves and matching mask by the independent New York designer Jonathan Cohen. Cohen is a pioneer of upcycling, and the mask, and the lining of the coat, were made from past seasons’ fabric remnants.
'We're trying to break down the shame and stigma of addiction': meet the charities striving to give people in need a chance:	Running a charity requires round-the-clock dedication, arguably unlike any other job you could do. There is no nine-to-five, no “closing the doors” at the end of the day, and no deadline to end the emotional pressure of trying to make sure the people you work with get the help they need. It’s stressful and demanding. When Covid-19 and lockdown hit, these pressures on charities undoubtedly weighed more heavily than ever. But across the country there was also a renewed vigour to not give up on their vital work. And it’s that tenacity that has kept many of them afloat, despite the 24/7 challenges and hardships that are faced by those running the charity and those they call service users, guests or clients. Worrying about money is perhaps something on all our minds right now, but never more so for charities such as  Trevi House , which focuses on helping mothers who are recovering from addiction. Women who, without the charity, would perhaps not see their child so often, and be separated from them while they deal with addiction. Or women who might end up relapsing because they don’t have the support to see their recovery through to the end. Trevi House is a charity that helps mothers recovering from addiction Trevi House works with around 20 to 25 women a year, who, Hannah Shead, the CEO, says, “don’t often have a voice, and aren’t seen”. She hopes to change the way society reacts to mothers with addiction, refusing to let their stories go untold and stopping them falling through cracks in the system. “A big part of our work is trying to break down the shame and stigma of addiction and recovery,” says Shead. The pressure to maintain that during lockdown – coupled with a refusal to let women down – was huge. “Closure was not an option, it was about how we kept our services going. We converted into a virtual women’s centre, and ran all our courses online. We had the phone line running,” she says, a clear defiance for any other option in her voice. It’s a stance that charity leaders take for the good of those they help. Shead adds: “For women who are in immediate crisis, however, we have been offering face-to-face services in a safe environment – we have limited staff in the women’s centre to make sure people are there for those who need it. We’re using PPE and have reduced the footfall … it’s been tricky and continues to be tricky. But these people really need a service.” Shead and her team are the winners of an annual award, the  GSK IMPACT awards , which will see a £30,000 boost to their bank balances, along with nine other deserving UK charities. But the awards are about so much more than just the money – though they have given almost £7m to nearly 480 health and wellbeing organisations since they began in 1997. The recognition of the charities’ work does wonders for morale – for staff and service users – and gives hope for the future. For these charities, every penny will filter down to the ground level, where individuals that society might have disregarded are given another chance. Shead says of the award: “It’s a message to the team that people care about the work we’re doing, and that it’s valued and important. I look at morale and it’s quite high. There is a real sense of purpose that ‘this is what we’re doing, and this is why we’re doing it’. “Financial uncertainty is a big concern for lots of charities, but [winning] is about more than [the funding] – it’s about people saying: ‘We recognise the impact of the work you do, and we value it’. That really helps at the moment.” The Lancashire charity Maundy Relief offers support to people in an area that has experienced much deprivation Another winner who shares Shead’s drive to work with those that society has marginalised is Lucy Hardwick, manager at  Maundy Relief . Maundy Relief is based in Accrington, east Lancashire, an area that has experienced much deprivation and poverty. “It has a strong community spirit, but times have been hard for some time now,” says Hardwick. “We offer wraparound support – people can come through our front door and tell us what’s going on with them.” Maundy Relief offers everything from housing advice to a night shelter for rough sleepers. “360-degree support for people is at the centre of what we do. It starts with our service users, who we call guests rather than clients. They don’t have to fit in with particular criteria. “We never say: ‘I’m sorry, you’ve got the wrong organisation.’ We can always do something. Often just listening is a big part of what we do.” Staying open through the pandemic was a priority for Trevi House and Maundy Relief – despite the challenges of the lockdown measures. Hardwick agrees that continuing to offer their guests support was non-negotiable. It’s a clear indicator of the tenacity that won both Maundy Relief and Trevi House an award each. Hardwick says: “The teams have been incredible in moving things online and to the phone. We do, however, still let people in [to our shelters] as, although everything has moved online and we are able to meet [many] needs digitally, not everyone has access. Not everyone can take in the information that way. So we never closed down completely.” As well as a financial donation, the awards offer the winning charities the opportunity to join a training and development programme. They can also become part of the GSK IMPACT awards network, which offers ongoing support and is an opportunity to share experiences and expertise with charities that have won in previous years. For many, the award is a lifeline, and in the Covid-19 climate, even more so. The awards are run in partnership with  The King’s Fund , an independent charitable organisation working to improve health and care in England. The people supported by this year’s winning charities include rape and abuse victims, those with dementia, deaf children, and the homeless. Themes that ring true for Trevi House and Maundy Relief also chime with the other winners – the common thread for the charities that have been honoured this year by the GSK IMPACT awards is that they work with people who society might have forgotten. The winners are working with people on a daily basis, in person, trying to make each day better. Every penny of the awards will help that work continue. For these two charities, and the other eight winners, triumphs such as the GSK IMPACT awards are hard won, and deserve celebration. The awards offer valuable recognition, and the reassurance that the doors can remain open. Trevi House and Maundy Relief join eight other awards winners in tackling a whole range of issues. Here is the complete list of those honoured in 2020: Auditory Verbal  – Helps deaf children learn to listen and talk so they can get an equal start at school. Empire Fighting Chance  – A Bristol-based charity, working to transform young lives through non-contact boxing. Headway East London  – Supports brain injury survivors, their families and carers. Maundy Relief  – Tackles poverty and helps those in need in Accrington. New Pathways  – Helps people who have experienced rape or sexual abuse across the south, west and mid-Wales. Playlist for Life  – Playlist for Life uses music to help improve the lives of people with dementia and their families across the UK. Shantona Women’s & Family Centre  – A Leeds-based charity empowering women and strengthening families in diverse communities. Trevi House  – A Plymouth-based charity helping mothers to recover from addiction without separating them from their children. Vision Care for Homeless People  – Offers eye tests and glasses to people who are homeless. Yellow Door  – Helps to improve the lives of people affected by domestic or sexual abuse across Hampshire. Find out more  about the GSK IMPACT awards and how all of this year’s winners have made a difference. And, if you’re interested in applying for an award in 2021, you can find out how to go about it.
Organisers of London wedding attended by hundreds face Covid fine:	The organiser of a lockdown-breaching wedding at an ultra-Orthodox Jewish girls’ school in north London attended by hundreds of people has been condemned by community leaders. Police discovered about 400 guests celebrating the wedding on Thursday evening. The windows of Yesodey Hatorah school in Stamford Hill had been covered to stop people seeing in when officers arrived. Many guests fled when police arrived after receiving reports of a large gathering. Five people were handed £100 fixed penalty notices for breaching Covid regulations and the organiser could face a £10,000 fine, the Metropolitan police said. The lockdown breach was swiftly condemned by the chief rabbi, Ephraim Mirvis. “This is a most shameful desecration of all that we hold dear. At a time when we are all making such great sacrifices, it amounts to a brazen abrogation of the responsibility to protect life & such illegal behaviour is abhorred by the overwhelming majority of the Jewish community,”  he tweeted . A spokesperson for the school said: “We are absolutely horrified about last night’s event and condemn it in the strongest possible terms. We lease our hall to an external organisation which manages all lettings and, as such, we had no knowledge that the wedding was taking place. We have terminated the agreement with immediate effect. “We are investigating how this shocking breach has happened and have no plans to re-lease the premises to any third party. We deplore the actions of anyone in any community breaking the law and risking people’s lives in this way.” The Union of Orthodox Hebrew Congregations, an umbrella organisation representing ultra-Orthodox groups, said in a statement: “We are shocked and deeply saddened by last night’s events which are shameful for our community. There are no excuses for anyone to endanger the community and the wider public in such a careless manner. “We will continue to work with the police and the community and we reiterate the importance everyone has to play in order to protect the NHS and save lives.” The Board of Deputies of British Jews condemned the wedding as a “flagrant and disgraceful breach of Covid-19 regulations, which goes against Jewish teaching that preserving life is of the highest value”. Marie van der Zyl, the board’s president, said: “The reckless and dangerous behaviour of those behind this event does not represent the attitude of the vast majority of British Jews, including from within the strictly Orthodox community, who are fully aware of the terrible toll of this pandemic.”   Yesodey Hatorah is a faith school serving Stamford Hill’s Haredi Jewish community, which is the largest in Europe. It is in the borough of Hackney, which has a Covid-19 infection rate of 625.43 cases per 100,000 people, compared with an average rate in England of 471.31 per 100,000 people. DCS Marcus Barnett, the local area commander, said: “This was a completely unacceptable breach of the law, which is very clearly in place to save lives and protect the NHS – an NHS that is under considerable pressure at a time when Covid-19 has killed nearly 100,000 people. “This is a deadly and very dangerous disease. We can all see that and we must act responsibly. People across the country are making sacrifices by cancelling or postponing weddings and other celebrations and there is no excuse for this type of behaviour. My officers are working tirelessly with the community and we will not hesitate to take enforcement action if that is required to keep people safe.” The mayor of Hackney, Philip Glanville, said the incident was a “deeply disturbing incident at a time when in Hackney we have seen the largest number of deaths reported since last April”. He added: “Unfortunately, similar events have taken place even at this venue before and we need to be really clear how unacceptable it is.” There have been reports of breaches of lockdown restrictions in ultra-Orthodox communities in the UK, US and Israel over the past 10 months, including weddings and funerals attended by large numbers of people. Ultra-Orthodox Jews have suffered disproportionate numbers of deaths during the pandemic, partly as a result of large intergenerational households and difficulties in transmitting messages to communities reluctant to engage with the internet or mainstream media.
German lockdown to remain in place despite drop in infection rate:	Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, has called for understanding of a continuation of harsh lockdown conditions in  Germany , saying they were necessary to prevent a “considerable worsening” of the current situation despite a slowdown in the rate of infections. Germany’s death toll rose to over 51,000 on Thursday, having been increasing at an average of 1000 deaths a day for several weeks. Spahn told a press conference, flanked by the head of the government disease control agency, the country’s leading coronavirus virologist and the head of intensive care medicine, that the measures would have to remain in place until at least “the end of February or into March”. He cited the dangers of mutations first detected in England, South Africa and Brazil as being a factor behind the decision. Germany reported almost 18,000 new coronavirus cases on Friday, approximately 4,000 less than a week ago. Spahn said he could understand the bafflement of many Germans over why the measures had been extended and intensified in recent days, despite a fall in numbers. Public discontent was reflected in a flurry of emails, telephone calls and letters he had received, he said. “The numbers of the last few days are encouraging. They’re going in the right direction. The infection rate is sinking. We’re seeing the first easing on intensive care wards … but it’s still a considerable burden with very many Covid-19 patients in the intensive care wards and in hospital. “But the numbers are still too high, and what we need is to collectively use the intensified measures, despite the many hardships they bring with them, to continue to suppress the numbers … so that this virus is controllable,” he said. For months Germany’s coronavirus rate has been too high to enable contact tracing, which Spahn said was a crucial tool for being able to control the disease. With almost 5,000 Iintensive care unit beds currently taken up with Covid-19 patients, Spahn insisted it was imperative to reduce numbers being hospitalised to prevent the health system becoming overwhelmed. “If we look at other countries in Europe we can see how quickly the situation becomes inflamed again,” he said, later referring specifically to Britain and Portugal. Facing renewed criticism about the slow progress of Germany’s vaccine programme compared to other countries such as Britain, Spahn said he was confident that it would quickly pick up once production capacities increased – with a new factory for the BioNTech company expected to be completed next month. The AstraZeneca vaccine is also due to be available in Germany within the next few days. So far 1.5 million people had received the jab, Spahn said. He said 60% of the residents of care homes had so far received a first shot, and in total 80% had been offered and accepted the offer. The take-up rate was also currently higher than expected among care workers, about 80% of whom had so far taken up the offer. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said on Thursday that all citizens could expect to have been offered the jab by 21 September. Spahn said there was no plan to delay access to second jabs. He said the German government would follow scientific advice that the highest protection would be provided if the gap between the first and second doses was between three to six weeks. With the focus initially being on the most vulnerable, he said he did not want to risk a situation whereby a mutation might escape leaving older people particularly exposed to infection. “The clear recommendation of our vaccine commission was and remains that the time gap between the first and second doses should be between three and a maximum of six weeks … Scientists have explained to us that the risk of waiting can mean there is not adequate protection against more virulent mutations. With this in mind we’re sticking to the original time plan.”
Electric vehicles close to ‘tipping point’ of mass adoption:	Electric vehicles are close to the “tipping point” of rapid mass adoption thanks to the plummeting cost of batteries, experts say. Global  sales rose 43% in 2020 , but even faster growth is anticipated when continuing falls in battery prices bring the price of electric cars dipping below that of equivalent petrol and diesel models, even without subsidies. The latest analyses forecast that to happen some time between 2023 and 2025. The tipping point has already been passed in Norway, where tax breaks mean electric cars are cheaper. The market share of battery-powered cars  soared to 54% in 2020  in the Nordic country, compared with less than 5% in most European nations. Transport is a major source of carbon emissions and electric cars are vital in efforts to fight the climate crisis. But, while they are already  cheaper to run , their higher purchase price is a barrier to mass uptake. The other key factor is “range anxiety”, but this week the first factory production began of  batteries capable of giving a 200-mile charge in five minutes . Government grants and tax breaks have cut the cost of electric cars in some countries, but the point when they become cheaper without subsidies is key, said James Frith, the head of energy storage at BloombergNEF: “That’s definitely an inflection point. [Then] we really see the adoption of electric vehicles taking off and real market penetration.” In 2020, 4.2% of new cars were electric. Prof Tim Lenton, at the University of Exeter, said: “There’s been a tipping point in one country, Norway, and that’s thanks to some clever and progressive tax incentives. Then consumers voted with their wallets.” Data from Lenton’s  latest study  showed that in 2019, electric vehicles in Norway were 0.3% cheaper and had 48% market share. In the UK, where electric cars were 1.3% more expensive, market share was just 1.6%. Once the line of price parity was crossed, Lenton said, “bang – sales go up. We were really struck by how non-linear the effect seems to be”. BloombergNEF’s analysis  predicts lithium-ion battery costs will fall to the extent that electric cars will match the price of petrol and diesel cars by 2023, while Lenton suggests 2024-2025. McKinsey’s  Global Energy Perspective 2021 , published on 15 January, forecasts that “electric vehicles are likely to become the most economic choice in the next five years in many parts of the world”. A  poll of 3,000 UK drivers  by the RAC, published on Thursday, shows the importance of prices, with 78% of motorists saying pure electric cars are still too expensive compared with conventional vehicles of a similar size and just 9% saying their next car would be electric. “The single biggest barrier to a driver choosing an electric car has to be cost,” said Rod Dennis of the RAC. The fall in battery prices in the past decade has been dramatic and much faster than most people predicted, Frith said. In 2010, even a small-car battery of 30kWh would have cost $30,000, far more than the total price of an equivalent fossil-fuelled car. Today, BloombegNEFs research shows the battery pack costs $4,100, thanks to a scale-up in production and cuts in material costs, such as reducing the amount of expensive cobalt required. Battery packs passed the milestone of $100/kWh in 2020 for buses in China, said Frith. But he expected further manufacturing improvements to mean this would be the average price for all vehicles in 2023, making a small-car battery cost $3,000 and electric cars the same price as their conventional counterparts. Electric cars are quieter and have faster acceleration, and rapid mass adoption will also be increased by the fact that, once motorists have one, they will not want to return to a petrol or diesel vehicle. In a recent poll of 2,000 electric car owners,  91% said they would not want to go back . “The poll shows the strong and enduring impact of switching to a clean car. The evidence in favour of electric vehicles grows more compelling with each one of our surveys, even in a year as disruptive as 2020, “ said Melanie Shufflebotham, at Zap-Map, which maps charging points. One automotive trend is moving the other direction – the rising sales of petrol-guzzling SUVs. The International Energy Agency reported earlier in January that in 2020, despite Covid-19 lockdowns cutting global emissions,  pollution from SUVs increased . Furthermore, over the past decade, SUVs were the only area among all energy-related emissions that increased in high-income nations. However, battery prices are expected to continue to plunge, suggesting even power-hungry SUVs will be going electric before long. New lithium-ion technologies being developed are creating cheaper, more energy-dense batteries, that could start being introduced mid-decade. An even more advanced technology, solid state batteries, could enter the mass market by 2030 if new manufacturing methods can be mastered, Frith said. BloombergNEF forecasts average prices of about $60/kWh at the end of the decade. “It is an incredibly exciting time,” Frith said. “We see so much innovation coming from all areas, whether industry or research, and so much money being poured in by governments and everyone, that it seems like there will be a lot of changes to come and it’ll just get more exciting.”
Morocco detects first case of UK variant – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Morocco ’s health ministry confirmed its first imported case of the more contagious variant of coronavirus first discovered in the UK. The variant was detected in the northern port of Tangier in a Moroccan national returning from Ireland via Marseille, the ministry said in a statement. Morocco has announced plans to launch a free vaccination campaign targeting 25 million people, or 80% of its population. The country ordered 66m vaccine doses from AstraZeneca and China’s Sinopharm. It has not yet received any. On 23 December, Morocco imposed a nationwide four-week curfew from 9pm to 6am to contain the virus. On Monday, the country said it has recorded a total of 460,144 coronavirus infections, including 7,977 deaths and 16,481 active cases. Health experts have raised concerns over new highly-transmissible mutations of the virus first reported in the UK and South  Africa  and now cropping up in several other countries. A third new variant has since been reported in Brazil. Donald Trump, the US president, has rescinded entry bans imposed because of coronavirus on most non- US  citizens arriving from  Brazil  and much of  Europe , including the  UK , effective 26 January, two officials briefed on the matter told Reuters. The restrictions are set to end on the same day that new Covid-19 test requirements take effect for all international visitors. Joe Biden, the president-elect, once in office could opt to reimpose the restrictions.  Rio de Janeiro  has kicked off its coronavirus vaccination campaign with what is likely to prove the most breathtaking immunisation launch ceremony on earth. Two Brazilian women, aged 80 and 59, received their first shot of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine at the feet of Rio’s Christ the Redeemer statue at dusk on Monday. The  spectacular televised event  on Corcovado mountain was attended by Rio’s media-savvy mayor, Eduardo Paes, and state governor Cláudio Castro. Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro – who is from Rio but has repeatedly undermined containment measures and vaccination and has attacked the Chinese vaccine – was a notable absence. Rio is one of the Brazilian states worst-hit by Covid-19, having registered more than 27,000 of Brazil’s 209,000 deaths. If the beachside state capital was a country, it would have one of the worst national Covid death rates. Ahead of the ceremony Paes, who took office early this month, tried to strike a positive note. “The start of vaccination is not the end of the pandemic but it is a light at the end of the tunnel,” he  tweeted , urging residents to continue wearing masks and respecting containment measures. Vaccination began in Brazil on Sunday after the country’s health regulator approved the emergency use of vaccines produced by China’s Sinovac and Oxford/AstraZeneca. More than 37,000 people with a symptomless Covid-19 infection have been detected through rapid lateral flow testing in the  UK , the chief medical adviser for NHS Test and Trace has said. Dr Susan Hopkins said the devices, which can give results in less than 30 minutes, were being rolled out across the country to enable those with no coronavirus symptoms to be tested. Lateral flow tests are regularly used by NHS staff and were the main method of testing during a mass pilot scheme in Liverpool, but some experts have questioned their accuracy. Dr Hopkins was asked at a Downing Street press briefing on Monday about the availability of the devices for teachers and supermarket workers who are yet to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. She said: “We are rolling out lateral flow devices throughout the country through community testing sites and also in workplaces to allow people to get tested where they are asymptomatic to reduce the spread of disease. “We’ve detected more than 37,000 individuals through lateral flow tests over the last number of weeks and we will continue to roll them out rapidly as an additional tool to help get this virus under control.” A new variant of the coronavirus first identified in  South Africa  is more contagious than earlier versions, experts said, but there is no evidence that it is more deadly. The new variant is 50% more contagious, said epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim, co-chair of the health ministry’s scientific committee. “There is no evidence the new Covid variant is more severe than the original variant,” he added. The experts drew their conclusions about the variant – now the dominant strain in South  Africa  – from an analysis of data collected from the main infection clusters across the country. With more than 1.3 million people infected, South Africa has recorded more cases than any other country on the continent and has also suffered more deaths, with 37,105 registered. The second wave of the virus has stretched South Africa’s health system to its limits. Health minister Zweli Mkhize on Monday said there had been a 23% fall in infections, but that the number of hospital admissions was up by 18.3% on the previous week. Dr Waasila Jassat, another member of the expert panel, said that even though admissions were up, the death rate from the virus in hospitals had not changed from the first wave of the virus. Brazil  on Monday reported 23,671 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the new total to 8,511,770, the country’s health ministry said. Deaths rose by 452 to 210,299 in Brazil, which has the world’s highest death toll from the pandemic outside the US.  Mexican  president Andrés Manuel López Obrador said the government aimed to compensate for a reduction in deliveries of Covid-19 vaccine doses from Pfizer Inc with those from other providers. The World Health Organization (WHO) said it was in advanced talks with Pfizer about including its vaccine in the agency’s portfolio of shots to be shared with poorer countries. Mexico had been expecting weekly deliveries of some 400,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine developed with Germany’s BioNTech SE. As a result of the US drugmaker’s WHO agreements, Mexico would for now only be receiving half that, López Obrador told a news conference. It was not clear how long the reduction would last. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is currently the only one being administered in Mexico, which has reported the fourth-highest death toll from the pandemic worldwide. Mexico has also signed deals to acquire vaccines from Britain’s AstraZeneca Plc and China’s CanSino Biologics. The country has approved the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot and expects to have it by March. It is still reviewing the CanSino vaccine. It is due to make the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and foreign minister Marcelo Ebrard said on Twitter that the active ingredient would on Monday be sent to Mexico from Argentina, allowing manufacturers to start the final packaging process. Mexico said it also expects to approve the Sputnik V vaccine for use soon, though it is likely to acquire fewer doses than it had previously suggested. Brazil’s  health minister Eduardo Pazuello said a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in the Amazonian city of Manaus was not tied to a new variant of the virus, and was instead the same coronavirus that caused the first wave of the disease.  Manaus has made headlines in recent days for its high death rate and a shortage of oxygen tanks for patients who develop severe cases of Covid-19. 
Europe can only fix its relationship with Africa if it exorcises its colonial ghosts:	Black Lives Matter protests last summer sparked an uncomfortable reckoning for many European nations with a legacy of slavery and colonialism. Excavating this dark history via revised school curriculums and initiatives such as  Black History Month  is difficult. But it is badly needed, and not just to dispel the self-congratulatory and entirely false narratives about Europe’s “civilisational” past still being driven by nationalist and populist politicians. The new conversation is urgently required if the EU is to salvage flagging efforts to launch a so-called  partnership of equals  with African nations. And it is needed, too, if European governments are to put relations with  African European  citizens on a sounder and more respectful footing. There are encouraging signs. In Germany, BLM protests injected momentum into efforts to  change street  names with colonial-era or racist references. In France, the  armed forces  ministry provided local authorities with a guide to 100 Africans who fought for France in the second world war, so that streets and squares may be named after them. President  Macron  had, in 2019 during a visit to Ivory Coast, denounced the French “hegemonic view and the trappings of colonialism”, which he said were “a grave mistake – a fault of the republic”. In Belgium, authorities responded to protests by removing at least some public monuments to King  Leopold II , whose forces seized Congo in the late 19th century and ran an exploitative regime that led to the deaths of millions. And in an unprecedented step last summer, Belgium’s King Philippe, an indirect descendent of Leopold II,  wrote to the Congolese president , Félix Tshisekedi, to offer his deepest  regret  for the “humiliation and suffering” inflicted during Belgium’s colonial occupation of the country. The pain of the past, said the king, was “revived by the discrimination that is still all too present in our societies”. They may have been a long time coming, and carry only symbolic value, but such gestures matter. Macron’s  recent decision  to invite young Africans rather than their political leaders to a France-Africa summit on biodiversity in July and to involve African Europeans in the effort are also steps in the right direction; as are efforts to bring female entrepreneurs, cities and business leaders into continuing African-European conversations. Because  Europe  and Africa are interconnected and interdependent. They need each other to create jobs and growth on both continents, to   ensure a post-pandemic economic recovery and to tackle climate change. The EU remains the  leading aid, trade and investment  actor across the continent. African  exports  of raw materials, chemicals and petroleum products, minerals and metals as well as fishery and agricultural goods, continue to be the mainstay of many European industries. Yet, even if Africa’s once dynamic growth rates have been slowed by the pandemic, its economic potential, youthful population and plans to build an  African Continental Free Area , (AfCFTA) modelled on the EU single market,   will intensify international rivalry and competition – especially between Europe and China. EU policymakers insist that their policies are better than Beijing’s, and that while China’s investments under the  belt and road initiative  grab global attention, they are worsening Africa’s already  high debt burden  and making debt-relief measures even more urgent. African commentators  accuse  the EU, which makes its aid conditional on human rights and other norms, of harbouring “paternalistic” attitudes, saying the bloc could learn from Beijing on consulting, informing and working with African states as true equals. They have a point. African Union leaders cancelled a much-trailed online EU-Africa mini-summit in early December at the last minute. That followed the postponement because of coronavirus of a full-format meeting scheduled for October. This can not be brushed off as just another routine diplomatic mishap. It is time to come clean. A reset of this relationship is difficult because many increasingly self-confident Africans are understandably sceptical about Europe’s motives. Africa-Europe relations have for years been marked by an imbalanced donor/recipient relationship, with African governments seeking access to EU trade and aid preferences, while European leaders have cultivated privileged ties with African elites and ignored the needs of the continent’s younger generation. Fortress Europe’s aim to keep out African migrants has added to the mistrust. Tasked with picking up the pieces, Portugal, as current holder of the rotating EU presidency, is hoping it can replicate this year a successful EU-Africa summit it organised in 2007. But times have changed. Geopolitics have become more unpredictable, the uncertainties triggered by the pandemic are countless and more countries, including post-Brexit Britain, are vying with the EU for economic opportunities in  Africa . One way forward would be an EU acknowledgment of the damage wreaked by colonialism followed by a recognition by African governments that a new generation of modern European leaders – as EU council President Charles Michel noted last year – can no longer be weighed down by the “ burden of nostalgia ”. A joint statement that admits the missteps of the past but also promises fresh beginnings may not lead to an immediate uptick in EU-Africa relations. But it would represent a very good start. If they are to make good on plans for a  fairer revamp of relations  with African states, EU leaders must take collective action to exorcise the ghosts of Leopold II – and those of other colonial “heroes” who trod similar ground. That will mean addressing African grievances over Europe’s role in the slave trade and the crueller aspects of colonial rule, as well as persistent modern-day discrimination, racism and unconscious bias. It will require a change in Europe’s toxic debate on migration, implementation of a  new EU anti-racism agenda  and stepping up work on “ international partnerships ” to replace the traditional EU policy of aid – or, as it was known in Brussels until recently, “development cooperation”, in which outdated white saviour narratives were firmly embedded. Shada Islam is a Brussels-based commentator on EU affairs. She runs New Horizons project, a strategy, analysis and advisory company
Brazil records 1,340 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  McKesson will replace some Moderna Covid-19 vaccines in the United States after they arrived colder than the low end of the required temperature range, Reuters reports. The company, which is the US distributor of Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccines, said some of the gel packs used to maintain appropriate temperatures during shipping on Sunday were too cold and it also impacted some shipments slated for Monday. Moderna expects to supply about 100m doses to the US by the end of the first quarter, with 200m doses in total by the end of the second quarter. McKesson, which did not provide the number of doses affected by the temperature issue, said it had not shipped the vaccines and would replace them within the next 24 hours. The doses are currently quarantined, waiting for a determination on whether they are viable, the company said. McKesson coordinated with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to notify each state expecting the shipments of the delay, the company said. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Oxford scientists are preparing to rapidly produce new versions of their vaccine to combat emerging more contagious Covid-19 variants  discovered in the UK, South Africa and Brazil,  The Telegraph has reported . The team behind the vaccine from Oxford and AstraZeneca is undertaking feasibility studies to reconfigure the technology, the newspaper said, citing a confirmation from the Oxford University. A university spokesman told the newspaper that Oxford is carefully assessing the impact of new variants on vaccine immunity and evaluating the processes needed for rapid development of adjusted Covid-19 vaccines. Separately, British prime minister Boris Johnson said on Wednesday that the nation’s medicines regulator will be ready and able to give approval to new versions of Covid-19 vaccines designed to counter new variants of the coronavirus that may appear. Brazil has registered 1,340 new coronavirus deaths , bringing the country’s total to 212,831. It has also registered 64,385 new cases of the disease, which now total 8,638,249.  Brazil’s foreign minister, Ernesto Araujo, said he still could not provide a timeline of when new coronavirus vaccine doses would arrive from India and China, raising concern in a country that is lagging behind others in vaccinating its people, Reuters reports. The World Health Organization (WHO) plans to approve several Covid-19 vaccines from Western and Chinese manufacturers in the coming weeks and months , a document published on Wednesday shows, as it aims for rapid rollouts in poorer countries. Covax, a global scheme co-led by the WHO, wants to deliver at least 2bn Covid-19 doses across the world this year, with at least 1.3bn going to poorer countries. But it has so far struggled to secure enough shots due to a shortage of funds, while wealthy nations have secured large volumes of vaccines for themselves. In the race to deploy vaccinations, regulatory approvals are key to confirming the effectiveness and safety of vaccines, and to boosting output. But some poorer countries rely mostly on WHO authorisations as they have limited regulatory capacity. The WHO is therefore “expediting” emergency approvals, according to a Covax internal document seen by Reuters. The Covid-19 vaccine developed by  AstraZeneca  and manufactured by the  Serum Institute of India  (SII) could be authorised by the WHO in January or February, the document says. The same vaccine produced in  South Korea  by  SK Bioscience  could be approved by the UN agency in the second half of February at the earliest, a provisional calendar published by the WHO on Wednesday shows. As well as vaccines, regulators usually authorise their manufacturing processes in different plants. Covax has supply contracts with AstraZeneca and SII for about 400m doses and an option for many more hundreds of millions, although the timing of deliveries is uncertain. Nobody should panic about getting access to a Covid-19 vaccine because everyone who wants one will get one , the World Health Organization said. AFP reports: The WHO’s assistant director general for access to medicines, vaccines and pharmaceuticals, Mariangela Simao, said the UN health agency was working towards ensuring access to coronavirus jabs all around the world. “No one needs to panic, because you’re going to get a vaccine,” said Simao. “We’ve been working very hard to ensure that all countries, all populations, do have the opportunity to access these vaccines.” Simao said that around 50 countries have started vaccination campaigns, with more than 40 of them being high-income states. The WHO co-led Covax facility, a globally-pooled vaccine procurement and distribution effort, has struck agreements with five manufacturers for two billion vaccine doses. It aims to secure vaccines for 20% of the population in each participating country by the end of the year, with funding covered for the 92 lower- and lower-middle income economies involved. “We are expecting to have the first doses reaching countries end of February,” Simao said. Amazon has offered to help with the Covid-19 vaccine efforts in the United States , according to a letter addressed to president Joe Biden, seen by Reuters. The world’s largest online retailer has an agreement with a healthcare provider to administer vaccines at its facilities, Dave Clark, chief executive of Amazon’s worldwide consumer business, said in the letter.  He added, “We are prepared to leverage our operations, information technology, and communications capabilities and expertise to assist your administration’s vaccination efforts.” Syria’s White Helmets , who rescue victims from the rubble of airstrikes, have added making personal protective equipment to their efforts saving lives in areas of the country outside Bashar al-Assad’s control. The civil defence service’s uniform-making unit has recently pivoted to manufacturing PPE with the help of a £920,000 award from a nonprofit organisation funded by the UK, US and Dutch governments. The local facility has already produced more than 2m masks, as well as protective gowns and face shields, and is handling the safe disposal of used PPE for north-west Syria’s  vulnerable population  of more than 3 million people. “The Covid-19 pandemic was the most difficult challenge the White Helmets faced in 2020. We witnessed the spread of the virus in north-western  Syria  among humanitarian workers and medical personnel while the global pandemic made cross-borders logistics almost impossible,” said Munir Mustafa, the White Helmets’ deputy general manager for humanitarian affairs. While doctors and humanitarian workers in Syria are still working at great personal risk to respond to and treat the disease, with the help of  Creating Hope in Conflict: a Humanitarian Grand Challenge , the White Helmets have been able to scale up community efforts to keep people safe from coronavirus. “Our volunteers and fellow humanitarians, healthcare providers, and other essential workers are safer now [thanks to the project] and can together continue caring for Syrian civilians and responding to the pandemic,” Mustafa added. Dubai has ordered hospitals to cancel non-essential surgery for the next month after a surge in coronavirus cases in the Middle East’s tourism and business hub, Reuters reports.  Health authorities said the decision, which takes effect on Thursday and could be extended in a month’s time, aims to ensure preparedness of health facilities to manage Covid-19 cases. The daily number of infections in the United Arab Emirates, which includes Dubai, crossed the 3,000 threshold on 12 January and has continued to climb, hitting 3,506 on Wednesday. It is the highest in the Gulf Arab region where daily cases in each of the other five states have fallen below 500. Visitors have flocked to international travel hub Dubai, as other countries imposed new lockdowns. The UAE has lifted most coronavirus restrictions but mask-wearing in public and social distancing are still required. Britain this month removed the UAE from its travel corridors list due to the rise in infections. Guardian reporters Archie Bland and Matthew Weaver looked into the flock of UK social media influencers who have headed to Dubai in recent weeks while their home country remains in lockdown, with the writer Clive Martin describing the hotspot as “the Covid Casablanca”.  Here is a quick re-cap of the key Covid-related events around the world: Some good news, as the Associated Press reports: Zélia de Carvalho Morley (106) rolled up a sleeve and looked stoically to the side as a nurse slid in a Covid-19 shot. She was one of thousands in Brazil to get the shot on Wednesday, but one of very few old enough to recall an earlier viral pandemic that swept her nation and the world a century ago. Born in  Rio de Janeiro  in 1914, Morley was a girl when the so-called Spanish flu killed millions around the world in 1918-1920, when no vaccines were available.  The French health ministry reported 26,784 new confirmed Covid cases over the past 24 hours, up from 23,608 on Tuesday and 23,852 last Wednesday. Wednesday’s tally was the highest since the 28,383 registered on 18 November, during  France ’s second lockdown, Reuters reports.  Spain  logged another record number of new infections on Wednesday afternoon, recording 41,576 new cases in the preceding 24 hours and bringing the country’s total caseload to 2,412,318. It also recorded 464 deaths. The new record came five days after the previous single-day high of 40,197 new cases.  The number of cases per 100,000 people also rose from 714 on Tuesday to 736 on Wednesday. To date, the central government has distributed 1,346,100 doses of the vaccine to the country’s 17 self-governing regions, of which 1,025,937 have been administered, meaning that around 2% of the country’s 47 million people have been vaccinated.  On Wednesday, the regional health minister in  Murcia , southeastern Spain, resigned after it emerged that he, his wife, and around 400 staff in the health department had been vaccinated despite the current round of vaccinations being intended for the staff and residents of care homes, and for frontline health workers. Health authorities in  Madrid  have started mass testing hundreds of young people for Covid-19 at universities in a bid to detect asymptomatic carriers. With the country in the grip of a third wave of infection, authorities called on young people to attend makeshift medical centres at nine university campuses to take a rapid antigen test, Reuters reports.
UK official Covid death toll has always undercounted fatalities, analysis shows:	The UK government death toll is missing coronavirus fatalities and it always has, Guardian analysis has shown. According to the paper by the University of Leicester 30% of Covid-19 patients discharged from English hospitals were readmitted within five months and almost  one in eight of them die , raising further concerns over the accuracy of the widely quoted official figure. If  the paper  proves correct, it would mean in the future thousands of coronavirus patients will be readmitted to hospital and some will die with complications from the virus without being included in the government tally.  The most recent Office for National Statistics (ONS) count, which includes all deaths in England where Covid-19 is mentioned on the death certificate, were 13,497 or 20% higher than the government count in the pandemic at the end of 2020, according to Guardian analysis. This is partly because testing was limited in the early months of the pandemic, so people who died of suspected Covid-19 but were not tested are not included in the government death toll. But people who die of complications as a result of the virus, beyond 28 days of a positive test, are also not included in the widely quoted government figure. Over time this discrepancy is likely to make the government figure less of an accurate representation of the true coronavirus death toll.  The government tally has  always been an undercount  and has been revised a number of times to date – first  upwards , later  downwards . But it has one important advantage: speed. As an ONS spokesperson said, the government method offers a “short-term measure designed to give an up-to-date account of how the pandemic is developing” adding that this is required for “operational decisions [that] need more timely daily data”. British statistician David Spiegelhalter said: “It’s useful as a rapid indication, but the problem is the media reporting, who give too much attention to the daily reports, and don’t seem to understand its limitations, particularly the huge undercount in the first wave due to limited testing.” There are other ways of counting deaths, including all deaths occurring within 60 days of a positive test (which the government does count, but only in England); counting all deaths where Covid-19 is mentioned on the death certificate; and excess deaths. But while the first of these satisfies the speed requirement, it still does not solve the problem posed by the University of Leicester paper. The definitive coronavirus death count is carried out by the UK’s three statistical agencies but with a time lag. This delay makes it difficult to report the most accurate figures in a timely way. The Guardian publishes the government’s daily figures, but also analyses the ONS figures and the government figure, to calculate the most complete and up-to-date death toll possible. Last week the Guardian reported that the true UK death toll had reached  100,000  compared with the official government count. At the time of writing, that figure has grown to 110,200. This includes the latest figures from UK statistical agencies, which on 19 January stood at 90,720 in England and Wales; 7,448 in Scotland; and 2,019 in Northern Ireland. Added to that are 10,013 deaths that occurred since, where the date of death was after 17 January in Scotland and 8 January in the other three UK nations as per the  government dashboard . This is still an undercount, but brings us much closer to the true death toll without overstating the number of deaths. Excess deaths is the gold standard in assessing the scale of the impact of coronavirus. It compares deaths with the average number of deaths over the previous five years for the same period. An excess deaths figure gets around all the complications of how Covid deaths are counted. In essence it reveals how many more people died in this period who were not expected to die. But this too takes time. As things stands the 28-day count remains the most prominent UK tally, even if it is not the definitive count.
Ministers consider paying £500 to everyone with Covid in England:	Ministers are considering paying £500 to everyone in  England  who tests positive for Covid-19, in a dramatic overhaul of the self-isolation support scheme, the Guardian can reveal. The proposed change is thought necessary because government polling found only 17% of people with symptoms are coming forward to get a test, owing to fears that a positive result could stop people from working. The universal payment is the “preferred position” of Matt Hancock’s Department of  Health  and Social Care (DHSC) and would cost up to £453m a week, 12 times the cost of the current system, according to an official policy paper seen by the Guardian. The 16-page document, dated 19 January and marked “Official Sensitive”, also proposes that police should be given access to health data for the first time to crack down on quarantine breaches. Another recommendation is ending the £500 one-off payments to close contacts of infected people and instead rolling out nationwide self-testing, so that those who test negative can return to work. The revamped self-isolation support scheme was drawn up by Hancock’s team to be considered by the government’s coronavirus operations committee, chaired by Michael Gove, which is expected to meet on Friday. The UK recorded another 1,290 deaths on Thursday and 37,892 new positive cases, and there is uncertainty about whether the current restrictions will do enough to bring the pandemic under control. Boris Johnson pointedly refused to be drawn on when lockdown measures could be lifted, raising fears that the regime may not ease for months. Financial support for people who need to self-isolate is critical to the government’s coronavirus strategy because the disease will continue to spread unless infectious people and their close contacts go into quarantine for 10 days. However, there have been  concerns  that the scheme unveiled by the prime minister  four months ago  is excluding many people who cannot afford to self-isolate, meaning they are torn between losing earnings or spreading the disease. The overhaul has been prompted by Cabinet Office polling indicating that only 17% of people with symptoms are coming forward for testing, according to the policy paper. It said: “Wanting to avoid self-isolation is now the single biggest reported barrier to requesting a test.” A separate survey carried out for the DHSC, discussed in the report, found that only one in four people reported compliance with self-isolation, with 15% going to work as normal. At present only those on a low income who cannot work from home and receive one of seven means-tested benefits are eligible for the £500 test-and-trace support payment (TTSP), excluding many small business owners, sole traders, self-employed workers and parents whose children have been told to self-isolate. Councils are given an additional pot of “discretionary” funding, but  figures released by Labour  this week showed that three-quarters of applicants were being rejected. An official review of the scheme has concluded that it excludes too many people, has created a “postcode lottery” around England, and that only one in four of those eligible have received financial support – about 50,000 people in total – because the application process is too complex. It proposes four options to expand the programme. The most generous is paying £500 to anyone who tests positive. The report says: “Anyone who tested positive for Covid-19, irrespective of their age, employment status or ability to work from home, would be eligible for TTSP. This would be straightforward for local authorities to administer, though it would lead to significantly greater volumes of applications than under the current scheme.” Describing the universal payment as “the preferred DHSC position,” officials estimate it would cost up to £453m a week if there were 60,000 cases a day – 12 times the current cost of £36.5m a week. It would cost £340m a week if there were 45,000 infections a day, as at present. A second option is paying the lump sum to those who test positive and cannot work from home, costing up to £244m a week. The third option is paying those earning less than £26,495 a year or on means-tested benefits, at a cost of £122m a week. The fourth proposal is keeping the current system but “significantly” expanding the discretionary funding to councils. The policy paper says “a more radical approach” would be paying people their usual earnings instead of a £500 lump sump, but it would be difficult to assess the earnings of those on zero-hours contracts, agency workers and the self-employed and therefore that option is not recommended. The proposal to end £500 payments to the close contacts of infected people and instead introduce regular nationwide at-home lateral flow testing would save the government £79m a week if cases were at 60,000 a day, according to the report. However, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency has cautioned against using self-tests as a “green light” to avoid self-isolation. Any nationwide scheme would need to be clinically approved. Another proposed change likely to be controversial is to give individuals’ health data to the police to prove that someone has tested positive for Covid-19, making it easier for them to be prosecuted. In October,  it emerged  that police could request information about whether someone was supposed to be self-isolating, but “ no testing data or health data ”. The official paper says the current enforcement approach is “difficult to implement” and that police should be given health data to distinguish between people who have tested positive and those required to self-isolate because they are a contact. It adds: “Contrary to previous assurances given to the public, this will mean sharing health data (ie an indication of who has tested positive for Covid-19) with the police if someone is reported to have breached their legal duty, but this is considered a necessary and proportionate measure – and data-sharing agreements will provide that the information is not used for any other purposes.” On Friday morning, the environment secretary, George Eustice, told Sky News the plan was “under review”. “We do need people, if they are asked to self-isolate because they have been contacted through our test and trace, we do need them to self-isolate,” he said. “No decisions have been made on this. But this is a dynamic, fast-moving situation with the pandemic.”  A DHSC spokesperson said they would not comment on leaks, but said: “We are in one of the toughest moments of this pandemic and it is incumbent on all of us to help protect the NHS by staying at home and following the rules. “All local authorities costs for administering the test-and-trace support payment scheme are covered by the government, and each authority is empowered to make discretionary payments outside of the scheme. Fifty million pounds was invested when the scheme launched, and we are providing a further £20m to help support people on low incomes who need to self-isolate. “We also recognise the impact of the pandemic on people’s mental health and wellbeing which is why mental health services have remained open throughout the pandemic.”
Johnson raises fears of lockdown in England continuing into summertime:	Boris Johnson  raised fears that tough Covid restrictions could continue well into the spring and beyond on Thursday as ministers refused to be drawn on plans for any potential easing of lockdown. While the vast majority of Tory MPs have toed the line since the new variant of the virus sent cases soaring, Downing Street’s reticence is already causing anxiety among a few backbenchers, who are urging an easing of the restrictions if vaccination rates stay on target. Downing Street is committed to reviewing the current England-wide lockdown in mid-February, by which point all people in the four top target groups for vaccinations should have been offered at least their first injection. But with 1,290 more UK coronavirus deaths recorded on Thursday, fears that infection rates in  England  might not even be falling, and the continued spread of the new, more infectious variant of Covid-19, Johnson was notably more cautious about lifting lockdown than he previously has been. “I think it’s too early to say when we’ll be able to lift some of the restrictions,”  he told reporters  during a visit to  flood-hit Didsbury  in Greater Manchester, when asked about the mid-February target. After Johnson’s spokesperson declined to rule out lockdown remaining in place until the summer,  Priti Patel , the home secretary, was similarly cautious at the No 10 Covid press conference on Thursday afternoon. “It’s far too early to even contemplate where we go with restrictions,” she said, when asked about timings.  Patel instead announced  beefed-up fines to better enforce social distancing rules, with guests found at house parties of more than 15 people liable to incur fines of at least £800. Speaking earlier the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, said only that  he “would certainly hope” schools reopen before Easter . The current plan is for pupils to return after the February half-term. While previously Johnson has appeared keen to talk up early exits from restrictions, No 10 officials have become much more cautious in recent days because of continued high levels of new infections, hospitalisations and deaths. “We’re less hopeful about moving quickly on unlocking than perhaps we have been: it’s because of the state of the pandemic,” said one Whitehall source. “The view is that we have to proceed cautiously and carefully.” As well as seeking evidence that the fall in new cases will not be reversed, they are waiting for the result of studies on whether the vaccines prevent transmission of Covid. The apparently slipping timetable brought a robust response from the Covid Recovery Group (CRG), which represents about 70 MPs concerned about the impact of lockdown. Mark Harper, the former chief whip who chairs the CRG, said if the mid-February vaccination target was met for the top four groups – older care home residents, those aged over 80 and frontline NHS staff, over-75s and over-70s – and they developed protection within three weeks, the prime minister “must start easing the restrictions” by 8 March. “Ministers must come forward now with a plan for lifting restrictions,” Harper added. Other MPs said they anticipated growing calls for the government to set out its expected road out of the restrictions now that the vaccine plan seemed to be going smoothly. “There’s big resistance to lockdown simmering with an insistence on showing the route map out of it all,” one former cabinet minister said. However, with the death figures so high, there is also a dilemma. One former minister said some among the CRG’s ranks were nervous about calling for the lifting of restrictions prematurely. “I think the general feeling is now that the virus is still not abating so we need to be cautious,” the MP said. “The group is being more circumspect. Certainly we need to be regularly informed by the government. But the new variant is clearly far more infectious.” There is also pressure from scientists to maintain robust restrictions because research suggests vaccination alone may not be enough to shrink the coronavirus epidemic. Prof Mark Woolhouse, chair of infectious disease epidemiology at the University of Edinburgh, said even in a best-case scenario it was unlikely vaccine uptake would be above 90%, meaning about 1 million vulnerable people would remain susceptible to Covid after the first phase of the programme. In addition, none of the approved Covid vaccines have a greater than 95% efficacy against Covid symptoms. “The general consensus is that a gradual releasing of restrictions would be possible but we would have to feel our way there, the way we did after the first lockdown,” Woolhouse said. But he added: “If [Covid vaccines] can’t take us past the [herd immunity] threshold, then we are going to be living with some kind of countermeasures for ever.”
Coronavirus live news: Hong Kong to impose local lockdown; EU seeking clarity from Pfizer over vaccine delays:	Dubai is keeping restrictions loose to preserve its reputation as a centre for trade, transport and tourism despite rising case numbers, reports Frank Kane.  Dubai is still hard at work, trying to carry on, even with its current spike in Covid infections. During working hours, like other financial hubs around the world, the Dubai International Financial Centre is still the domain of suits and pencil skirts. By night, it becomes the swanky playground of the emirate’s glitterati, where chic restaurants and cocktail bars pull in the well-heeled movers and shakers of the Dubai business scene. The car park valets handle a steady stream of Rolls-Royces and Ferraris. However, the authorities have been stung by a string of reports suggesting that the emirate was endangering the health of its 2 million residents by throwing open its doors to global revellers, even as Covid cases hit record levels in many parts of the world. This is Rachel Hall taking over from Mattha Busby. Do send me any tips and thoughts to rachel.hall@theguardian.com, or you can reach me on Twitter  here . US  public health officials have said a second Covid shot could be administered as much as six weeks after the first one in situations where it was not possible to get a booster dose immediately, Reuters reports. In most cases, the recommended dosing interval of three weeks for Pfizer’s vaccine and four weeks for Moderna’s vaccine should be followed, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said in its guidance. However, “sometimes the situation is stressed where it’s very difficult to be exactly on time”, US infectious disease expert Anthony Fauci told CNN. “I don’t see a big problem with that [six weeks recommendation] if the situation on the ground means the stress is such that you can’t precisely do 28 days or 21 days.” Moderna said there was no data to give an informed perspective on the CDC’s recommendation, while Pfizer did not respond to Reuters’ request for comment. Britain has begun spacing doses of the vaccines by up to 12 weeks despite little data, saying the move could help more people get initial protection. It comes after Israel’s coronavirus tsar  warned earlier this week  that a single dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine may be providing less protection than originally hoped. Food rations are being distributed to the most vulnerable families in  Rwandan  capital, Kigali, after a 15-day lockdown began on Tuesday, the BBC reports. Those outside their homes require a permit from the police, except essential workers. Households started to receive sacks of rice, maize flour and beans on Thursday evening, according to the BBC. About 3,000 families in the city with a population of around 1 million have been identified as most in need of support amid fears that impoverished residents could struggle even more severely during lockdown. The supplies are reportedly being delivered by volunteers who have recently tested negative for Covid. On Thursday, Rwanda – which has a population of almost 13 million – reported nine Covid-19 deaths, the highest daily fatalities so far, bringing the tally to 162, and 310 new cases. Sweden, which has spurned a lockdown throughout the pandemic, has registered 84 new Covid-related deaths, taking the total to 11,005, official statistics showed. The country of 10 million also registered 4,214 new coronavirus cases. The deaths registered have occurred over several days and weeks. Sweden’s death rate per capita is several times higher than that of its Nordic neighbours, but lower than in several European countries that opted for lockdowns, Reuters reports. Epidemiologists in  Greece  are poised to recommend that junior and high schools reopen as the country’s coronavirus case load continues to drop.  According to local media, scientists advising the government have said schools can reopen on 1 February in what would be a big step for a nation under lockdown since 7 November. The decision is expected to be formally announced at 6pm.  It follows the reopening of shops for the first first time in over two months on Monday – albeit under strict coronavirus restrictions. Under social distancing rules, entry to stores is limited to one person per 25 sq metre with the result that long queues have formed outside retail businesses during opening hours.  In the wake of a nationwide lockdown that has included a 9pm to 5am curfew, Greece has begun to finally suppress the second wave of the pandemic, epidemiologists say.  Speaking to the Guardian recently, the infectious disease expert Gkikas Magiorkinis, who is among the scientists on the advisory committee, said a surge in cases since November had proven “far more difficult to deal with but also the lockdown has been more relaxed than the first [in March]. People are clearly tired.”  Kindergardens and primary schools opened earlier this month as the centre-right government began to ease curbs aimed at stemming the spread of coronavirus.  “We are going to be very cautious about lifting measures,” Magiorkinis said. “We don’t want people to gather indoors. If restaurants open it will be strictly with tables outdoors.”  Infections rates continued to drop this week with Greece’s public health organisation, EODY, registering 509 new cases on Thursday compared to 516 and 566 over the previous 24-hour periods. Ten days ago, 866 cases were announced by EODY.  Although the country, which has a population of almost 11 million, has fared better than most EU states confirmed coronavirus diagnoses rose to 150,479 on Thursday. The death toll stands at 5,470.  Lawyers have warned that  Canada  is putting people needlessly at risk amidst the pandemic after it emerged that it deported thousands of people last year, Reuters reports. Lawyers and human rights advocates are decrying Canada’s decision in November to resume deportations. Until now, the extent of the country’s pandemic deportations was not known, but recent interviews with immigration lawyers and scrutiny of government numbers has shed light on the situation. Canada counted 12,122 people as removed in 2020 - 875 more than the previous year and the highest number since at least 2015, according to Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) data seen by Reuters. The government says this was necessary and done safely. The CBSA says the high number last year is because it includes people who decided to leave on their own, termed “administrative removals.” In 2019 there were 1,657 administrative removals, compared with 8,215 last year. Even as Canada continues to deport non-citizens during a health crisis, US president Joe Biden paused deportations for 100 days within hours of being sworn in on Wednesday. Canada officially imposed a moratorium on deportations in March that it lifted at the end of November. “As much as a human rights concern it’s a common sense concern,” said Bill Frelick, director of Human Rights Watch’s Refugee Rights Program. The CBSA said it has been prioritising deportations for reasons of “serious admissibility,” including criminality. The vast majority of people deported in 2020 were for reasons of “noncompliance.” Even taking into account administrative removals, more than 1,000 people were deported during the suspension, the data shows. “As everybody is putting in place more restrictions in an effort to flatten the curve ... CBSA made a shocking decision to simply go back to business as usual,” said Maureen Silcoff, president of the Canadian Association of Refugee Lawyers. “Canada has taken the position that nonessential travel is barred yet people are now being removed and there’s no indication that those removals are essential.” The CBSA said in a statement it lifted the moratorium on deportations because foreign government offices and borders had reopened, airlines restarted their routes and public-health protocols “have contributed to a high degree of safety for persons being removed by air.” “Canada continues to uphold both its human rights and public safety obligations in relation to the removal of inadmissible foreign nationals,” the statement said. “The removal process includes many checks and balances to ensure that the removal is conducted in a fair and just manner.” A privacy activist has filed a complaint with an  EU  watchdog over the European Parliament’s Covid testing app for its staff, saying it could be transferring data illegally to the US, Reuters reports. The Austrian privacy advocacy group Noybaid, led by Max Schrems it had taken its case to the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) on behalf of six European Union lawmakers. Schrems, an Austrian and prominent figure in Europe’s digital rights movement against intrusive data-gathering by Silicon Valley tech giants, previously pursued two cases against Facebook , winning landmark judgments that forced the social network to change how it handles user data in  Europe . The complaint said that EU lawmakers, on accessing the virus test site, discovered that it had sent over 150 third-party requests, including requests to US-based companies Google and Stripe, in breach of an EU court judgment in July last year. A number of these third-party requests were for user data in targeted advertising and to enable software to function smoothly. “The main issues raised are the deceptive cookies banners of an internal corona testing website, the vague and unclear data protection notice, and the illegal transfer of data to the U.S.,” Noybaid said in a statement. “Public authorities, and in particular the EU institutions, have to lead by example to comply with the law. This is also true when it comes to transfers of data outside of the EU. By using U.S. providers, the European Parliament enabled U.S. authorities to access data of its staff and its members.” Cookies are used by companies to track online browsing behaviour, key to online advertising. Schrems said the EU parliament should have known better. EDPS confirmed receipt of the complaint. The European Parliament did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Hungary  has signed a deal to buy 2m doses of Russia’s Sputnik V Covid vaccine, the first EU country to do so, foreign minister Péter Szijjártó told a briefing during talks in Moscow, Reuters reports.  With its order for Russia’s Covid vaccine, Hungary is the first EU member to break ranks and unilaterally approve the shot as frustrations build in  Europe  over delays in supplies of Western vaccines that are hampering an economic recovery. “Under the terms of our agreement, we are buying an amount sufficient to inoculate 1 million people,”  Szijjártó  said during talks with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. “This represents 2m doses in three tranches. An amount to inoculate 300,000 people in the first month, for half a million people in the second month and 200,000 people in the third.” Szijjártó did  not say when the first shipment of the Russian shot would arrive in Hungary and it was unclear how much Budapest would pay for the 2m vaccines in total.  The agreement comes only days after Hungary’s drug regulator gave approval for use of Britain’s AstraZeneca and Russia’s Sputnik V vaccines against the coronavirus, as Budapest strives to lift coronavirus lockdown measures to boost its economy. The EU’s medicines regulator has yet to approve the Russian or AstraZeneca vaccine.  Szijjártó  said the Russian vaccines could allow Hungary to lift lockdown restrictions sooner. Earlier today, prime minister Viktor Orbàn said Hungary cannot lift restrictions until it can carry out a mass inoculation. He said the best approach was to authorise the use of several vaccines as competition would force manufacturers to speed up shipments. “We don’t need explanations, we need vaccines,”  Orbàn  told state radio. The European Medicines Agency (EMA) is expected to decide on the vaccine developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford University on 29 January. Russia on Wednesday filed for registration of the Sputnik vaccine in the EU before an EMA review next month. Germany ’s health minister, Jens Spahn, has called for understanding of a continuation of harsh lockdown conditions in Germany, saying that despite a slow down in the rate of infections they were necessary to prevent a “considerable worsening” of the situation. Germany’s death toll rose to more than 51,000 on Thursday, having been increasing at an average of 1,000 deaths a day for several weeks. Spahn told a press conference, flanked by the head of the government disease control agency, the country’s leading coronavirus virologist and the head of intensive care medicine in Germany, that the measures would have to remain in place until at least “the end of February or into March”. He cited the dangers of mutations first detected in England, South Africa and Brazil as being a factor behind the decision. Germany, which has a population of 83 million, reported almost 18,000 new coronavirus cases today, about 4,000 less than a week ago. Spahn said he could understand the bafflement of many Germans over why the measures had been extended and intensified in recent days, despite a fall in numbers. Public discontent was reflected in a flurry of emails, telephone calls and letters he had received, he said. The numbers of the the last few days are encouraging. They’re going in the right direction. The infection rate is sinking. We’re seeing the first easing on intensive care wards … but it’s still a considerable burden with very many Covid-19 patients in the intensive care wards and in hospital. But the numbers are still too high, and what we need is to collectively use the intensified measures, despite the many hardships they bring with them, to continue to suppress the numbers … so that this virus is controllable. Germany’s coronavirus rate has for months been too high to enable contact tracing, which Spahn said was a crucial tool for being able to control the disease. Spahn said with almost 5,000 ICU beds taken up with Covid-19 patients, it was imperative to reduce numbers being hospitalised to prevent the health system being overwhelmed. We need to explain this contradiction and this ambivalence. Why, even though the figures are moving in the right direction … we are right now intensifying the restrictions for a manageable length of time to bring down these numbers still further. Neither politicians nor citizens want to have to accuse each other that we relaxed too early, and if we look at other countries in  Europe  we can see how quickly the situation becomes inflamed again. He later referred specifically to the situations in Britain and Portugal. The global release of the  James Bond  movie No Time to Die has been postponed again from April to October, its producers have announced. No Time to Die, from MGM and Universal Pictures, had originally been set to hit the big screen in April 2020 before moving to November 2020 and then April 2021. The film, which cost an estimated $200m to produce, marks actor Daniel Craig’s last outing as agent 007. The Bond franchise is one of the movie world’s most lucrative, with 2015’s Spectre raking in $880m at the box office worldwide, while Skyfall in 2012 grossed more than $1bn globally. NO TIME TO DIE 8 October 2021  pic.twitter.com/HZlNG5kz8t The European commission will seek clarification from Pfizer over whether there will be fresh delays in delivering Covid vaccines to  EU  countries next week, a spokesman for the EU executive said. “We will seek clarification from the company,” the spokesman told a news conference in reply to a question about a new slowdowns in deliveries reported by EU countries for next week. Pfizer and the commission had earlier said that there would have been no further slowdown next week, after supplies slowed this week. Government officials from a number of EU states told Reuters yesterday that the US-based drugmaker had halved the volume of Covid vaccines it was delivering this week. Romania got only 50% of its planned volume for this week, the other half being allocated gradually by the end of March, with deliveries returning to normal starting next week, deputy health minister Andrei Baciu said. It was a similar situation in Poland, which on Monday received 176,000 doses, a drop of around 50% from what was expected, authorities said. The Czech government was bracing for the disruption to last for weeks, slowing its vaccination campaign just as the second dose of vaccinations get under way. “We have to expect that there will be a reduction in the number of open vaccination appointments in the following three weeks,” health minister Jan Blatny told reporters on Thursday, with Pfizer deliveries falling by about 15% this week and as much as 30% for the following two weeks. Pfizer and its German partner BioNTech have declined to comment on the cuts beyond their statement last week, which announced cuts to deliveries as they ramp up manufacturing in  Europe . On Wednesday, Italy threatened legal action against Pfizer. Belgium  cannot yet lift coronavirus-related restrictions despite a stabilising of Covid infections and falling daily deaths, the health ministry has said, ahead of a meeting at which the government may seek to ban tourist trips abroad temporarily, Reuters reports.  With one of the world’s highest per capita death rates from Covid-19, Belgium has so far avoided a third wave of infections such as those seen in Britain and Germany. But the health ministry said the numbers remained too high to start easing measures. The objective is to have fewer than 800 confirmed infections a day and fewer than 75 new hospitalisations a day for three weeks before starting to ease lockdown rules, a far cry from the current average of just under 2,000 infections a day. “For the moment, the virus still has its hand in the game but we still have our two best players: vaccination and spring,” health ministry spokesman Yves Van Laethem told a news conference. This week also marked the first time in a month that the number of people in hospital is rising again, particularly in the last few days, Van Laethem said. “The situation remains fragile, on a plateau too high for health systems, especially since the number of cases and hospitalisations no longer seems to be decreasing,” he said. Belgium is not under a strict lockdown but bars, cafes and restaurants remain closed as well as gyms and cinemas, while home working is obligatory. The country of 11 million, home to the headquarters of the European Union and Nato, has officially recorded 20,620 Covid-related deaths so far. Turkish  president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has said China has approved the delivery of a second consignment of the CoronaVac vaccine, produced by Sinovac Biotech, and that 10m doses could arrive in Turkey by this weekend. Turkey has already received an initial consignment of 3m doses and has so far vaccinated 1.166 million people, mostly health workers and elderly people, Reuters reports. Lithuania ’s president has said the country expects to receive enough Covid vaccines to inoculate 70% of its population by early July, and that this would achieve herd immunity, Reuters reports. The ambitious supply schedule hinges on vaccines from AstraZeneca and Johnson & Johnson being approved for use in the EU, in addition to the Pfizer shot already being administered, president Gitanas Nauseda said. “We received assurances from the European Commission president that Lithuania will be able to vaccinate 70% of population by early summer, because we will receive 4 million vaccines during the first and second quarters,” Nauseda said. “The challenge is about to change from vaccine shortages to setting up mass vaccinations, so that we use the time optimally and can fully reach collective immunity (by early July). This is the goal we can set for ourselves,” he told reporters. Nauseda said Lithuania, a Baltic republic of 2.8 million people, will need to vaccinate 10,000 per day by February and up to 35,000 people per day by April to reach the July target. Between 1,000 and 4,000 people have received the vaccine daily this week, according to government data. Thousands of  Hong Kongers  will be ordered to stay in their homes for the city’s first coronavirus lockdown,  local media have reported , as authorities battle an outbreak in one of its poorest and most densely packed districts. AFP reports: The order bans anyone from leaving their apartment unless they can show a negative test where cases have surged in recent days, and will last until everyone within the designated area has been tested, the reports said. The South China Morning Post said the measures would come in at midnight Friday into Saturday with some 1,700 police ready to enforce the lockdown covering some 150 housing blocks and up to 9,000 people. Health officials declined to comment on the proposal at an afternoon press briefing but multiple local outlets reported the lockdown citing government officials throughout Friday. Hong Kong was one of the first places to be struck by the coronavirus since it burst out of central China. It has kept infections under 10,000 with some 170 deaths by imposing effective but economically punishing social distancing measures for much of the last year. It’s Mattha Busby here, taking over the blog from my colleague Ben Quinn. Good morning, good afternoon and good evening to everyone reading. Do drop me a note  on Twitter  or via email on mattha.busby.freelance@guardian.co.uk with any tips or thoughts. Some heartening news from Israel, where an  agreement between the government and Pfizer  to share data has turned the country into what has been described as a “dashboard” for how the vaccine has had an impact. A scientist at the Weizmann Institute in Rehovot, Israel, tweets this observation about medical staff who received the vaccine and the numbers who have fallen ill. Israel: Some (cautiously) encouraging vaccine results Big drop in working days missed amongst medical staff, who were vaccinated first (green line), despite surge in cases throughout the country (blue line) This pattern was not seen in the second wave (left side, Oct.)  pic.twitter.com/d6JHQDWG2V Israel’s coronavirus “tsar”  warned earlier this week  that a single dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine may provide less protection than originally hoped, as the country reported a record 10,000 new Covid infections on Monday. In remarks reported by Army Radio, Nachman Ash said a single dose appeared “less effective than we had thought”, and also lower than Pfizer had suggested. While coronavirus cases are starting to flatten across the  US , the virus is still raging in many border communities,  according to the New York Times . Three of the six “metro” areas with the highest rates of known cases since the outbreak began are small cities straddling Mexico, it adds in a report from a county in Arizona that has the most cases per capita of one those areas. Miriam Jordan  writes : Seasonal migration, the daily flow of people back and forth and lax measures to contain the virus’s spread have created a combustible constellation.  Arizona has seen among the highest increases in newly reported deaths of any state over the past two weeks – and it is not clear when this troubling trend will abate.
UK Covid live: R-value falls to 0.8-1; one in 35 Londoners and one in 55 in England tested positive last week – ONS:	The  Ministry of Defence  is drawing up a list of hundreds of key personnel who should be a top priority for receiving a covid vaccine in the coming weeks, who are understood include members of the SAS and Trident submarine crews, the defence secretary said on Friday. Ben Wallace  said work was going on to “identify the key people” across “the rest of the wider defence enterprise” at a time when other key worker groups, such as police, teachers and fire workers have been lobbying to be moved up the priority list.” We have identified some people that are absolutely key to the essential operation of defence operations to the UK. I can’t say who they are because that would undermine the security of it [but] we expect them to get a vaccine as soon as possible,” the minister said in a pooled interview. Insiders said no key personnel had been vaccinated yet - other than the 1,600 military doctors and nurses who are already seconded to the  NHS  - and that there was no immediate call to for them to jump the queue, which calls for the over 70s and  NHS  and care workers to be vaccinated by 15 February. The military’s key personnel include those engaged in counter terror, such as the elite SAS special forces, plus the  Trident  nuclear submarine crews who have to be away for months at a time.  But they stressed immunisations were not urgently required. “These are fit and healthy people, and we should be able to prevent outbreaks through good practice and protocols,” a defence source added.  Downing Street has ruled out the idea of paying £500 to people in England who test positive for coronavirus, but declined to comment on other possible moves to try and increase the proportion of those with symptoms who do seek a test. Asked about the idea, set out in a health department paper  seen by the Guardian , Boris Johnson’s spokesman said: There are no plans to introduce an extra £500 payment. As you’re aware, we already offer a £500 payment to those on low incomes who cannot work from home. But asked if there were any plans to widen such support schemes in any way, or whether the idea had been looked at, the spokesman said only: “There are no plans to introduce an extra £500 payment.” The reproduction number, or R value, of Covid-19 transmission has fallen and is now estimated to be between 0.8 and 1 across the  UK , according to the Government Office for Science and the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage). Last week, the value was between 1.2 and 1.3 (if the figure is above 1, it means the outbreak is growing exponentially). The last time it was below 1 was in December. An  R number  between 0.8 and 1 means that, on average, every 10 people infected will infect between 8 and 10 other people. Sage scientists said: It is essential that everyone continues to stay at home, whether they have had the vaccine or not. We all need to play our part, and if everyone continues to follow the rules, we can expect to drive down the R number across the country. Absence rates for primary school teachers with Covid-19 were six times higher in  England  than for children in the same settings, an analysis suggests. PA media reports:  Teacher absences due to a confirmed case of coronavirus were up to three times higher in secondary schools than those of pupils, according to research from the Education Policy Institute (EPI) think tank. It is “highly likely” that more teachers had a confirmed case of Covid-19 during the autumn term than the wider adult population, but more government data is needed to confirm this, the report says. Approximately 0.5% to 0.9% of primary teachers in England were absent due to a confirmed Covid-19 case during the autumn term, compared with 0.05% to 0.15% of primary pupils, the analysis finds. About 0.6% to 1% of secondary teachers were absent compared with 0.2% to 0.3% for secondary pupils.   More from the Guardian’s reporter  Steven Morris : Asked about the  UK  government proposal to pay £500 to everyone in England who tests positive for Covid-19, the Welsh first minister,  Mark Drakeford , said:  I think it was a kite flown overnight that has come very firmly down to earth this morning with UK ministers denying this was ever a serious proposition. If the UK government were to institute such a scheme we would of course expect to have an equivalent sum of money to allow us to do something here in Wales. Here are the graphs that were shown in today's press conference 👇  pic.twitter.com/YtE4WwBzRQ Nicola Sturgeon  also addressed the story on the front page of the Daily Record this morning, which reported that painters carried out work last week at her official ­residence Bute House despite the ban on non-essential building work by her own government. Sturgeon clarified that she had not stayed at the residence since before the first lockdown, when she decided to minimise her own contacts and exposure of staff by remaining in her private home. She said that the work was “essential safety work” to pin part of a ceiling and that no painting was done. Just to be very clear, the rules that we living under right now apply to me and government ministers, just as much as they do to everyone else...I know people get really angry if they do get the suggestion that I get special dispensation. I don’t and nor should I have. The number of Covid cases is falling across  Wales  but the Welsh first minister,  Mark Drakeford , has said there is still only “marginal headroom at best” to begin lifting lockdown restrictions when they are reviewed next week. But he revealed he had asked the chief medical officer,  Dr Frank Atherton , if there was “any prospect” of more children returning to school in the week before half term. He has not had the reply yet. Drakeford said the seven-day case rate for Wales has dropped to around 270 cases per 100,000 people compared with more than 650 before Christmas. The first minister also said the number of people being admitted to hospital was stabilising. He said the Welsh government is on target “to hit our first milestone” of offering vaccination to its first four priority groups by mid-February.” Drakeford was challenged about his government’s promise that 70% of over-80s would be vaccinated by Sunday.  Figures released by Public  Health  Wales on Friday said  30.2%  of those aged over 80 have received their first dose – but advised this was a snapshot and the real figures will be higher. The first minister said the government hoped to vaccinate 70% of over-80s by the end of Sunday but suggested the official figures on Monday would not support this because there is a lag in the statistics. Announcing 1,480 new cases of coronavirus at her daily briefing,  Scotland ’s first minister  Nicola Sturgeon  said that there were some grounds for optimism, noting it is “the first day in a long time that test positivity has been under 7%”. Asked about UK government plans to give the £500 self-isolation grant to all, reported in the Guardian yesterday, she said she would “welcome it” and that her government is continually looking at what it can do to support people with self-isolation. Following the  cancellation of Glastonbury for another year  yesterday, Sturgeon said that people had to be “realistic and pragmatic” – “it’s going to be a bit longer before big-scale events become possible again”, adding that she can’t say with any certainty if that will be by the summer. Coastguard teams are undertaking a relay journey of 140 miles, including two ferry crossings, to transfer Covid test samples from Barra for processing as the outbreak on the island continues, with 47 positive cases and a fourth person airlifted to hospital. The transfer will continue every weekend until the outbreak is deemed under control by  NHS  Western Isles, to ensure completed tests can be processed quickly. Rescue teams will carry tests from Barra to the island’s ferry, then another team will transport tests by road to the Berneray ferry terminal, and the final part of the journey is completed by either Harris or Stornoway coastguards as they collect samples from the ferry in Leverburgh and carry out the final road transfer to Western Isles Hospital, Stornoway, for processing.  Josh Halliday , the Guardian’s North of England correspondent, has more on the news he broke about the  proposals of paying £500 to those who test positive for coronavirus .  Some experts have warned it could act as “a bounty” for people to catch the disease, with some people claiming it would encourage irresponsible behaviour. Read his latest story on how the idea has divided opinion here: Condemning the wedding party held in Stamford Hill, Chief Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis has  tweeted : This is a most shameful desecration of all that we hold dear. At a time when we are all making such great sacrifices, it amounts to a brazen abrogation of the responsibility to protect life & such illegal behaviour is abhorred by the overwhelming majority of the Jewish community. Public Health  Wales  said a total of 212,317 first doses of the Covid vaccine had now been administered, a rise of 21,882 on the previous day’s figure. PA media reports: The agency say 415 second doses were also given, an increase of 19. In total, 30.2% of those aged over 80 have received their first dose of the vaccine, along with 59.9% of care home residents and 69.8% of care home staff.  Health  minister Vaughan Gething previously said he expected 70% of the over-80s, care home residents and care home staff to have received their first jab by 25 January. Even though more young people have been infected, hospital admissions and deaths involving  #COVID19  are highest among those aged over 65 years.  Hospital admissions decreased in most age groups in the week ending 17 January  https://t.co/Lqei9r4Efv   pic.twitter.com/5c1ujUxtCs The latest  ONS  statistics are in. Here are some of the key findings: Read all the findings  here . Phillip Glanville, the mayor of Hackney in  north London , has said the Stamford Hill school where Covid regulations were breached with a wedding celebration had previously been used for similar events during the pandemic. Police officers broke up a wedding with about 400 guests at Yesodey Hatorah senior girls’ school in Egerton Road at 9.15pm on Thursday night (see  earlier post ). Glanville told BBC News:  It’s a deeply disturbing incident at a time when in Hackney we have seen the largest number of deaths reported since last April. Unfortunately, similar events have taken place even at this venue before and we need to be really clear how unacceptable it is. A double-dip recession is “on the cards” after the  UK ’s private sector saw activity plunge this month due to the latest set of lockdown restrictions, new data indicates. PA Media reports: The closely watched IHS Markit/CIPS Flash UK Composite PMI report showed a reading of 40.6 so far in January. Anything below 50 is seen as a decline in activity. It is significantly below the expectations of analysts, who predicted a reading of 46.1 for the month.  A steep slump in business activity in January puts the locked down UK economy on course to contract sharply in the first quarter of 2021, meaning a double-dip recession is on the cards,” said Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit. Read our  business live blog  for the latest financial coverage. New research from the Institute for Employment Studies has found that low-paid workers are more than twice as likely to have lost their jobs over the pandemic.  The findings, which you can read  here  in full, said it was likely that around 4m workers have been temporarily laid off or are working fewer hours than usual. A wedding attended by about 400 people at a  north London  school has been broken up by police, with the organiser facing a £10,000 fine. Read the Met’s full statement  here . Priti Patel , the home secretary, yesterday announced a new fine of £800 for people caught at house parties, signalling a tougher stance on blatant Covid guideline breaches. Organiser of wedding in Stamford Hill to be considered for £10,000 COVID breach fine. Officers responded and found around 400 people inside the venue.  @MPSSpecials   https://t.co/qUi2hjoh27 Covid-linked deaths are being investigated at more than 450 care homes in  Scotland . PA Media reports: The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service’s dedicated Covid-19 Death Investigation Team (CDIT) is probing the circumstances of coronavirus-related deaths in 474 care homes across the country. The CDIT was set up in May after Lord Advocate James Wolffe QC said all confirmed or suspected coronavirus deaths in care homes should be reported to the Crown Office, as well as deaths of people who may have contracted the virus at work. The team had received 3,385 death reports as of Thursday, with a majority of those believed to be linked to people who lived in care homes.  There have been disproportionate rates of premature death from Covid-19 among patients of Asian and black ethnicity, a large cohort study has found. The research, published in the journal BMJ Open, is based on nearly 1,800 patients admitted to five acute hospitals within Barts  Health  NHS trust between January 1 and May 13 2020. The study found that patients from minority ethnic backgrounds were younger and less frail, compared with white patients, PA Media reports. It also showed that black patients were 1.8 times, and Asian patients 1.54 times, more likely to be admitted to an intensive care unit and need mechanical ventilation. The study author, Dr Yize Wan, a clinical lecturer at Queen Mary University of London, said:  Our study shows the disproportionate impact of Covid-19 on black and Asian groups in the first peak. Black and Asian people admitted to Barts Health hospitals with Covid-19 were significantly younger in age, had greater acute disease severity, and higher mortality relative to white patients of the same age and baseline health. As the impact of Covid-19 continues to be seen within our community, the importance of responding to the ethnic disparities unmasked during the Covid-19 pandemic is crucial to prevent entrenching and inflicting them on future generations. Experts and politicians have called for high-risk minority ethnic groups to be prioritised for Covid immunisations, alongside a targeted publicity campaign amid growing  fears over vaccine scepticism .
Portugal bans all UK flights – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Japan’s government has privately concluded the Tokyo Olympics will have to be cancelled  because of the coronavirus,  The Times has reported , citing an unnamed senior member of the ruling coalition. The government’s focus is now on securing the games for Tokyo in the next available year, 2032, the newspaper said.  French president Emmanuel Macron said France will make PCR tests compulsory for all travellers into France from Sunday , including from fellow EU countries, Reuters reports. Cross-border workers and land transportation will be exempt from that obligation, the French presidency added. The test will have to be carried out no later than 72 hours before departure. Here is a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe: Hotspots of Covid-19 infections in the European Union will be labelled “dark red” zones , and travellers from those areas will be required to take a test before departure and undergo quarantine, the chief of the bloc’s executive said. “A dark red zone would show that in this zone, the virus is circulating at a very high level,” European commission president  Ursula von der Leyen  said after a meeting of EU leaders, Reuters reports. “Persons travelling from dark red areas could be required to do a test before departure, as well as to undergo quarantine after arrival.” This system would apply to travel within the EU, she said. Von der Leyen said that with infections rising and contagious variants of the virus spreading fast, non-essential travel should be “strongly discouraged” within the EU but essential workers and goods must be able to cross borders smoothly. Spanish tennis player Paula Badosa has become the first player to test positive to Covid-19 while in hard quarantine ahead of the Australian Open. The world No 67 was one of 72 players forced to isolate in their hotel rooms after passengers on three separate charter flights to Melbourne tested positive. The 23-year-old took to Twitter late on Thursday night, stating that she had tested positive on the seventh day of her isolation. Authorities have not confirmed where she contracted the virus. “I have some bad news. Today I received a positive COVID-19 test result. I’m feeling unwell and have some symptoms, but I’ll try to recover as soon as possible listening to the doctors,” she said. “I’ve been taken to a health hotel [medi-hotel] to self-isolate and be monitored.” pic.twitter.com/9SLzW46HuZ Originally all players travelling to participate in the Australia Open were meant to enter a bubble where, after testing negative upon arrival, they would be allowed to leave their room for five hours a day to train at specially designated tennis courts. But this plan was complicated when three international charter flights had passengers test negative to Covid-19 prior to taking off, but positive upon arrival in Melbourne, suggesting they may have been contagious while flying. Portuguese prime minister  António Costa  has said all flights to and from Britain will be suspended from Saturday onwards as Portugal scrambles to tackle the rapid spread of the new variant of the coronavirus. Only repatriation flights will be allowed between both countries, Costa told a news conference.  He described the measure as a move to reduce the “risk of contagion” due to the new, more contagious variant of the coronavirus discovered in Britain, which is spreading across Portugal. Anthony Fauci , the top infectious diseases expert in the US, has spoken of a “liberating feeling” of being able to speak scientific truth about the coronavirus without fear of “repercussions” from Donald Trump. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, endured a tortuous relationship with the former president and was increasingly sidelined from public briefings. But the 80-year-old returned to the White House podium on Thursday after  Joe Biden  released a national Covid-19 strategy and signed 10 executive orders to combat a pandemic that has now claimed more than  400,000 lives  in the US. “One of the things that we’re going to do is to be completely transparent, open and honest,” Fauci told reporters. “If things go wrong, not point fingers, but to correct them. And to make everything we do be based on science and evidence. “That was literally a conversation I had 15 minutes ago with the president and he has said that multiple times.” Asked if he would like to amend or clarify anything he said during the Trump presidency, Fauci insisted he had always been candid, noting wryly. “That’s why I got in trouble sometimes.” Fauci and other public health advisers were forced to walk a delicate line as the president used coronavirus taskforce briefings to downplay the virus, push miracle cures and score political points. Fauci also said that, based on seven-day averages, the coronavirus may be plateauing in this US but warned there can always be lags in data reporting. “One of the new things about this new administration: if you don’t know the answer, don’t guess,” he said. The UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, has raised fears that tough Covid restrictions could continue well into the spring and beyond , as ministers refused to be drawn on plans for any potential easing of lockdown. While the vast majority of Tory MPs have toed the line since the new variant of the virus sent cases soaring, Downing Street’s reticence is already causing anxiety among a few backbenchers, who are urging an easing of the restrictions if vaccination rates stay on target. Downing Street is committed to reviewing the current England-wide lockdown in mid-February, by which point all people in the four top target groups for vaccinations should have been offered at least their first injection. But with 1,290 more UK coronavirus deaths recorded on Thursday, fears that infection rates in England might not even be falling, and the continued spread of the new, more infectious variant of Covid-19, Johnson was notably more cautious about lifting lockdown than he previously has been. “I think it’s too early to say when we’ll be able to lift some of the restrictions,”  he told reporters  during a visit to  flood-hit Didsbury  in Greater Manchester, when asked about the mid-February target. After Johnson’s spokesman declined to rule out lockdown remaining in place until the summer,  Priti Patel , the home secretary, was similarly cautious at the No 10 Covid press conference on Thursday afternoon. “It’s far too early to even contemplate where we go with restrictions,” she said, when asked about timings.  Patel instead announced  beefed-up fines to better enforce social distancing rules, with guests found at house parties of more than 15 people liable to incur fines of at least £800.  Joe Biden has said the US death toll from the coronavirus will probably top 500,000 next month, painting a grim picture of what he said would be a difficult battle. In a White House event, the new US president said the rollout of the vaccine had been a “dismal failure so far”. It will not be possible to host carnival celebrations in July, Rio de Janeiro’s new mayor has said, as Brazil’s second wave of coronavirus infections spreads, and with vaccine supplies still scarce. On Twitter, Eduardo Paes said he was aware of the economic and cultural benefits the world-famous party, originally scheduled for next month, brings to the city. But he said there was no way it could be held even in the middle of the year. I have never hidden my passion for carnival and the clear vision I have of the economic importance of this cultural event for our city. However, it seems pointless to imagine at this point that we will be able to hold the carnival in July. This celebration requires a great deal of preparation on the part of public bodies and of samba associations and institutions, something impossible to do at that moment. Thus, I would like to inform you that we will not have carnival in the middle of the year in 2021. Nunca escondi minha paixão pelo carnaval e a visão clara que tenho da importância econômica dessa manifestação cultural para nossa cidade. No entanto, me parece sem qq sentido imaginar a essa altura que teremos condições de realizar o carnaval em julho.  pic.twitter.com/B932v233En The latest delay to this year’s celebrations is not a surprise. Brazil is reeling from a brutal second wave in a pandemic that has claimed more than 200,000 lives, the second highest total in the world after the US. Meanwhile, the government is under growing pressure over the slow pace of its vaccine rollout. The French government will recommend that people wear surgical masks in public because fabric masks do not provide enough protection from Covid-19 transmission, health minister  Olivier Véran  has said. France already requires masks to be worn in public places, but until now has not made recommendations about the type of masks that should be worn in that setting. Véran, speaking to French broadcaster TF1, also said it was unlikely restrictions on ski resorts would be lifted next month, effectively ruling out a return to skiing in time for the February school holidays. He said the government could not rule out a tightening of coronavirus restrictions if virus transmission accelerates, Reuters reports. Spanish health minister Salvador Illa will resign next week to campaign in regional elections in Catalonia , an official from his party said, while national authorities reported a record 44,357 new daily coronavirus cases. From Reuters: “By Thursday of next week at 12 midnight, he will have given up his portfolio,” said  Miquel Iceta , the secretary of the Catalan Socialist Party. Illa, who has overseen Spain’s response to the coronavirus pandemic, had said he would step down when campaigning got underway for the election, which is set to take place on 14 February. Spain has been routinely reporting record daily coronavirus infections since the end of December, but a top health official said the recent surge appeared to be stabilising. “The increases we are seeing are getting smaller every day, which implies that we have reached an inflection point,”  Fernando Simón , the country’s health emergency chief, said. Despite that optimism, the nationwide incidence of the virus as measured over the past 14 days climbed to a new high of 796 cases per 100,000 people on Thursday from 736 cases the previous day. Simon warned that pressure on hospitals would likely continue into at least the next week. The latest figures brought the cumulative total of coronavirus cases in Spain to 2,456,675, while the death toll increased by 404 to 55,041. The Czech parliament has extended the country’s state of emergency until 14 February , a week less than the government had wanted as it seeks to keep in place measures to tamp down coronavirus infections. Reuters reports: The extension, pushed through with support of the Communist party, provides the government with a legal basis for some measures such as limits on assembly and movement, or temporarily shuttering businesses. The country of 10.7 million has been one of the worst-hit globally with 14,973 deaths so far and over 150 deaths most days this month as many hospitals are filled to capacity. Health minister  Jan Blatný  has called on the public to observe limits on social interactions to help break the trend, with the aid of stricter social distancing rules and the closure of most shops that came into force on 27 December. Officials have also said the number of those hospitalised with Covid-19 needs to fall by more than half to below 3,000 patients for the government to consider lifting some restrictions. The European Union has promised to help  Ukraine  obtain coronavirus vaccines as soon as possible, the county’s president Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office has said, Reuters reports. Zelenskiy received assurances of support in a letter from European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen and European Council president Charles Michel, Zelenskiy’s office said in a statement. “It is emphasised that Ukraine can count on the solidarity of the European Union in obtaining a vaccine against coronavirus. The EU is taking steps to ensure Ukraine’s access to vaccines as soon as possible,” the statement said. The first batches of Covid vaccine under the Covax scheme could arrive in Ukraine in the first half of February, television channel Ukraine-24 quoted a senior Ukrainian lawmaker as saying earlier on Thursday. Ukraine, which has a population of 44 million and has registered around 1.2 million coronavirus cases along with 21,499 deaths, has already agreed to buy some vaccines from China. Ireland ’s Covid death rate is at its highest level since the start of the pandemic with an average of 44 deaths per day in the past week, a senior health official has said, Reuters reports. “The number of deaths confirmed per day over the last seven days, 44, is the highest we have seen at any point during the pandemic,” Philip Nolan, head of the government’s Covid modelling unit, told a news conference.  The infection rate, however, has fallen sharply from a pandemic high registered earlier in January. There were an average of 2,430 new cases over the past five days, down from a five-day average of 4,473 reported a week ago. The January spike followed an easing of public health restrictions in December. The growth was also fuelled by a new more transmissible variant of the virus that first emerged in Britain. The variant now accounts for around 60% of transmission in Ireland, chief medical officer Tony Holohan told journalists. Ireland on Thursday reported 2,608 new cases of Covid-19 and 51 deaths. A total of 2,818 have died from the disease in Ireland, which has a population of 5 million. Ireland on Tuesday reported a record 93 deaths. Hungary  has licensed Russia’s coronavirus vaccine, breaking ranks with other EU countries and ignoring calls to stick to a common European vaccine policy. Its foreign minister, Péter Szijjártó, was on his way to Moscow on Thursday to discuss the purchase, after Hungary’s medical body gave the Sputnik V vaccine emergency approval. Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s rightwing prime minister, has been strongly critical of the slow speed of the EU vaccine distribution programme. His chief of staff, Gergely Gulyás, said on Thursday: “If vaccine shipments arrive at this rate from Brussels, we can only get vaccines from other, alternative sources.” So far abut 140,000 people in Hungary have been vaccinated, with the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines. Officials are also in Beijing for talks over the approval of China’s Sinopharm vaccine. Surveys show Hungarians are among the biggest vaccine sceptics in  Europe , with fewer than half prepared to be vaccinated. The UN’s cultural agency has called on  France  to do more to stop the Musee de l’Eventail in Paris becoming the cultural world’s latest coronavirus victim, AP reports. The museum classed as a historical monument has until Saturday to pay up over 117,000 euros in rent arrears — stemming mainly from losses during lockdowns, otherwise it will close. And with it will go the savoir-faire of its workshop. The studio that teaches design and restoration to a new generation of fan-makers was placed on France’s intangible heritage list last year. In a rare intervention, Unesco called on France to honour the implementing of “safeguarding measures identified for this particular living heritage,” noting in response to AP’s reporting that Paris’ decision to place this knowhow on the list was taken already “while the pandemic was starting to expand at a fast pace.” “It is a tragedy. I can’t believe Parisians will let a part of their heritage die. I have a problem, because I always believed there would be a miracle,” the museum’s 74-year-old director, Anne Hoguet, said. The US House of Representatives is planning to bring a coronavirus relief bill to a vote in the first week of February, the speaker, Nancy Pelosi, has said. “We will be doing our committee work all next week so that we will be completely ready to go to the floor when we come back,” she said, according to Reuters. Biden has proposed a $1.9 trillion Covid-19 bill that would provide enhanced jobless benefits and direct cash payments to households struggling amid the economic fallout from the virus.  Though Biden’s Democratic party holds narrow majorities in the House and Senate, the legislation will likely need bipartisan support to clear procedural hurdles and emerge out of the Senate. Some Republicans have raised questions about shovelling out more direct payments on the heels of last month’s enactment of a coronavirus aid bill. Many of them also oppose aid to state and local governments, a top priority of Democrats.
China revives conspiracy theory of US army link to Covid:	Attempts by Chinese authorities to shift the narrative around Covid-19’s origins have reignited on social media this week after a government spokesperson revived a  conspiracy theory  that it came from a US army lab. Hua Chunying, a spokesperson for the foreign affairs ministry, was responding to a US state department “fact sheet” released last week that claimed there was new evidence of researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology falling ill before the first known cases of Covid-19 in the city. The state department did not provide data to back up  its assertions . Hua accused the US of spreading “conspiracy theories and lies” as part of the “last-day madness of Mr Liar”, apparently referring to either Donald Trump or his secretary of state, Mike Pompeo. “I’d like to stress that if the United States truly respects facts, it should open the biological lab at Fort Detrick, give more transparency to issues like its 200-plus overseas bio-labs, invite WHO experts to conduct origin-tracing in the United States, and respond to the concerns from the international community with real actions,” said Hua. On the microblogging platform Weibo, the Chinese hashtag for “biological laboratory in US Fort Detrick” has been viewed more than 900m times, with comments latching on to the conspiracy theory that the US could be the source. “The origin of coronavirus – American virus!” said one commenter. Another said: “Apologise to the bats!” Tit-for-tat accusations of the virus beginning in a lab have bubbled since at least mid-2020, after China’s attempts to cover up the initial outbreak. In recent months Chinese officials have ramped up efforts to  suggest the virus began outside of China , airing theories without evidence linking it to US military personnel, and there has been blanket state media coverage of virus detections on frozen food imports and ice-cream. WHO’s director of the health emergencies programme, Michael Ryan, said it was “highly speculative” to argue that coronavirus came from outside  China , and investigations should start where the first confirmed human cases emerged. China only this month  allowed a team of scientists  from the WHO into the country on a mission to investigate the source of the outbreak. The team is completing quarantine in Wuhan, and several members have told media that their investigation is not about apportioning blame but about finding as much information as possible to reduce the risk of the disease. They have expressed concern about Chinese officials blocking access. The virus was first identified among people who had worked at or visited a  market in Wuhan , and there is evidence to suggest the virus jumped to humans from bats via an intermediary animal.
Indian hesitancy sets back world's biggest Covid vaccination drive:	India’s Covid-19 vaccine drive has been hampered by turnout as low as 22% in some states, as fears over the safety of the vaccine and the spread of misinformation has fuelled widespread hesitancy. On Saturday,  India  launched the world’s largest vaccination programme as it began the massive task of vaccinating its 1.3 billion citizens against coronavirus. On the first day of India’s vaccine drive on Saturday, more than 200,000 vaccinations were given –  the highest first-day total of any country, a government minister said  – but it nonetheless fell short of the nationwide government targets by more than 100,000. By Tuesday evening, the government said 631,417 people had been vaccinated, far below the expected figure. So far the overall national turnout has averaged a lacklustre 64%, while in states such as Tamil Nadu and Punjab, uptake of the vaccine was as low as 22% and 23% in the first two days of the vaccination drive. The low turnout was attributed to a nervousness about safety among the healthcare workers who were first in line to receive the vaccine, as well as technical difficulties with the app designed to alert people to their vaccine appointments. Two Covid-19 vaccines have been approved for emergency use in India, the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine – known as Covishield in India – and a domestically developed vaccine called Covaxin, produced by Indian company Bharat Biotech. The Oxford/AstraZeneva vaccine, which has completed international trials and was found to have about 62% efficacy with two doses, has already been widely distributed in the UK. Britain’s NHS  says  of the vaccines in use in that country: “The coronavirus vaccine is safe and effective. It gives you the best protection against coronavirus.” Covaxin has not completed phase 3 trials and so there is no final data on its efficacy, making India one of the few countries rolling out a vaccine still in its trial stages. However, the drugs controller of India said interim data from an ongoing trial of more than 22,000 people showed it was “100% safe” and effective. Nonetheless, some healthcare professionals in India expressed concerns that they had not been provided with enough data on the vaccines’ safety and efficacy and were nervous at the speed the vaccines were being rolled out. Dr Namrata Agarwal, a paediatrician in Kashipur, was among those not eager to take the vaccine. “I’m very hesitant,” she said. “All the protocols have been rushed and hurried through. I am not so concerned about the efficacy of a vaccine – that can vary – and I can handle that but what concerns me is its safety and the chance that it might cause harm.” On Tuesday, Bharat Biotech released a fact sheet of those with underlying heath problems who should avoid the Covaxin vaccine, raising questions about why it had not been publicised before the vaccine was released. Dr Mandeep Aulakh, a pathologist in Chandigarh, said she would wait a few weeks before getting vaccinated. “The vaccine development was rushed,” she said. “I also have a few allergies so I have not volunteered to take it.” The Indian government had hoped to vaccinate 300 million people by August, a target that will prove challenging if uptake remains at its current rate. In the capital, Delhi – which hopes to vaccine 100,000 people a day – only 3,598 healthcare workers received their vaccine on Monday, far below the daily target of 8,136, making uptake just 44% that day in India’s capital. In Delhi’s largest hospital, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), just eight healthcare workers out of an expected 100 turned up on Monday for their jab. In Mumbai, one of the cities worst affected by Covid-19, turnout for vaccines was 48% on the first day, with 1,926 out of a target of 4,000 people turning up for their vaccine. It was far below Mumbai’s ambitious target of vaccinating 50,000 healthcare workers a day. Dr Amit Thadhai, director of Niramaya hospital in Mumbai, said: “There have been a long series of questions which have been raised about the safety and efficacy of the vaccine. The fact that doctors have been asked to take it first has caused problems; doctors are not used to enrolling in trials which is why the uptake has been so low.” Thadahi said there was also a decreased sense of urgency to take the vaccine because the number of Covid cases in India was in rapid decline, with new cases at their lowest level since mid-June. “The motivation to take a vaccine is not great at the moment,” he said. On Saturday, the state of Maharashtra, which is home to Mumbai, temporarily suspended the vaccination drive after less than 2,000 people were vaccinated across the state. It was partly attributed to widespread technical glitches which meant people were not given alerts for their vaccination appointments. Misinformation and fake news about the vaccine was also doing the rounds on WhatsApp. In one widely circulated video, Dr Johan Denis, an alleged “medical doctor and homeopath” from Belgium, made the unsubstantiated claim that “the vaccine is not proven safe or effective” and the false statements that: “It’s a fake pandemic … it’s all been orchestrated to create fear to make you take the vaccine which might cause irreversible changes to your DNA.” Ashraf Buchson, a carpet seller from Delhi who had been forwarded the video, said the videos had given him second thoughts about the vaccine. “When I see these videos, I feel anxious. I don’t know who to believe and everyone in my family is divided,” said Buchson. The low turnout appeared to take state governments by surprise. In Karnataka only 47% of people registered to receive a vaccine had turned up to their appointments by Monday, making the state government unlikely to hit its target of vaccinating 650,000 healthcare workers by the end of the week. “Despite the district having the highest literacy rate in the state, I am surprised at why healthcare workers are reluctant to take vaccines,” Karnataka’s health minister, K Sudhakar, told local media. Many doctors said politicians and public figures should be publicly taking the vaccine to allay fears. “If well-known figures take it, it will help push up the numbers,” said Dr Sanjiv Zutshi, a cardiologist in Delhi who is going to get the jab in two days. Dr Arun Shah, a senior paediatrician in Muzaffarnagar, agreed. “The prime minister himself and the health minister should have the vaccine. That would reassure many people. And to create a sense of confidence, every vaccinated person should share photos and their experience on WhatsApp to spread reassurance,” said Shah. •  This article was amended on 22 January 2021. The 200,000-plus vaccinations given on the first day of India’s programme were the highest first-day total of any country, not the highest one-day total of any country as stated in an earlier version.
I thought my eating disorder was my protector, but I have been anorexia's prey:	Name:  Melis Layik Age:  21 Dreams of:  Being a lawyer, an author and a grassroots organiser I increased my dosage of antidepressants today. With the loosening of Victoria’s Covid restrictions and the surge of New Year’s weight loss marketing, my eating disorder has once again overwhelmed me with feelings of inadequacy and self-loathing. I’m splayed on the couch, light-headed and nauseous; classic side effects of my medication. But it’s worth it. Antidepressants have been a life-saving intervention in my mental health journey, particularly in the past year. I’m so glad I never listened to the fear-mongering and mythology which surrounds them. The notions that I would “feel nothing” and that my “personality would change” have turned out to be completely unfounded. To the contrary, they have allowed me to live my life free from perpetual rumination, anxiety and self-harm. In the short term, though, I am dizzy. I’ve been recovering from an eating disorder for over five years. The illness has infiltrated my mind and robbed me of joy. I have missed out on dinners, parties and holidays because of my chronic fear of gaining weight. I have spent hours at the gym instead of seeing friends and have self-harmed after eating food I perceive as unhealthy. I have internalised so deeply that my value lies in my proximity to thinness that my self-worth has become directly proportional to how little I can consume on any given day. I have been anorexia’s prey, all while thinking that it was my friend and protector, my arbiter of discipline. When I heard that gyms were going to be closed during the pandemic, I spiralled into paranoia. My mind was plagued with visions of my future obesity, accompanied with delusions that my friends, family and partner would find me repulsive. While I recognised the absurdity of these claims, the power of the illness was overbearing; my rationality did not stand a chance. My fears were validated by the endless barrage of home workouts which were marketed to me and I loathed myself for not creating an at-home gym using my couch and some sacks of rice or lifting my fridge a hundred times a day. My mind repeated its bigoted script:  You are so lazy, you are weak, you are repulsive. With so much time on my hands during Victoria’s extended lockdown, with uni being online and still with no work for me to go to, it became even easier to berate my appearance. Hours were spent in front of the mirror, pinching my skin, measuring my waist, checking my reflection from every angle for signs of imperfection. I felt profoundly lonely in these ruminations and feelings. It seemed like everyone else could eat and exist without a second thought. But I recognise now that I wasn’t the only one. Around one million Australians suffer from eating disorders and the limitations of extended Covid lockdowns and restrictions have reportedly  worsened many people’s illnesses . Disruptions to routine, use of videoconferencing (which exposes individuals to their own image) and increased marketing of weight-loss programs have also culminated in heightened negative body image and restrictive behaviours in the  general population. Now in the New Year, I once again feel victimised by the fitness industry. It jeers that I need to fix myself, become thinner and transform into a better “me”. My eating disorder agrees, bolstered by this external validation. Years of therapy have taught me that I need to resist the compulsion to appease my illness and buy into this narrative, but it’s so hard when both the outside world and my internal dialogue is telling me otherwise. I feel defeated, but equally, I feel enraged. It’s the same trick every year. Images of models chiseled and photoshopped to perfection, thrust upon us all to inspire feelings of inadequacy, all cloaked in the language of health. Ads meticulously engineered to target feelings of insecurity so we buy whichever product promises us thinness and eternal happiness. No wonder eating disorders are so prevalent. It’s essential to raise awareness for the insidiousness of these tactics and advocate for better mental health education. I’m glad I can finally recognise this propaganda for what it is. I’ve lost years of my life to an eating disorder and I will not lose any more. The truth is I don’t want to lose weight in 2021. I want to gain mental wellbeing. •  In Australia, support is available at  Beyond Blue  on 1300 22 4636,  Lifeline  on 13 11 14, and at  MensLine  on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity  Mind  is available on 0300 123 3393 and  Childline  on 0800 1111. In the US,  Mental Health America  is available on 800-273-8255
What is the Order of Australia, who decides the awards and can they be challenged?:	The process of awarding Orders of Australia has come under scrutiny in recent years, after a series of contentious appointments sparked furious backlash. Between 2019 and 2020, formal reviews have been requested for awards made to  controversial sex therapist Bettina Arndt , robot sex expert and former far-right political candidate  Prof Adrian Cheok  and former journalist  Mike Carlton . The decision to give former tennis player  Margaret Court the highest honour  in the awards system has also been heavily criticised due to Court’s stance on LGBTQ+ rights, including comments that transgender children  were the work of “the devil” . How does the process work? The awards are considered by an independent body called the Council for the Order of Australia. Nominations can be made by any member of the public  by submitting them online to the council. Staff at the council conduct additional research and contact referees. The council then decides whether to recommend the nominations to the governor general, to not recommend, or defer. Officially, the governor general, David Hurley, then considers and approves the award appointments, but he does so on the advice of the council. The council itself has 19 members, who are appointed by the governor general on the recommendation of the prime minister. The current chair is Shane Stone. Orders of Australia are awarded twice a year – on 26 January and the Queen’s birthday. Awards take between 18 months and two years to be processed, according to the council. There are four levels of award within the Order of Australia. Court, for example, had already been made an Officer of the Order of Australia (the second highest honour) in 2007, and will be made a Companion of the Order, the highest rank, in 2021. Awards can be reviewed by the council, and concerned parties can also write to the governor general, who can then refer the award to be reviewed by the council. In February 2020, awards given to Arndt and Carlton were referred for review. Arndt’s award for “gender equity through advocacy for men” was heavily criticised due to  a 2018 interview she conducted with a convicted paedophile  in which she described the behaviour of female students as “sexually provocative”. She was further criticised after she  congratulated Queensland police for saying they would keep an “open mind”  about whether the death of Hannah Clarke and her children was a case of a  “husband being driven too far” . Arndt  accused her critics  of “engaging in virtue signalling at the expense of supporting free speech and proper discussion of key social issues”. The Victorian attorney general, Jill Hennessy, wrote to Hurley asking him to rescind the honour over the interview with the paedophile. The Victorian Liberal MP, Tim Smith, also wrote to Hurley asking him to rescind the honour over her comments on Clarke. The federal Liberal senator, Sarah Henderson, wrote to Stone, the chair of the council, saying the award “should be cancelled”. My letter to the Chairman of the Council of the Order of Australia Shane Stone. Ms Bettina Arndt’s award as a Member of the Order of Australia in the General Division should be cancelled.  pic.twitter.com/8vlUdJFtdy Carlton’s award was referred after journalist  Sharri Markson criticised  swearing and violent imagery in his tweets. He responded that he’d been subject to a News Corp Australia attack that was “a vicious and disgraceful vendetta”. In June 2019, Cheok –  a man who advocates sex with robots who had been accused of poor conduct with his peers , and  had run as a candidate for Fraser Anning’s Conservative National party  – also had his honour reviewed. The chapter president of the Digital Games Research Association Australia, Brendan Keogh, wrote to formally challenge the honour alleging that Cheok had a “track record of abusive behaviour towards other academics” on social media. In the 2019 federal election, Cheok attracted 868 votes in the lower house seat of Boothby in South Australia  running for Anning’s party. Cheok also said in 2019 he was setting up a graduate school that  would teach classes on “Trumpism” and “Bannonism”. At the time of the honours controversy, Cheok  told the Guardian he was a worthy recipient  and the criticism was “about creating a perception and getting an emotional public reaction rather than dealing in precise facts”. The office of the governor general told Guardian Australia in February 2020: “In all matters relating to the Order of Australia, the governor general acts on advice from and recommendations made by the Council for the Order of Australia. “When the governor general receives correspondence – including requests to terminate or cancel an award – it is referred to the council … for advice and action.” Yes, but the bar is high. Last year, Stone said none of the awards that were reviewed would be revoked. Awards can be revoked when a person “has behaved or acted in a manner that has brought disrepute on the Order”. But Stone said this grounds would require a criminal conviction. “In the council’s view and as a general principle, for the Order to be brought into disrepute, a conviction, penalty or adverse finding must have occurred,” he said. “In essence, the council … uses law as the threshold for termination and cancellation.” He added that political or social views would not be grounds for “disrepute”. “In a system that recognises hundreds of people each year, it is inevitable that each list will include some people who others believe should not be recognised,” he said in a  statement . “Unanimous community approval is not a criteria for council to make a recommendation … Individuals are neither qualified nor disqualified on the basis of their political leanings, social views or religious convictions.” Other grounds for termination include when information for the recommendation “is found to be based on false or misleading material”. In 2019, Scott Morrison said he would strip Cardinal George Pell of his Order of Australia  if he failed in his appeals against multiple sexual assault convictions . Pell was later acquitted by the high court, and he retains his award. The council says that it includes the legal appeals process in its consideration for criminal charges. The percentage of people who win awards after being nominated is generally quite high. In 2019, there were a total of 1,374 nominations for the Queen’s birthday honours and 993 were granted – 72%. More statistics are here:
Morrison says he can't comment on Margaret Court Australia Day honour as Daniel Andrews slams it – as it happened:	With that, we’ll be closing the blog for today. Here’s a recap of the day’s headlines: The NSW premier’s office breached state record-keeping laws by shredding documents related to a pork-barrelling scheme, a watchdog has found. A day after  Gladys Berejiklian ’s staff were half-heartedly cleared by the  information commissioner  over the incident, the  State Archives and Records Authority  has concluded rules were broken, AAP reports.  An adviser to the premier in October told a parliamentary committee she shredded “working advice notes” showing Berejiklian “signed off” on $141.8m of council grants. She also deleted electronic copies. The grants had been causing trouble for the premier for months, after it emerged more than 95% of the $252m fund went to projects in Coalition-held seats in the lead-up to the 2019 state election. The notes, which Berejiklian’s staff argued didn’t fall under record-keeping requirements, functioned as pseudo briefing notes and were therefore required to be kept, Sara found. “These working advice notes should not have been destroyed and they should have been retained as state archives,” the report reads. The report notes an email recording the final outcome of the premier’s review of the notes was sent but ruled that it was not sufficient as the final version of the record.  Sara also found the guidelines on record-keeping given to the premier’s staff were lacking and that monitoring of the office’s compliance with the laws was insufficient. The NSW information commissioner,  Elizabeth Tydd ,   on Thursday published a report also concluding guidelines for the office were poor. Tydd made no adverse finding against Berejiklian’s staff. The opposition leader,  Jodi McKay , on Friday said Labor would introduce a bill in the first sitting week of the year to do just that. “I find it extraordinary that we even have to do this ... It should be commonplace that state records important documents are kept by the premier’s office,” she said.  A spokeswoman for the premier told AAP the government would consider all the information in the commissioner’s report and said it was pleasing an investigation was not warranted. Olympic gold medal winner  Cathy Freeman  has become the latest high-profile critic of  Scott Morrison  following the prime minister’s comments about  Cricket Australia ’s initiative to make matches around the date of 26 January more inclusive. Morrison on Thursday criticised the decision by some  Big Bash League  clubs to follow CA guidance and drop references to “Australia Day” from promotional material for upcoming matches in a bid to create a safer and more inclusive environment for fans. The day, referred to as “Invasion Day” by many Indigenous people and others, will instead be referred to by some clubs simply as 26 January. Morrison said the push by CA was “pretty ordinary” and claimed the date in 1788 “wasn’t a particularly flash day for the people on those [first fleet] vessels either”. Freeman, who famously won Olympic gold at the 2000 Games in Sydney and is a prominent Indigenous rights campaigner, rebuked the prime minister’s comments. You can’t compare the experiences of those 12 ships that first arrived to this country to what their arrival meant for all generations of Australia's First Nations people! “You can’t compare the experiences of those 12 ships that first arrived to this country to what their arrival meant for all generations of Australia’s First Nations people!”  Freeman tweeted  on Friday. Morrison, when asked whether he had meant to draw parallels between what Indigenous people suffered as a result of European settlement in 1788 and the experiences of those on the first fleet, said “it was false to take that equivocation”. “I’ll simply say this: Australia is more than 25m stories; more than 25m. Each of us can trace our stories back into our own Australia, Indigenous Australia, First Nations Australia. All the stories are important. All stories should be respected,” he said. The news media code is not aimed at making  Google  and  Facebook  pay per click on news articles, but to let media companies negotiate fair payment for the value of their content to the platforms, the  Australian Competition and Consumer Commission  chair,  Rod Sims ,   has told parliament. The ACCC developed the code in 2020. Sims has told the Senate committee reviewing the draft legislation that what’s being lost in the debate over the code is that it’s not simply a requirement for Google and Facebook to pay per click for news articles. “Discussions we are aware of have focused on paying upfront lump sum amounts, not per click,” he said. “What the code does is require the digital platforms to negotiate in good faith over paying news businesses for the value that the digital platforms derive from having news content on their platforms, and participate in arbitration if no agreement is reached. “Without the code as a backup, commercial deals cannot be made as terms are simply offered on a take-it-or-leave-it basis.” He said ultimately digital platforms and media companies do want to reach a deal but the code would empower media companies to make proper commercial deals by levelling the playing field. Western Australia  will reopen its borders to NSW and Queensland from Monday but travellers will still be required to self-isolate for 14 days and get a Covid-19 test, AAP reports. The decision to reclassify the states as “low risk” means travellers will no longer require exemptions to enter WA. Queensland  has recorded 15 consecutive days of no confirmed community transmission and NSW seven. Victoria  was also reclassified as a low-risk state earlier this week. People from all other states and territories are allowed to enter WA without self-isolating. WA’s chief health officer has advised Queensland could also transition to “very low risk” from 1 February, removing the isolation requirement. “The outbreak in NSW last month was extremely concerning and prompted immediate action right across the country,” the premier,  Mark McGowan , said in a statement on Friday. “Queensland’s situation, which followed shortly after, was compounded with the detection of the variant strain and again resulted in swift action by us, by the Queensland government itself and from other states and territories in a bid to protect the country. “Everyone in the community has played a role in keeping WA safe and I want to thank them for their co-operation, particularly over the last month as border controls have had to change quickly.” All arrivals at Perth Airport will be required to undergo health screening and a temperature check and to present for a Covid-19 test on day 11 of their isolation period. The deputy chief medical officer,  Michael Kidd , has said any Australians who test positive to the more transmissible Covid-19 strain originally identified in the United Kingdom will have to isolate for longer than other returned travellers.  Kidd, speaking after today’s national cabinet, said the requirement was communicated to state and territory leaders on Friday. It means those travellers with the strain will have to isolate for 14 days from diagnosis, as opposed to 10 days.  Kidd said: One of the concern with this variance is the concern about whether they lead to increased transmissibility of Covid-19. Fortunately they did not seem to be causing more severe disease, but are more at risk of being transmitted.  As a consequence we have increased the isolation requirements for people who are diagnosed with these new variant, from 10 days to 14 days, before they get potential release from isolation. Retired female tennis star  Martina Navratilova  has responded to news  Margaret Court  will be recognised with Australia’s highest honour.  Navratilova has been a vocal critic of Court’s position on LGBTQ+ issues and, with  John McEnroe , last year called for  Margaret Court arena  at Melbourne Park – where the Australian Open is held – to be renamed to honour  Evonne Goolagong Cawley. This is what needs to happen... one day...  pic.twitter.com/LTlvauDGXi It appears Navratilova is renewing that idea. You can read more about Court’s leaked Australia Day honour, and the furious backlash it has sparked from Victoria’s premier  Daniel Andrews , here: The full national cabinet statement is out and gives a bit more context to the decision not to require vaccinations in aged care – for now. It said: National cabinet agreed the interim AHPPC advice on Covid vaccination and aged care facilities.  The Australian  Health  Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) has provided advice that state and territory public health orders should not be utilised to require the Covid-19 vaccine for aged care workers at this point. There is currently a lack of evidence regarding effectiveness at preventing transmission and there is not yet a clear date by which all residents, staff, visitors and carers will have had an opportunity to be vaccinated. The AHHPC will continue to monitor the situation and will reconsider this matter and provide advice once further evidence becomes available. Currently, AHPPC believes that commonwealth and jurisdictional efforts should focus on communications to strongly encourage community uptake, which is expected to be high. Google  has threatened to remove its search engine from Australia and  Facebook  has threatened to remove news from its feed for all Australian users if a code forcing the companies to negotiate payments to news media companies goes ahead. The move would mean the 19 million Australians who use  Google  every month would no longer be able to search, and 17 million Australians who log into Facebook every month would not be able to see or post any news articles. Guardian Australia’s  Josh Taylor  has this report on what Google’s Australian managing director,  Mel Silva , said this morning before a Senate committee on a proposed news code that would force the digital platforms to enter into negotiations with news media companies for payment for content. Local news outlets, including the managing director of Guardian Australia, later appeared before the committee, speaking in favour of stronger laws protecting news publications.  Silva has also appeared in a video Google is distributing on social media.  Mel Silva, Managing Director for Google Australia, explains why there is a workable news code that doesn’t break Google Search. Learn more about what the News Media Bargaining Code means for you at  https://t.co/X4UoySQPLw   pic.twitter.com/9UjtaPW0zZ The  Morrison government  is offering  fossil fuel companies  grants of up to $250,000 to attend industry events as part of a program that is supposed to help the Australian conference industry recover from a coronavirus-induced slump. A dozen events involving the oil, coal and gas industries are among 150 so far approved by the Australian Trade and Investment Commission as part of the $50m stimulus package. They include the  International Mining and Resources Conference  (Imarc), where  police action  in 2019 to break up a blockade left one protester in hospital. Bans on travel and social distancing rules smashed the events sector in 2020. Instead of face-to-face conferences, industry bodies and other organisers either held events online or cancelled them altogether. Announcing the program in September ,  Scott Morrison  said: “Getting business events up and running again will be a critical part of the recovery of our tourism industry, but will also have huge flow-on effects through the entire economy. “This is not only about supporting events companies and venues, but will also be a shot in the arm for a broad range of businesses and the people they employ – whether it’s accommodation providers, those who build exhibitions, caterers, cleaners or those offering audio-visual services.” Businesses can claim a grant of half of many of the expenses incurred for both attending a trade show and appearing at one. Costs the government will cover include airfares, accommodation, registration of delegates, and the cost of building, installing and staffing event booths.
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Joe Biden's Oval Office: what changes has the new president made?:	The Oval Office has long symbolised the power and grandeur of the US presidency, and incoming White House incumbents traditionally change the decor to reflect the tone of their administration. Joe Biden  has unveiled the new ceremonial backdrop to his administration, marking a number of significant changes from that of his predecessor. Biden kept the curtains that hung during Donald Trump’s administration and had previously been used during Bill Clinton’s presidency. The carpet, taken from storage, is a darker blue than the Trump model. Immediately behind Biden is a bust of Cesar Chavez, the civil rights activist and leftwing labour leader. Other busts on display include Martin Luther King Jr, Rosa Parks, Eleanor Roosevelt and Robert F Kennedy. One prominent head from the Trump era has been taken away:  Winston Churchill’s . On the right of the picture is a painting of Benjamin Franklin, a founding father and consummate all-rounder. The portrait represents Biden’s interest in science and hangs near a bookshelf with a chunk of moon rock. In another piece of symbolism, Biden has removed the portrait of Andrew Jackson, the US’s populist seventh president, whose white nationalist views foreshadowed Trump’s own. Directly in front of Biden, and out of shot, is a massive portrait of Franklin D Roosevelt. Roosevelt is joined by the former   president Thomas Jefferson and former treasury secretary Alexander Hamilton, together with George Washington and Abraham Lincoln. Piled up on the famous Resolute desk are a heap of executive orders in green folders, signed on Wednesday by Biden. They mark a tearing up of Trump’s legacy and include a decision to rejoin the Paris climate treaty and the World Health Organization. Presidents have traditionally used multiple pens to sign significant legislation. These are then given to key individuals as souvenirs. Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr – whose busts are now in the Biden Oval Office – both received pens from Lyndon Johnson when Johnson signed the 1964 Civil Rights Act On an ornate table behind the president are various family photographs, including a framed picture of Biden’s late and much-missed son, Capt Beau Biden. Also visible is the president’s mother, Catherine Eugenia Finnegan, as well as the first lady, Dr Jill Biden, and their three children, plus other family members. Oh, and a snap of Biden, a Catholic, meeting Pope Francis. On the table to the right is a bust of the former president Harry Truman, Roosevelt’s successor and another one-time vice-president who made it to the top job.
Joe Biden to focus on economic recovery after Covid as 17.5m vaccine shots given in US – live:	I mentioned earlier that the  Anywhere but Washington video  features an interview with  Rep. Ilhan Omar . Here’s  some more on that interview from Oliver Laughland :  Representative Ilhan Omar began to fear for her life as soon as the evacuation began. She takes long pauses as she recalls the details. “It was a very traumatizing experience, and all of us will be traumatized by it for a really long time,” she says. “The face of the Capitol will forever be changed. They didn’t succeed in stopping the functions of democracy, but I do believe they succeeded in ending the openness of our democracy.” The 38-year-old who was first elected in 2018, was placed in the same room as the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, and the Republican Senate leader, Mitch McConnell, along with other senior figures from both parties. “Leaders from both sides seemed to be terrorised by what was taking place,” she says. “I don’t think any of them ever expected to be witnessing an insurrection against our government. And I think that watching the response from the president was completely unsettling for them as well … I think the fear of what we were dealing with grew and you could see that in the faces of all of them.” “There’s a set of expectations in functioning as a part of a long-existing democracy, and to have allowed a president to degrade our traditions and norms, make a mockery of our laws, our constitution and oaths of office. And then to still deal with people who are ‘two-siding’ every conversation, who don’t have an ability to understand the gravity of what we are dealing with … is pretty exhausting.” Read more of Oliver Laughland’s interview here:  ‘I didn’t know if I would make it out that day’ – Ilhan Omar on the terror of the Capitol attack Despite the pandemic, the NFL is still planning for Super Bowl LV on Sunday 7 February, to be hosted at the Raymond James Stadium in Tampa. This morning the NFL have announced that 7,500 vaccinated healthcare workers will be invited to the game as guests to thank them for their service during the pandemic.  In  a statement  NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell said: These dedicated health care workers continue to put their own lives at risk to serve others, and we owe them our ongoing gratitude. We hope in a small way that this initiative will inspire our country and recognize these true American heroes. This is also an opportunity to promote the importance of vaccination and appropriate health practices, including wearing masks in public settings. The NFL say that the workers, who will need to have received two doses of the vaccine, will be selected from hospitals and the healthcare systems in the Tampa and central Florida area. There are set to be 14,500 additional fans in attendance at the showpiece event.  We have this op-ed from David Sirota this morning –  To achieve a real legacy, Biden will have to be more radical and ready to fight : The fervor of the pro-Trump forces whipped up by the outgoing president could prove problematic for incoming President  Joe Biden  as he seeks to unite a divided nation. “We would not have Trump as president if the  Democrats  had remained the party of the working class,” University of California-Irvine professor Bernard Grofman recently told the New York Times .  “[Obama] responded to the housing crisis with bailouts of the lenders and interlinked financial institutions, not of the folks losing their homes. And the stagnation of wages and income for the middle and bottom of the income distribution continued under Obama.” A decade later, it’s unclear what Biden gleaned from his experience with Obama. At some moments, he appears to finally be leaning away from his decades-long record as a budget-cutting fiscal hawk, instead campaigning to expand Social Security, then  embracing  the idea of $2,000 stimulus checks and most recently declaring that “we should be investing in deficit spending in order to generate economic growth”. And yet at other moments he has done the opposite. He initially urged Democratic lawmakers to accept a stimulus plan with no stimulus checks. And tellingly, eight days after a violent rightwing uprising at the US Capitol had eviscerated the Republican party, he resuscitated and rewarded the party by signaling that – even though he needs no Republican votes – he would rather cut a deal with them on his first stimulus legislation than use ruthless legislative tactics to pass a more robust bill with only Democratic support. Read more here:  David Sirota – To achieve a real legacy, Biden will have to be more radical and ready to fight Stephen Collinson at CNN offers  his analysis of what Joe Biden is hoping to achieve with the launch of his Covid strategy . First off, Collinson points out that this isn’t some radical option: What is so striking is that Biden’s approach, while welcome, is in many cases implementing measures that a comprehensive pandemic response from the previous administration would have taken at the start. It is rooted in a bet that throwing federal government expertise, money and scale at a crisis can turn the situation around and finally provide the leadership and coordination that has been lacking in the year since coronavirus struck. However, he warns that there are some obstacles in the way that are deep-rooted in the way the US has handled the pandemic to date – and the question of fatigue setting in among the public: It is one thing to come up with a strategy. It’s another thing for Biden and his incoming team to quickly turn around often sluggish federal government machinery. The White House will need states, some of which have failed badly in all aspects of the pandemic, to respond to the new federal effort. And while Biden can change policy with his pen, he needs massive, swift investment from a tightly balanced Congress to make his plan work. Then there are the medical factors beyond his control. While hospitalizations are declining, many experts fear that it could be a temporary relief and new, more transmissible versions of the virus will quash hopes of a significant easing of the situation. And even in countries where the pandemic has been better handled, there have been a string of busted timelines over when normal life might resume. So there is a question of how much more patience the American people have. While the  Biden administration  is just getting started, the country has been locked in the purgatory of lockdowns, working and schooling from home, amid separation from family members for 10 months. Read more here:  CNN – The huge stakes of Biden’s new Covid-19 plan Speaking of DC, today we’ve published the latest in our  Anywhere but Washington video series , which sees Oliver Laughland and Tom Silverstone travel to *checks notes* Washington DC. Huh? OK, there’s a very good reason why Anywhere but Washington is actually coming from Washington for once – it was the week of Joe Biden’s inauguration and the pair arrived to find a downtown area under what is essentially military occupation and a city coming to terms with the trauma of Donald Trump’s final days in office. They speak to lifelong residents in the outer suburbs as well the US congresswoman  Ilhan Omar , who tells of her harrowing experience of the 6 January riot. Trump’s former national security adviser  John Bolton  meanwhile rails against criticisms of the Republican administration’s handling of the domestic terrorism threat. You can watch it here: Florida’s Republican  Gov. Ron DeSantis  has also tweeted this morning about bringing the national guard troops under his command back from DC. Last night, I ordered our Adjutant General to bring Florida National Guard soldiers home from the National Capital Region. Some Governors are making a bold public show of this decision, after pictures emerged of troops being forced to sleep in a parking lot which have sparked outrage. Former Trump press secretary  Kayleigh McEnany  earlier tweeted “THIS IS SICK” about the situation, before deleting the tweet. The National Guard Bureau has said of the nearly 26,000 troops deployed for the Biden inauguration, 10,600 had remained on duty, with many already having headed home. The bureau said the guard was helping states with coordination and logistics. Of the situation with the troops,  Senator Tammy Duckworth , an Iraq war veteran, tweeted last night: “Just made a number of calls and have been informed Capitol police have apologized to the guardsmen and they will be allowed back into the complex tonight. I’ll keep checking to make sure they are.” After midnight, Duckworth tweeted an update: “Troops are now all out of the garage. Now I can go to bed.” Politico reported they had been allowed back into the Capitol. Joe Biden’s new administration is faced with a monumental task in curbing the deadliest wave of the Covid-19 pandemic so far in a race against time before a new, more contagious coronavirus variant threatens already strained US health resources. The  Biden administration  has mere weeks to speed vaccine deployment, and convince more Americans to wear masks, wash hands and social distance. And it must be done amid a rocky transition, critical supply shortfalls, widespread new infections, shaky public trust and a vaccine rollout that “has been a dismal failure so far”. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has now issued stark warnings about a more infectious new variant of Covid-19, called B117.  Various scenarios could play out. In one model, Covid-19 infections decline in March, only to crest again in late April and early May driven by B117 infections.  This model  assumed there was no widespread community vaccination. In another model, B117 still overtakes current strains, but it declines alongside current dominant strains. The decline would take place in an environment of overall reduced transmission, because people maintain social distance and vaccines are distributed to about 1 million a day. This endpoint can be reached, CDC modelers said, but only if people curb the spread of Covid-19 and vaccine uptake is high. Biden has repeatedly pledged to vaccinate 100 million Americans in 100 days, which would roughly match modeling by the CDC. “We need to ask average Americans to do their part,” said Jeff Zients, the White House Covid-19 response director. “Defeating the virus requires a coordinated nationwide effort.” Read more of Jessica Glenza’s report here:  Biden team in race against time as new strain threatens to intensify Covid wave A key conservative doctors’ group pushing misinformation about Covid-19 vaccines faces growing fire from medical experts about its woeful scientific grounding, while its leader, Dr Simone Gold, was charged early this week for taking part in the 6 January  attack on the Capitol . Gold, who founded America’s Frontline Doctors last spring with help from the Tea Party Patriots organization, was arrested on Monday in Beverly Hills, where she lives, and faces charges of entering a restricted building, violent entry and disorderly conduct. Prior to her arrest, a headshot of Gold holding a bullhorn that she used to give a talk inside the Capitol appeared on an FBI flyer headlined “Seeking Information” about suspects in the Capitol attack. Gold first acknowledged her presence at the Capitol and voiced “regret” to the  Washington Post , after a video surfaced of her walking inside the Capitol. Last May, Gold’s group gained fast attention as several allied rightwing organizations, including Tea Party Patriots and the FreedomWorks Foundation, began a well-funded publicity drive attacking state lockdowns and downplaying the risks of the pandemic. Gold and her fledgling group attacked policies advocated by top scientists like Dr Anthony Fauci and other national experts on the pandemic, and they promoted misinformation at rallies in Los Angeles and Washington and on rightwing media outlets owned by Salem Radio and Pat Robertson’s Christian Broadcasting Network. Gold’s mission has included touting the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine, a phoney Covid- 19 cure that  Donald Trump  endorsed which carries serious health risks, and suggesting that the lockdown’s mental health effects were more harmful than the Covid-19 virus. Last July, Gold delivered her message at a well-publicized rally her group hosted in front of the supreme court, which drew about 10 doctors, including two ophthalmologists. Gold, who had been working at two hospitals before the rally, was fired afterwards and quickly tapped the conservative attorney and Trump ally Lin Wood to represent her. Read more of Peter Stone’s report here:  ‘Wilful ignorance’: doctor who joined Capitol attack condemned for Covid falsehoods Our  First Dog on the Moon cartoon today  tackles the vexed issue of what now for adherents of  QAnon ? Read it in full here:  First Dog on the Moon – Reality has rudely come crashing down on many adherents of QAnon Some fall-out from those overnight images of the national guard being forced to sleep in a parking lot last night – New Hampshire’s  Gov. Chris Sununu  has just tweeted that he is recalling the state’s troops from DC. Referring to the conditions that the troops endured last night, he says: “They did an outstanding job serving our nation’s capital in a time of strife and should be graciously praised, not subject to substandard conditions.” I’ve ordered the immediate return of all New Hampshire National Guard from Washington DC. They did an outstanding job serving our nation’s capital in a time of strife and should be graciously praised, not subject to substandard conditions.  @NHNationalGuard Overnight the Twitter account of Iran’s supreme leader has carried the image of a golfer resembling former President  Donald Trump  apparently being targeted by a drone, vowing revenge over the killing of a top Iranian general. Reuters note that the post carried the text of remarks  Ayatollah Ali Khamenei  made in December, in which he said “Revenge is certain”, renewing a vow of vengeance ahead of the first anniversary of the killing of military commander  General Qassem Soleimani  in Iraq by the Trump administration. “Those who ordered the murder of General Soleimani as well as those who carried this out should be punished. This revenge will certainly happen at the right time,” Khamenei tweeted on December 16, without naming Trump Earlier this month, Twitter removed a tweet by Khamenei in which he said US and British-made vaccines were unreliable and may be intended to “contaminate other nations”. The platform said the tweet violated its rules against misinformation. As of this moment the graphic illustrating a drone strike on Trump remains available on the service. Yesterday Iranian journalist Iranian journalist had called for Twitter to ban Iran’s supreme leader in  a Washington Post op-ed , writing: Many Iranian human rights activists have often wondered why Twitter and other social media organizations take so little action against the Islamic republic’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and other government officials. Meanwhile, Khamenei has banned 83 million Iranians from Twitter, although he and his allies make full use of social platforms to spread their lies — without even a hint of warning labels. The social media playing field remains starkly tilted in favor of the dictatorship. Twitter’s failure to act is also likely to anger Republicans who are already enraged that the social media platform banned Donald Trump for inciting violence. The Pentagon has announced plans to move ahead with a military trial for three men held at  Guantánamo Bay  who are suspected of involvement in the 2002 Bali bombings. After an unexplained delay, a senior military legal official on Thursday approved non-capital charges that include conspiracy, murder and terrorism for the three men, who have been in US custody for 17 years for their alleged roles in the deadly bombing of  Bali  nightclubs in 2002 and a year later of the JW Marriott Hotel in Jakarta. The bombings on the island of Bali killed 202 people, mostly foreign tourists, including 88 Australians and three New Zealanders. Military prosecutors  filed charges against Encep Nurjaman, an Indonesian known as Hambali, and the other two men in June 2017 . Hambali is alleged to have been the leader of Jemaah Islamiyah, a south-east Asian affiliate of al-Qaida. The Pentagon said in a brief statement on the case that he is accused with Mohammed Nazir bin Lep and Mohammed Farik bin Amin, who are from Malaysia, of planning and aiding the attacks. All three were captured in Thailand in 2003 and held in CIA custody before they were taken to Guantánamo three years later. The timing of the charges, which had been submitted under  Donald Trump  but not finalised, caught lawyers for the men by surprise and would seem to be in conflict with president Joe Biden’s intention to close the detention centre. Read more here:  Bali bombings – US to move ahead with trial of suspects held in Guantánamo The changes in the Oval office as  Joe Biden  takes over the presidency are maybe cosmetic, but they are laden with symbolism. The presence – or lack of it – of  a bust of Winston Churchill can make political headlines in the UK . And there are some practical differences – apparently  the little red button which Donald Trump used to summon Diet Coke has gone . My colleague Luke Harding breaks down some of the changes here:  Joe Biden’s Oval Office – what changes has the new president made? The Senate Finance Committee will vote early today Janet Yellen’s nomination for Treasury secretary , which David Lawder and Andrea Shalal at Reuters describe as an early litmus test of bipartisan support for Joe Biden’s ambitious plans for coronavirus relief, infrastructure investment and taxes. Yellen, who would be the first woman to head Treasury after breaking that same barrier as Federal Reserve chair from 2014 to 2018, is highly regarded by both her fellow Democrats and by Republicans. The vote two days after Biden became president is quick by recent standards. Biden has proposed a $1.9 trillion coronavirus relief plan and has pledged to invest $2 trillion in infrastructure, green energy projects, education and research to boost American competitiveness. Friday’s vote on Yellen’s nomination may reveal the level of Republican opposition to the Democratic president’s plans, for which he is seeking bipartisan support. Already some Republicans are expressing concerns over its price tag and increased debt in a predictable u-turn to fiscal conservatism after having no problem running up deficits with the 2017 tax cuts. Indeed, Republican Senator  Pat Toomey  said at Yellen’s hearing: “We’re looking at another spending blowout”, having previously acquiesced to the nearly $5 trillion in coronavirus spending last year under former president Trump. The committee vote is scheduled for 10:00 ET/15:00 GMT, which is early enough that it could pave the way for a full Senate confirmation vote later in the day on Friday. Yellen faces both an evenly split committee and an evenly divided full Senate, with Vice President  Kamala Harris  casting the tie-breaking vote if needed. With Yellen still awaiting confirmation, the  Biden administration  on Wednesday named Andy Baukol, a longtime career international finance official, as acting Treasury secretary. A confirmation hearing for Deputy Treasury Secretary nominee Wally Adeyemo has not yet been scheduled. It’s hardly the most important metric in the world but presumably it will irk former president  Donald Trump  that  roughly 40 million people watched live coverage of Democrat Joe Biden’s inauguration as US president  on the six major domestic TV networks – a 4% increase on the 38.3m that tuned in for Trump’s swearing-in four years ago. The figure covers the 30-minute span starting at 11:45 on Wednesday, when Biden took the oath of office and delivered his inaugural address. It includes the audience on broadcasters ABC, CBS and NBC and cable channels Fox News, CNN and MSNBC. Reuters note that the swearing-in of Democrat Barack Obama in 2009 as the first Black US president drew 51.2 million viewers. TV viewing figures do not capture people who tuned in via digital platforms such as Twitter, Facebook, YouTube or this live blog, that streamed the event live. Time magazine had a bit of a deeper dive into the figures, which go some way to highlight the partisanship in broadcast audiences: The 6.53 million people who watched Biden take the oath of office and deliver his inaugural address on MSNBC was a whopping 338% bigger than its audience for Trump’s swearing in four years ago. On the flip side, Fox News Channel’s audience of 2.74 million for Biden represented a nearly 77% drop from its viewership for Trump in 2017. A quick foreign policy snap from Reuters here – the Kremlin said this morning it welcomed the stated intention of president  Joe Biden  to extend the New Start arms control treaty with Russia, but said that Moscow wanted to see concrete proposals from Washington. The White House said yesterday that Biden would seek a five-year extension of the arms control treaty that is due to expire in early February , in one of the first major foreign policy decisions of the new administration. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said it was important to see the detail of the US proposal. The Trump administration had sought to attach conditions to any renewal, something Moscow rejected. Amanda Gorman, the 22-year-old poet who stole the show with her poem The Hill We Climb at the presidential inauguration on Wednesday, has landed yet another book deal, with her forthcoming debuts shooting straight to the top of the charts. Hours after she stepped off the dais, publisher Penguin Children’s announced that it would be releasing Gorman’s poem  as a hardcover book in spring,  with plans to print 150,000 copies in the first run, unprecedented even for a whole poetry collection, “due to overwhelming demand”. Days before Gorman’s reading, it was also announced that her debut collection,  also titled The Hill We Climb,  will be published on 21 September in the US. The national youth poet laureate’s first picture book,  Change Sings , written as a children’s anthem, is due to come out the same day. Both books shot to the top of Amazon’s charts within minutes of Gorman taking to the stage, with the poet sharing her reactions to her newfound fame on social media. “I’m dying!” she shouted in one Instagram story, as she watched a newsreader on television read a glowing tweet addressed to her from Lin-Manuel Miranda, the creator of the musical Hamilton, which inspired part of her poem. In another video, she was filmed staring at Amazon on a laptop, where The Hill We Climb and Change Sings reached No 1 and No 2 respectively on the overall book charts. “Y’all my Instagram literally is broken, this is not a game, this is not a joke. I just looked up and had one million followers,” she said. “I can’t even post anything … there is so much love and support coming via the app, so thank you so much. This is wild.” Joe Biden has opened his presidency with a flurry of executive orders aimed at targeting the economic and pandemic crises the Democrat has inherited from the previous Trump administration. However, for CNN, Zachary Wolf argues that  executive orders aren’t a solution – they’re a symptom : This yo-yo style of government is not how things are supposed to work in the US. Big policy changes are supposed to move through Congress and then to the president’s desk, molded by the compromises necessary to get everyone to agree. Instead, with Congress absolutely stuck on key issues for the past 15 years – give or take – presidents have settled into a pattern of making executive policy on their own, which has resulted in them doing and then undoing each other on key issues. (That is, unless the courts step in first.) Presidents have power. The actions Biden signed on Thursday were meant to focus the federal government’s efforts on Covid, create a national effort to get kids back in schools, encourage mask usage, mobilize FEMA and the national guard to help get vaccines into communities, harness local pharmacies and reinsert the US in the worldwide Covid effort. But other actions he signed, including the major ones on Wednesday – re-joining the global climate change effort and protecting undocumented children raised in the US – are the duct-tape version of governing. Biden essentially undid what Trump had done to undo what Obama had done. Read more here:  CNN – Executive orders aren’t a solution. They’re a symptom
‘It’s being built on our blood’: the true cost of Saudi Arabia’s $500bn megacity:	“The future has a new home,” proclaims the website. “It’s a virgin area that has a lot of beauty,” says the voice over a string section soundtrack as the  promotional video  tracks colour-tinted panoramic shots of picturesque desert expanses, and deep azure lagoons. “Better humans, better society,” it boasts extravagantly. The brainchild of Crown Prince  Mohammed bin Salman , the new city state of Neom, named from a combination of the Greek word for “new” and the Arabic term for “future”, is intended to cover an area the size of Belgium at the far north of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea coastline. There has been no shortage of outlandish promises for the $500bn (£400bn) city-state. According to  strategy documents leaked last year , the project may include a huge artificial moon, glow-in-the-dark beaches, flying drone-powered taxis, robotic butlers to clean the homes of residents and a Jurassic Park-style attraction featuring animatronic lizards. Advertising materials stressed Neom will be built on “virgin” land, ready to be conquered with futuristic technology. “In 10 years from now we will be looking back and we will say we were the first ones to come here,” declares a Neom staff member featured in the video. Yet part of the site is the home of the Huwaitat tribe, who have spanned  Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Sinai peninsula for generations, tracing their lineage back before the founding of the Saudi state. At least 20,000 members of the tribe now face eviction due to the project, with no information about where they will live in the future. “For the Huwaitat tribe, Neom is being built on our blood, on our bones,” says Alia Hayel Aboutiyah al-Huwaiti, an outspoken activist and member of the tribe living in London. “It’s definitely not for the people already living there! It’s for tourists, people with money. But not for the original people living there.” For some Saudis, the Huwaiti tribe among them, Neom, with its parallel legal system reporting directly to the king, represents an elite version of Saudi society, one designed simply to shut them out. Residents and visitors to the site will probably be allowed to drink alcohol and enjoy fine dining in a futuristic version of paradise that is also set to include a vast  data-gathering network , including drone and facial-recognition technology covering the entire city-state. The  death  of Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti on 13 April highlighted the tension between the tribe and the kingdom’s development plans. A resident of the town of Khuraibat, he had become the face of the tribes’ criticism of their forced eviction, voicing complaints in videos posted to social media, and appearing in others’ videos.  One  piece of footage showed him confronting a Saudi official who visited the town to speak with residents. Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti made one of his last  videos  in mid-April. “They have begun the process of removing people, beginning with surveying homes with the intent of removing people and deporting them from their land,” he said, referring to the security forces in his town. “They arrested anyone who said they’re against deportation, they don’t want to leave, they want to remain [in] their homes, that they don’t want money. “I would not be surprised if they come to kill me in my house now, and place a weapon next to me,” he added. Later the same day, he shot a video from his rooftop of the police down below. “See them? The police have come to get me,” he  said . Others from Khuraibat recorded  videos  of gunfire from outside his house. Later, they recorded  footage  inside his house, pockmarked with bullet holes. In a statement, the Saudi authorities  claimed  he’d been killed in a shootout with regional security forces, stating that Abdul Rahim injured two after he shot back. His supporters have described the shooting as “an extrajudicial killing”. So too have rights groups. “They killed him to set an example – anyone opening their mouth gets the same treatment,” says Alia al-Huwaiti. According to the Saudi rights group Al Qst, the authorities have  since  worked to cover up Abdul Rahim’s killing and placate the tribe. “They are hoping to pull off a major publicity stunt by getting prominent figures among the Huwaitat to publicly disown Abdul Rahim and ‘renew their allegiance’ to the king,” said the group. This was accompanied by the arrest of eight members of the tribe. For Alia al-Huwaiti, the killing of Abdul Rahim and the forced displacement of the Huwaitat people highlights the kingdom’s lack of care towards tribal communities long dominated and suppressed by the state. “MBS [Mohammad Bin Salman] began by telling the tribes: ‘We will develop your area, you will make money.’ They believed him at first. By 2019, they said ‘We will empty three villages, and force people to move,’” she says. “There is nothing called a tribe for Mohammed bin Salman,” she adds. “He doesn’t care about the tribes.” Alia said she has received death threats for posting about the plight of Abdul Rahim and the tribe on social media, including threats she has reported to the British police. The public relations team for Neom, as well as executives from the management consulting firm Teneo, hired by Saudi authorities  for more than $2m  last year to represent the project, did not return requests for comment. The Saudi Arabian embassy in Washington DC did not respond to a request for comment. But Ali Shihabi,  a member of the Neom advisory board , told the Guardian that the displaced members of the tribe would be compensated. “Practice in Saudi has been that people have to accept it, and have usually done so because the government has a tradition of compensating generously.” He said he did not know how much members of the tribe would be compensated, or when. “We anticipated there might be problems, especially with as large of a land grab as Neom. It’s inevitable that there would be some kind of forced displacement happening,” says James Suzano, of the European-Saudi Organisation for Human Rights. “When the state has done this before, it was accompanied by human rights violations.” The destruction of communities on the Neom site follows decades of tensions between the House of Saud and the tribes it has ruled over since the creation of the Saudi state in 1932. Exerting control over the land through construction projects or destruction of some heritage sites have marked this rule. In 2017, the UN  condemned  the kingdom’s forced demolition of the walled city of Awamia, in the eastern Qatif region, as violating human rights. Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur for cultural rights, said that “historic buildings have been irremediably burned down and damaged by the use of various weapons by the military, forcing residents out of their homes and of the neighbourhood, fleeing for their lives”. A $10bn King Abdullah financial district in Riyadh,  intended  as a “special zone,” has sputtered since its inception in 2006, weathering construction delays and confusion over its purpose, even after government attempts at a relaunch in 2016. Critics of Neom say the project risks the same fate. Construction is ploughing ahead despite the challenges of the pandemic and the  historic drop  in the price of oil, Saudi’s primary export. The project is part of the crown prince’s flagship Vision 2030 project, intended to diversify the economy away from oil, which has sustained the kingdom since the early 20th century. Yet the funds required to see Neom realised will inevitably require oil wealth. “It’s quite revealing that [Neom] is more of a vanity project targeting the domestic elite and an international audience in terms of a new Saudi, one that’s open and economically or socially liberal,” says Josh Cooper, of Al Qst. “But at the same time, not allowing the involvement of local actors or interests in these decision-making processes.” For Cooper, Neom is less a shining vision of the future than a grim symbol of Saudi human rights violations, underscored by the treatment of the Huwaitat tribe. “It shows the lack of platforms people have to express their opinions, even on less contentious matters than civil or political rights,” he says.
UK Covid: Priti Patel announces £800 house party fine; 1,290 further Covid-related deaths reported - as it happened:	Next week we will be introducing a new £800 fine for those attending house parties, which will double for each repeat offence to a maximum level of £6,400. These fines will apply to those who attend illegal gatherings of more than 15 people in homes. The science is clear: such irresponsible behaviour poses a significant threat to public - not only to those in attendance, but also to the wonderful police officers who attend to shut down these events. The executive today has reviewed the current restrictions and agreed that they remain an appropriate and necessary response to the serious and imminent threat posed by Covid-19. Following a detailed outline from health highlighting continuing pressures on hospitals and intensive care units and the emergence of highly-transmissible variants the executive has agreed that the restrictions will be extended for four weeks until March 5 2021. Today's vaccination data shows that yesterday was the biggest day of the UK vaccination programme so far - 363,508 people were vaccinated.  https://t.co/o46oqIKaAx That’s all from me for today. But our coverage continues on our global coronavirus live blog. It’s here. With  Boris Johnson  playing down the prospect of an early release from the lockdown, the  Covid Recovery Group , which represents Tory MPs pushing for restrictions to be lifted, has renewed its call for the measures to be eased from early March. In a statement its chairman, the Conservative MP  Mark Harper , said: Once the top four risk groups have been vaccinated and fully protected by 8 March - assuming the government hits the 15 February deadline - the government must start easing the restrictions.  Vaccinations will of course bring immunity from Covid, but they must bring immunity from lockdowns and restrictions too. Of course we must relax restrictions in a way that is proportionate and safe. The top four at-risk groups account for about 88% of deaths and about 55% of hospitalisations from Covid - that gives us a good guide to the reduction in risk and therefore a roadmap to the rollback of restrictions. Ministers must come forward now with a plan for lifting restrictions. People must see light at the end of the tunnel and feel hope for the future, and businesses need to be able to plan our recovery as more and more of the vaccinations are rolled out to the most vulnerable groups. Q: Was it a mistake to ease restrictions over Christmas given how high the death toll now? Patel  says every death is tragedy. But the government has always acted on the basis of scientific advice. That has always been the case and remains the case, she says. Q: Would you introduce fines for people who jump the queue for vaccines? Patel  says she agrees that doing this is reprehensible. All measures are kept under review, she says. And that’s it. The press conference is over. Q: Is the government considering putting new arrivals to the UK in hotels? (See  3.02pm.) Patel  says those are “speculative measures”. She says strong measures are already in place. Q: Are you disappointed that  No 10 has ruled out including police officers in the first wave of the vaccination programme? Patel  says this a decision for the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation. But she says she is working on ensuring the police can be prioritised in phase two. Hewitt  says he would like to see police officers vaccinated as a priority. Q: What proportion of people are refusing to have vaccines? And are you worried about any particular group? Diwakar  says there is a huge amount of acceptance of the vaccine from people. There is a real sense of hope. There are communities with legitimate concerns about the vaccine. Black and Asian people have longstanding concerns, going back generations to when unethical experiments were carried out in the last century. He says the government will be tireless in addressing these concerns. From my colleague  Peter Walker  Unlike some of her fellow ministers,  Priti Patel  doesn't openly dodge questions. It's more than she spends five minutes making a series of apparently unconnected sentences until you're not quite sure what she meant, what the question was, or why it mattered in the first place. Q: Are there any circumstances in which the government will lift the lockdown in three weeks’ time?  Patel  says it is “far too early” to say or even speculate on when it might be possible to lift the restrictions. The priority is to make sure the most vulnerable people are vaccinated, she says. Diwakar  says he has learnt in this pandemic that you cannot look more than a few days, or a couple of weeks, ahead. So it is too early to look ahead to the lifting of lockdown, he says. Q: You seem to be blaming the public, when perhaps the rules are at fault. Should they be stronger? Patel  says the majority of the public are following the rules.  She says we have heard shocking examples of people breaking the rules. People want to know that people are being punished, she says. She says it is right that the government is doing “everything at the border” to protect the rollout of the vaccine. All measures are under review. The vaccine rollout is a “great British success story”, she says. She says it is right to protect it. Hewitt  says the police are not blaming the public. They are working with the public. But you have to focus on people breaking the rules, he says. He says he does not accept that, if 150 people attend a party, they don’t know the rules. Q: Should people be booking a foreign summer holiday? Patel  says it is far too early to speculate on what the situation will be in the summer. We are still in lockdown, she says. She says people are not allowed to travel. She says there are stringent measures at the borders for a very good reason - to protect health. Diwakar  repeats the point about there being “early glimmers of hope” from what the lockdown is achieving. Q: In  Northern Ireland  the lockdown is being extended. Will this happen in England? Patel  says it is too early to speak about new measures. The advice now is to follow the rules, she says. Diwakar  says it is very early, but there are “some glimmers” of positive news in the numbers. Hospital admissions have stabilised, he suggests. But he says that has not fed through to figures for people in intensive care beds. Q: Will there be tighter controls at the borders? Patel  says all measures are kept under review. Q: Why have the definitions of key workers being broadened to allow more children to stay in schools?  Patel  says in schools measures are in place to protect pupils and teachers.  (She does not even come close to addressing the question.) She passes this on to  Diwakar  who says a “difficult balance” must be struck. But the key point is that schools must be safe. (He obviously does not know anything about why the criteria were broadened either.) Dr Vin Diwakar , NHS England regional medical director for London, is speaking now. He talks about the new vaccination centres opening in England, including one in a mosque in Birmingham. (See  4.09pm.) He says he was horrified that  some people have been trying to jump the queue for vaccine because of an IT loophole.  That is “morally reprehensible”, he says, because it denies the vaccine to someone who needs it more. Martin Hewitt , chair of the National Police Chiefs’ Council, is speaking now. He welcomes the announcement about the new fine. He says the police have been asking for a power like this. There has been a significant increase in the number of fines issued to people breaching lockdown rules, he says. He says up to Monday 250 fines had been issued by forces in England to people attending large gatherings. He gives examples of parties the police have had to break up. Last week in Brick Lane in London, following reports from neighbours, offices attended a house party where there were more than 40 people indoors. Those people in there were hostile to the police, three officers were injured and one actually required hospital treatment. And we also found drugs on the premises. Patel  is reading out more figures from the dashboard, including the death figures. (See  4.27pm  and  4.52pm.) She says most people are obeying the rules. But some are not. She says she is announcing that from next week there will be a new £800 fine for people attending house parties. It will double for every repeat offence, going up to a maximum fine of £6,400. These fines will apply to people who attend illegal gatherings of more than 15 people in homes, she says. Patel  says she wants to counter vaccine disinformation, particularly aimed at black and minority ethnic people. She says the vaccine is safe. She would urge everyone to get it.
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
The teenage taekwondo trainer fighting child marriage in Zimbabwe – photo essay:	I t is 11am on a Sunday and Natsiraishe Maritsa, 17, is running through some workout drills with a group of sweating teenage girls from her neighbourhood in Epworth, a poor township nine miles (15km) south-east of the capital, Harare. On a normal Sunday, Maritsa and her friends would be attending church, but the strict 30-day lockdown imposed by the government earlier this month has banned religious gatherings – so it’s time to catch up on a taekwondo training session. Maritsa shouts instructions as the group punch, kick and break a sweat in the morning sun in her yard, where she has created a makeshift training ground. Natsiraishe Maritsa runs through taekwondo stretching drills at her family home in Epworth. Among those attending are young mothers and girls who were forced into child marriages, a practice common in Epworth and across  Zimbabwe , where many under the age of 16 are married off by poor families who would otherwise struggle to provide for them. According to Girls Not Brides, which campaigns  for an end to child marriages , about  34% of girls in Zimbabwe are married before they are 18  while 5% are married before they are 15. Maritsa works with young children from her community. Maritsa keeps a journal of heart-rending testimonies from some of the teen mothers who confide in her about their abusive marriages. One of her most promising taekwondo students was recently stopped from attending training sessions by her husband. “The girls are being abused. There is one lady who told me that she was stabbed with a knife by her husband and was threatened with death,” Maritsa says. After losing most of her friends to early marriages from the age of 13, Maritsa looked for ways to raise awareness about the dangers of the practice. Maritsa practises at home. “I decided to do something for the girl child. I had to create a foundation so that they grow up in a better environment.  Most of my friends got married due to poverty  and others were forced by their guardians because their parents had died,” she says. According to girls’ rights organisations, teenage pregnancies and marriages have been rising since Zimbabwe announced its first lockdown in March last year. The situation has been worsened by the protracted closure of schools and growing poverty, with families’ livelihoods suffering amid harsh economic conditions. Marrying off their young daughters is the easy way out. Zimbabwe outlawed marriage for girls under the age of 18 in 2016, but the practice has continued and become more acceptable in poorer communities such as Epworth.  Maritsa’s neighbourhood. In 2018, Maritsa set up her foundation, Underaged People’s Auditorium, which seeks to stop more children becoming brides, through a combination of taekwondo and discussions about the dangers of early marriage. With scant resources, the organisation has helped raise awareness of the dangers of child marriage for 40 teenage mothers and young women. Driven by her desire to see an end to early marriages, Maritsa has used the lockdown to engage parents. She has vowed to use her influence in taekwondo to further the campaign. In 2019 she won two gold medals at the Epworth Junior Cadet Championships and a silver medal at the Korean Ambassador trophy. “A lot of people look down on Epworth, but I would like the world to know that something big can come out of a despised place,” Maritsa says. Having started taekwondo at the age of five, Maritsa has inspired her 10-year-old sister to take up the sport with the help of their father – a taekwondo and fitness enthusiast. Family life revolves around taekwondo in a household where everyone is an enthusiast. Maritsa dreams of joining the Zimbabwe air force as an armament engineer and fancies a shot at representing her country in the sport. “I took taekwondo as a sport because I want to take part in taekwondo [at the] Olympics. Although Covid-19 has slowed me down in terms of my training, I believe I can still make it,” Maritsa says, showing off her medals in the family lounge. Her mother, Ndanatseyi Karigundu, says her daughter’s struggle against child marriage should be taken up by every adult in Epworth. Maritsa with her brothers and sister and their mother. “Adults must report what is happening within the community, but [that] is something that is not happening because of poverty. Parents are consenting to their little girls’ marriages and it is sad. It is not good for parents to accept  lobola  [dowry] for the young girls,” Karigundu says. Mainly made up of families who migrated from rural areas in the early 1990s looking for work, Epworth’s girls are often married off to richer men or into polygamy. Inspired by their daughter’s passion to see an end to child marriage, Maritsa’s parents have joined the campaign. They say, however, that it has been a significant task to change deep-rooted attitudes. “We always hear sad stories here when Natsi is conducting her sessions. If we had resources, we would help them rebuild their lives. I am planning to help them start a soap-making business so that they can grow from there,” says her father, Richard Maritsa. Maritsa’s parents, Richard and Ndanatseyi; Desire Mtunzi, 17: ‘I think child marriages are not good for the girl child.’ One of Maritsa’s students, 17-year-old Desire Mtunzi, agrees: “I have been coming for the sessions for about three months. It helps me keep fit and I learn about early marriages. I think child marriages are not good for the girl child.” Maritsa is also determined to get teenage mothers back into school. In Mbare, southern Harare, a group of young mothers gather for a support session at a community centre. Most of them dropped out of school after becoming pregnant. At sessions organised by nonprofit group Ignite Youth girls are encouraged to create vision boards and set achievable targets for themselves, which include returning to school. An initiative that started as a Covid-19 response has become a life changing experience. Master and pupils. Emily Nderezima, 17, who could not finish her O-levels after becoming pregnant, oozes confidence after her first training. “I have learned how to take responsibility as a mum. I have the power and strength to achieve my goals,” she says. Ignite Youth founder Tadzi Madzima says the programme is aimed at dealing with stigma associated with teenage pregnancy. Although Zimbabwean law now  prevents pregnant girls being expelled from school , society still stigmatises them, she says.  “As much as we applaud the fact that teen mums can continue with their education after giving birth, a lot [is still needed] to educate parents, teachers and communities on how stigmatisation of teen mums is unfair and detrimental to their future.”
