No power, no water, no hope: inside Europe’s largest shanty town:	D espite the daily trials her family has to endure – a pandemic, three months with no electricity and now days without running water since Storm Filomena froze the pipes and left Madrid under a lingering duvet of snow – Sara Benayad has not forgotten the importance of hospitality. She would welcome the powers-that-be to join her in the novel ritual into which the absence of water has forced her. Every night before bed, Benayad fills saucepans and buckets with snow that must be melted on the gas stove the next morning so there is water for washing and for the dishes. “I’d really like anyone who’s responsible for this to come and spend the night with us,” she says. “We’d be honoured to have them. They can sleep in my house and suffer and live what we’re living. Maybe then they’d do something.” Filomena has brought Madrid’s heaviest snows in 50 years , claimed four lives, torn the limbs off tens of thousands of trees and managed the rare feat of leaving the capital in a state of icy, suspended animation. But no part of Spain has been hit quite as mercilessly as the Cañada Real,  the shanty town 12km from the centre of Madrid  that is home to Benayad and 8,500 other people, most of them of Moroccan or Roma descent. Since the beginning of October, the 4,500 people who live in Sectors 5 and 6 of Europe’s largest informal settlement  have been without power . The electricity provider, Naturgy, says it has never cut off the supply to the Cañada Real and blames the outages on huge surges in the two sectors that mean the network is forced to shut down for safety reasons.  It says there are only four registered users in the two sectors – despite there being some 1,500 houses in the area – adding that it has continued to provide electricity “despite the serious economic damages” caused by people illegally tapping the supply. The regional government of Madrid says the surges are due to marijuana plantations in the shanty town that have been hooked up to the supply and are drawing so much power that the system trips time and time again. The people of Sectors 5 and 6 dispute the claims but say they are beside the point. The lack of electricity, they say, is putting their lives – and the lives of 1,800 children in the area – in grave danger. If the situation was desperate before, Filomena has brought the Cañada Real to the brink. “We’ve had lots of difficult times here,” says Beatriz Aragón, a doctor who has worked in the town since 2007. “We’ve had loads of fires and floods but they happened and then they stopped. And we’ve had winter power cuts before. But we’ve never seen anything like this.” The death of a 74-year-old man  who lived in Sector 6 has led to a legal complaint against the authorities, while Aragón says between 40 and 50 people have suffered from carbon monoxide poisoning because of the butane heaters used by those who can afford them. “We’re seeing children with chilblains because their hands have been destroyed by the cold, and respiratory infections,” says the doctor. “But the most worrying thing is how all this will play out with  the third wave of Covid . One family told me yesterday they had no way to keep warm so they all shared a bed with their daughter, who’s got a fever. ‘If we don’t do that, we’ll freeze,’ they said. Having this in the middle of a pandemic is just a perfect storm.” Aragón and her colleagues have been advising mothers and babies who can stay with relatives elsewhere to leave the Cañada Real until the temperature begins to rise. “It’s not what you want to do during a pandemic, but you’ve got to choose between what’s bad and what would be worse.” Aura Morales, who works for the socio-educational  Barró Association , is equally blunt in her assessment of the damage that is being done to the town’s younger residents. “Everything gets worse if you don’t have electricity,” she says. “Some of the kids are doing their homework inside cold cars so they can see what they’re doing.” Other children use their parents’ mobiles to try to keep up with their lessons while schools in the region remain closed because of the snow. The phones serve a dual purpose: once lessons have been downloaded, the built-in torches are used so children can see what they’re writing after the sun goes down. Loubna El Azmani, a community worker who lives with her family in Sector 6, says the people of the town are doing everything they can to explain their desperate circumstances to the outside world. “We’ve demonstrated and written letters and reported the situation to the authorities,” she says. “Everybody knows what’s going on here but nobody wants to react. But they need to before there’s an ever greater tragedy here.” Towards the end of December, a group of UN special rapporteurs  called on the Spanish government to ensure that the power was restored immediately , warning: “The lack of electricity not only violates these children’s right to adequate housing, it is having a very serious effect on their rights to health, food, water, sanitation and education.” The problem, however, is that responsibility for the Cañada Real is shared between three local town halls (including Madrid city hall), the government of the Madrid region, and the central government’s delegate to the region. Between the drip-drip of the slowly thawing ice, locals swear they can just make out the sound of the buck being passed once again. Almost four years after a deal was signed to rehouse hundreds of families, 130 have been rehomed by the regional government and Madrid city hall. It is, as a spokesman for the regional government points out, a gradual process. “The idea is to spread families out across the region so that you don’t end up with more ghettos,” he says. “It’s very complicated – it’s not like buying cars and sticking them in a garage; it’s about finding homes for people.” In the meantime, the city and regional governments have been offering residents emergency shelter and butane canisters to see them through Filomena and its aftermath. According to Madrid city hall, of the 17 families identified as being especially vulnerable, only two took up the offer of moving to a shelter. Some residents say they have turned down the offer because they are afraid of mixing with others during the Covid pandemic, and are puzzled as to why temporary accommodation is being proffered when all they want is their electricity back. As the wait goes on, the children of the Cañada Real do what children do in the snow. The younger ones build snowmen, throw snowballs and slide down the frozen embankments on rubbish sacks. The older ones toss sheets of cardboard on to makeshift bonfires for a few seconds of flaring warmth or dash about, aware that they will be warmer rushing around outside than they would be indoors. The town’s older residents are finding it far harder to cope with the lack of power, both literal and figurative. “Morale has gone through the floor,” says Benayad, who gave up her job in a recycling business a month ago so she could look after her family. “This is a national disgrace – and it’s happening in a developed country in  Europe  in 2021.” If the authorities are serious about getting people out of the Cañada Real, she adds, they need to offer clear solutions. “The way things are going, the only people they’ll manage to get out of here are the dead ones.” Additional reporting by Pablo García Sacristán
UK inflation rises to 0.6%; London average house price exceeds £500,000 – business live:	Bitcoin is not enjoying a Biden Bounce today, though. It’s fallen over 5%, or nearly $2,000, to around $34,500 after Treasury secretary nominee Janet Yellen warned that cryptocurrencies could be used for illicit activities such as terrorist financing. Yellen was speaking during her Senate confirmation hearing yesterday. Business Insider has more details .  Senator Maggie Hassan yesterday asked Yellen about the dangers of terrorists using cryptocurrencies during the latter’s Treasury confirmation hearing.  Yellen said: You’re absolutely right that the technologies to accomplish this change over time, and we need to make sure that our methods for dealing with these matters, with terrorist financing, change along with changing technology. “Cryptocurrencies are a particular concern. I think many are used - at least in a transaction sense - mainly for illicit financing. “And I think we really need to examine ways in which we can curtail their use and make sure that money laundering doesn’t occur through those channels.” #Bitcoin  plunges >5% on latest sign lawmakers & regulators could get tough on cryptocurrencies. Janet Yellen suggested lawmakers 'curtail' use of Bitcoin amid terrorism concerns. Yellen said cryptocurrency transactions mainly used for 'illicit financing'.  https://t.co/0aEsQcH7kW   pic.twitter.com/2Huls8zqXd European stock markets have had a decent morning, lifted by the prospect of stimulus measures from the new team in the White House and the easing of Covid-19 restrictions this year. The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 is up 0.5%, with gains in Frankfurt and Paris. In London, though, the  FTSE  100 is flat, with multinational shares being held back by a stronger pound (currently up half a cent at $1.367). Joshua Mahony,  Senior Market Analyst at  IG , says investors hope Joe Biden’s inauguration will lead to  a period of greater stability, as well as fresh stimulus spending . “The pomp and ceremony of inauguration day has come with a similarly chipper outlook from European markets, with traders hoping this marks the beginning of a more stable four years.  “European markets are preparing looking forward with optimism this morning, with Joe Biden’s inauguration marking the end of a four-year period that married up both Brexit and global trade uncertainty. Electrical goods retailer Dixons Carphone has benefitted from the boom in home cooking and computer gaming during the pandemic,  my colleague Joanna Partridge explains: Locked-down European consumers bought big-screen TVs, food preparation gadgets and health and beauty appliances, handing  Dixons Carphone’s  11% more revenue from selling electrical items over the Christmas trading period than a year earlier. The retailer, which owns the Currys PC World brand, said computing and gaming products were also big sellers during the festive period and online sales had grown by more than 120%..... The number of UK companies which collapsed into administration slumped to historic lows last year, as the government’s coronavirus support measures proved to be a lifeline for many businesses.  1,112 companies fell into administration during 2020, a 22% fall compared with 2019, according to the restructuring practice at accountant KPMG, which analysed notices in  The Gazette . The coronavirus job retention scheme, rent and tax deferrals, grants and loans all combined to support firms which saw income dry up as a result of Covid restrictions, leading to the lowest annual number of administrations since KPMG started tracking the data in 2005. Leisure and hospitality companies, which have struggled the most to trade during restrictions, represented the lion’s share of insolvencies in the final quarter of the year following by building and construction firms, real estate businesses and retailers. Blair Nimmo , head of restructuring for  KPMG  in the UK, warned that the figures “provide a distorted view of reality” and that companies will struggle once support measures are eased:  “Those businesses that remain in hibernation due to ongoing lockdown measures, such as those in the leisure and hospitality and travel and tourism sectors, continue to accrue liabilities while seeing precious little cash flow into the business. At some point, rent and tax deferrals and loans will need to be repaid. The job retention scheme will unwind. Weaning off these support schemes is going to be a massive challenge for many.”  While inflation rose in the UK last month , it remains elusive in the eurozone. Consumer prices fell by 0.3% year-on-year in December, for the fourth month running, according to statistics body Eurostat. Cheaper energy kept inflation below zero, it says: In December, the highest contribution to the annual euro area inflation rate came from services (+0.30 percentage points, pp), followed by food, alcohol & tobacco (+0.25 pp), non-energy industrial goods (-0.14 pp) and energy (-0.68 pp)  Euro area annual  #inflation  stable at -0.3% in December 2020  https://t.co/YLhzuo1mpw   pic.twitter.com/2WosWPRLnH Estate agency Chestertons has confirmed that the housing market was busy in November -- even though England was  under its second national lockdown . It carried out 44% more valuations and brought 76% more new properties to the market than in November 2019 (when the looming general election and Brexit uncertainty may have dampened demand). Guy Gittins, Chestertons MD says:  “The second lockdown no doubt encouraged some people to put their property search on hold, but we didn’t notice a big difference and activity levels were still a lot higher than we anticipated for this time of year. Part of this was driven by the incentive of the stamp duty saving, but we believe the main driver was that people just wanted to move as quickly as possible while conditions were favourable.” The 7.6% jump in UK house prices last year  is a blow to those trying to get onto the housing ladder. But Ross Counsell, chartered surveyor and director at  Good Move , suggests 2021 will be better for buyers, as the stamp duty holiday expires:   “So why are the house prices so high? We can put this growth down to the influx of people looking to buy property in 2020, both before the end of the Stamp Duty Holiday in March, and due to many people simply looking for more spacious properties, particularly in rural locations, during lockdown. Mortgage approvals too are at an all-time 13 year high, and with such high demand for properties and mortgages, naturally comes higher average house prices. “The property market is incredibly competitive, and becoming increasingly more selective for lenders choosing who to lend to. However, it’s not all bad news. Despite these record high house prices, we expect them to fall after the end of the Stamp Duty Holiday in March. And as the world hopefully resumes some normalcy this year, we do not expect 2021 to follow 2020’s footsteps with the staggeringly high house prices, and we therefore expect 2021 to be a solid year for buyers.” Some campaigners have been pushing chancellor  Rishi Sunak to extend the stamp duty holiday  in his March budget, or even to replace council tax and stamp duty with ‘a proportional property tax (PPT). Jamie Durham, economist at PwC, says the stamp duty holiday drove prices up in London: “Prices in the capital rose by nearly 10% on an annual basis, adding £45,000 to the average home in 12 months, and  pushing the average house price to over £500,000 for the first time . The stamp duty holiday is a particular benefit in London and is likely to have played a significant part in this strong price growth, as the higher average house prices means that more stamp duty is typically due.”  “Despite a weak economy and the considerable impact of COVID-19, this data shows that the housing market has continued to perform strongly, buoyed by the stamp duty holiday, pent up demand and preference changes brought about by the pandemic.” “There continues to be a lot of uncertainty in the outlook. The vaccine rollout could help to support the economic recovery and in turn the housing market. However, there is a risk that activity could drop off over the next couple of months as the stamp duty holiday comes to an end. Assuming the Chancellor does not extend the holiday in the March budget, that could feed through to weaker price growth in the coming quarters.” Property website Rightmove warned on Monday that time is running out to avoid stamp duty, and some buyers could be hit with a tax bill if they can’t complete in time.... Here’s Noble Francis, economics director at the Construction Products Association, on  the jump in London house prices in the last year :  ... & the increases in house prices in £ in the year to November 2020 according to the ONS/Land Registry. The £45,240 increase in London house prices was compared with a relative low point in November 2019 due to political (Brexit & General Election) uncertainty...  #ukhousing   pic.twitter.com/RQSwCzcX1h The updated chart of average London house prices (that in November 2020 were 9.7% or £45,240 higher than a year ago according to the ONS/Land Registry) & mortgage rates between January 2004 & November 2020.  #ukhousing   #london   #ukhouseprices   pic.twitter.com/puCmns9LzH The average London house price has risen over £500,000 for the first time, as the stamp duty holiday helped to  fuel demand for property during the pandemic. New figures from the Office for National Statistics show that the average price in the capital hit £514,000 in November 2020, a jump of 9.7% over the last year. That’s a record high and the first time London’s average house prices have surpassed £500,000. The ONS reports that the temporary suspension of stamp duty (on the first £500,000 of a house purchase in England) was one factor driving the market. It also cites pent-up demand following the first lockdown, and changes in housing preferences (as some families seek homes with more space due to rising remote working). London’s annual house price growth has followed a sharp upward trend seen in most regions in recent months, likely reflecting a range of factors including pent-up demand, changes in housing preferences and the temporary reduction in property transaction taxes, which are due to end on 31 March 2021. Looking at the picture within London, house prices have grown more quickly in Inner London than Outer London for some time. In November 2020, two London boroughs had annual house price growth above 20%, one is in Inner London (Kensington and Chelsea, at 28.6%), while the Outer London borough of Brent had annual price growth of 23.9%. The annual growth rate in Brent is partly caused by a base effect as the average house price decreased by 11.9% between October and November 2019 and increased by 2.8% between October and November 2020. The ONS also points to demand for investors, and  people looking to move to the UK from Hong Kong  following China’s clampdown on the city state. Demand for property in Inner London may be particularly responsive to temporary property tax changes as property prices are high and therefore so is the corresponding tax to be paid. In addition, compared with other regions of the UK, London has a relatively high proportion of properties bought for investment, including from cash buyers and overseas investors. As such, demand for property in Inner London is likely influenced by a broader range of factors than the rest of the UK, including the forthcoming introduction of  additional property tax for non-UK residents  and geopolitical circumstances such as  the new route to UK citizenship for British Nationals Overseas in Hong Kong , being introduced in January 2021, both of which may push up demand for properties in Inner London.  Across the country, prices rose by 7.6% in the last year - their fastest rate since June 2016 - to hit a new record. The lowest annual growth was in the East of England, where average prices increased by 4.8% over the last year. Commenting on today’s figures, Deputy National Statistician for Economic Statistics  @jathers_ONS  said: (1/2)  pic.twitter.com/nYUEFgVOd3 . @jathers_ONS  continued: (2/2)  pic.twitter.com/ANpKH5sfOz Shares in UK pub chain JD Wetherspoon have jumped 6% this morning, after it raised over £93m to strengthen its balance sheet...and buy up struggling pubs. Wetherspoons announced the share placement last night, saying that the money would offset the impact of the pandemic, and also “facilitate the acquisition of new properties, which are likely to be available at favourable prices, as a result of the pandemic”. My colleague Rob Davies explains: It is targeting pubs in central London, which have been particularly hard-hit due to the loss of tourist traffic and office workers. Many have also been closed for longer than large, rural pubs because they cannot meet social distancing standards. Separately, former  Greene King  boss Rooney Anand is leading a new venture ready to spend £200m on pubs, in anticipation of a recovery after a miserable 2020: Robert Alster , CIO at wealth manager  Close Brothers Asset Management , reckons Britin is “extremely vulnerable” to a jump in prices this year: “The rate of inflation doubled in December , but ongoing lockdowns and consumer uncertainty, accompanied by falling global oil prices, meant it remained far below the Bank of England’s 2 percent target. “With Government debt soaring and individual purse strings tightening, Britain is extremely vulnerable to a rise in inflation in the year ahead. Short-term fluctuations caused by Brexit disruption and exchange rate shifts may not yet concern the Bank, but all eyes will be on when and how wages recover from Covid. Paul Donovan  of  UBS Wealth Management  flags up that the lockdown has driven demand for computer gaming: Computer consoles and games helped push up prices—perhaps inevitable when confronted with the prospect of an extended period of time at home with one’s family.  A “highly successful festive campaign” featuring campaigning England football star Marcus Rashford has helped luxury fashion chain Burberry ride out the pandemic. Burberry reported a 9% drop in “retail comparable store sales” in the three months to Boxing Day, partly due to reduced tourism during the pandemic.  Sales were particularly weak in Europe, the Middle East and Africa, as Covid-19 restrictions continued. But Burberry also benefitted from “new, younger clientele”, and reports that teaming up with Rashford was a success:  In November, we launched our Festive campaign, partnering with Marcus Rashford MBE, the English international footballer who has taken a prominent role against child poverty during the pandemic, and global charities championing youth-related causes. The consumer response to the campaign was exceptional, with engagement on our Instagram campaign posts more than double our Q2 average, and imagery featuring Marcus becoming our most liked Instagram post of all time. Marcus’ work to support the UK’s youth sits at the heart of our partnership and embodies our commitment to community and going beyond.  Shares in Burberry have jumped 5% this morning, with CEO Marco Gobbetti saying the company is ‘well placed’ for the pandemic to ease: “Despite the challenging external environment, we made good progress on our strategic priorities in the quarter. We saw a strong increase in full-price sales as our collections and communication resonated well with new, younger clientele as well as existing customers. Our localised plans and digital capabilities helped drive growth in rebounding markets and we implemented our planned reduction in markdown. While the short-term outlook remains uncertain due to COVID-19, we are well placed to accelerate when the pandemic eases.” We are proud to support  @marcusrashford ’s heroic work to help young people. This is part of our commitment to youth, community and creativity #BurberryVoices   pic.twitter.com/KFywzKjmrh Burberry ad celebrates creativity with Marcus Rashford  https://t.co/6ex8FuWgjY   pic.twitter.com/vKrw4mAsji Despite picking up last month, UK inflation is still relatively low - having  hit a five-year trough in September . Several economists are predicting that inflation will keep rising as the UK economy reopens later this year, following  December’s increase . Thomas Pugh  of  Capital  Economics  s uggests CPI inflation could rise over the Bank of England’s 2% target by the end of this year, before dipping in 2022. Inflation  will probably start to rise more sharply from April when the temporary VAT cut for the hospitality sector is reversed and the recent rises in agricultural and energy commodities start to make themselves felt. T Together these forces could lift inflation to more than 2% by the end of the year. But ample spare capacity means it will probably settle at close to 1.5% by the end of next year. Further ahead, inflation may creep higher if the authorities keep monetary and fiscal policy loose after all the spare capacity in the economy has been absorbed.  Suren Thiru,  head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, says prices could also rise if ‘the current post-Brexit disruption persists’:  @ONS  data shows  #UK  CPI  #inflation  rate doubled to 0.6% in December 2020 (from 0.3% in Nov) but still the 17th successive month of below  @bankofengland  target inflation. Rise in inflation in December was mostly driven by rising transport costs and clothing & recreation prices.  pic.twitter.com/sAclP9qgzh While the short-term outlook for UK inflation is relatively subdued amid a contracting economy, if the current post-Brexit disruption persists this could increase the upward pressure on prices, especially if the mass vaccine rollout triggers a surge in consumer demand. Tom Stevenson , investment director for personal investing at  Fidelity International , says investors should prepare for a more inflationary environment:  “The doubling in the CPI measure of inflation in December to 0.6% is a reminder of the need to remain vigilant about the price threat. Inflation never seems to be a problem until suddenly it requires firm action to tame it again. The combination of unprecedented government spending, pent up consumer demand and low productivity is a recipe for rising prices. Transport, recreation and clothing were the biggest contributors. “The challenge facing UK policy makers is that historically high debt levels will make it hard for us to rein in inflation with higher interest rates as and when they become necessary. Servicing our high borrowings is expensive enough with rates on the floor. Meat and vegetable prices dipped during December, the ONS reports, with cooked ham and cauliflowers having the largest downward impact. But today’s inflation report won’t capture the impact of shortages caused by disruption at UK ports last month: The December 2020 price collection was completed on or around 15 December 2020, so our price quotes were not influenced by the reported stock shortages in supermarkets as we approached the end of the year.  Computer game downloads also nudged inflation up last month, along with “smaller upward contributions from computer game consoles, equipment for sport, and plants and flowers”. But the prices of pre-school activity toys and board games fell in the run up to Christmas, the Office for National Statistics adds. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The reflation trade is one of the key drivers of the markets right now, as investors bet that stimulus packages and a post-lockdown boom will drive prices higher. And the latest figures show that inflation across the UK rose in December. The UK consumer prices index rose by  0.6%  in the year to December, up from 0.3% in November, the Office for National Statistics reports. Transport costs picked up during the month -- as restrictions on travel were briefly lifted over the Christmas period (before the latest lockdown was brought in).  Clothing prices were also higher, along with recreation activities (such are possible during a pandemic, anyway). The ONS says: Rising transport costs contributed 0.11 percentage points to the monthly change, while increasing prices for clothing, and recreation and culture items both contributed 0.10 percentage points to help increase inflation; these were partially offset by a downward contribution from falling food and non-alcoholic beverage prices. Air fares  rose by more than usual during November and December, the ONS reports, with fuel prices also picking up --prices at petrol pumps rose by 1.5 pence per litre last month.  Women’s and men’s clothing prices  also rose, as the Black Friday discounts ended. Technology prices  were also higher than usual, the ONS adds: The largest upward contribution [in the recreation and culture grouping] came from data processing equipment, where prices for computer software, PC peripherals and laptops were overall largely unchanged between November and December 2020, but fell between the same two months in 2019. Food  prices fell by 0.4% during December, though, bringing some help to households suffering from the impact of the Covid-19 lockdown. #UK   #consumer  price  #inflation  rose slightly more than expected to 0.6% in December (consensus: 0.5%) from 0.3% in November. Main upward impact on inflation from clothing prices, transport costs & recreation & culture. Core inflation up to 1.4% from 1.1%. Food had downward impact Inflation  is still below the Bank of England’s 2% target, but this move could be a signal that prices are going to keep pushing higher in 2021, as the Covid-19 lockdown eases. 2021 is all about reflation expectations—— Britain's annual inflation rate accelerated more than expected to 0.6% in December on the back of rising fuel costs and more stable trends in apparel prices. Core CPI also beat, rising 1.4%. We also get eurozone inflation figures later this morning, plus the latest UK house prices and US mortgage figures. Investors will also be watching Joe Biden be sworn in as America’s 46th president, and assessing his chances of ‘going big’ with a new stimulus package and green energy policies. Kyle Rodda  of  IG  says: The conversation in the market has generally remained on US politics and the incoming Biden-administrations fiscal stimulus plans. Subdued price action in bond markets suggest little new information has come about on either front in recent days. Nevertheless, ahead of President-elect Biden’s inauguration this evening, where there remains some concern regarding civil unrest and violent protests, the drama enveloping US politics and the US economy remains the most attention grabbing news. 
Hidden lives: the animals behind the products we consume – photo essay:	Hidden: Animals in the Anthropocene is a collection of work by 40 photojournalists from around the world, documenting the lives of animals used for research, entertainment and food. “The animals we use most in our daily lives are hidden. They’re hidden away in factory farms, fur farms, and in labs that use them in research and testing,” says photographer Jo-Anne McArthur, who co-edited  the collection . “They are also hidden euphemistically; we don’t say we’re eating a calf, for example. We say we’re eating veal.” Clockwise from top left: Rabbits being skinned at a slaughterhouse in Spain; a duck farm in Spain; ear tags at an abattoir in Spain; a performing monkey in the street in Jakarta, Indonesia “As animal rights activists, our battle is against the powerful enterprises that have normalised the torment and killing of billions of animals for food, clothing, entertainment and experimentation each year. Like conflict photographers documenting war and other humanitarian crises, the brave photojournalists featured in this book deserve our acclaim. Their work has made it impossible for exploitative industries to plausibly deny the agony and suffering taking place behind closed doors, deliberately kept out of the public consciousness,” write McArthur and her co-editor Keith Wilson in the book  published  at the end of last year. A silver fox at a fur farm in Poland Photographs of farmed and captive animals are subject to many legal restrictions and are mostly at the discretion of the company owner. Animal photojournalism is an emerging genre of photography that “captures, exposes and memorialises the experiences of these animals who we never see”, the book says. “It is certainly dangerous, not so much from stray bullets or IEDs, but from the emotional and mental impact caused by witnessing animal death on a scale that is far greater than from any human conflict,” says Wilson. Chicken farm in Italy “Animal industries should be transparent because they serve the public, but they are just the opposite, with multimillion dollar lobbying efforts keeping their exploits concealed,” says McArthur. “Concentrated animal feeding operations and other industries that use animals do not want cameras around.” Blood runs from under a door on a transport truck leaving a slaughterhouse in Canada “From public and environmental health crises to zoonotic viruses, animals are inextricably linked to many areas of current global concern, and rightfully so. Our existence is intertwined, and the ethics of how we treat the other sentient beings with whom we share this planet are being called into question,” says McArthur. Mink farm in Sweden “We are always hiding animals from ourselves. We build walls and euphemisms to cover any discomfort we might have. If we were to face the animals we keep in crates and cages, and spend some time examining their lives there, and why they are there, we may not be able to enjoy ham or foie gras,” says McArthur. Children with a brown bear at a circus in Spain Sign up for the  Animals farmed monthly update  to get a roundup of the best farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at  animalsfarmed@theguardian.com
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Plotting the future: the ‘seed guardians’ bringing variety to UK gardens:	I t’s a fine, crisp day and the first frost of the season, a significant occasion for any gardener and one that has not gone unnoticed by the seed guardians of the  Stroud Community Seed Bank . Beth Richardson, a 27-year-old student midwife and coordinator at the seed bank, meets me by a big compost heap that steams on contact with the icy cold air. The heap, a valuable group resource, belongs to the allotment where Beth grows her crops. In allotment greenhouses and back-garden potting sheds across towns, cities and villages in the UK, communities of local growers are digging deep and planting the seeds for a richer, more diverse and more resilient food system. It is  a trend being repeated  all over the world. Seed guardian Beth Richardson digging on her allotment plot in Stroud “Seeds are so powerful, so vital to life, but the range and variety of seeds that the big companies provide are very narrow,” says Josie Cowgill, one of the Stroud seed bank’s 30-strong growers and seed-savers. “In our small way, we are trying to, in each of our gardens or on the land that we grow food on, increase the biodiversity within our plots and within Stroud.” The more you have these things being grown on a local scale and by many people, the more resilient it is The Stroud Community Seed Bank in Gloucestershire is one of hundreds of initiatives across the UK focusing its seed-saving efforts on “open pollinated seed”, which – providing there is no cross pollination – will reliably produce viable, true-to-type plants year after year. Rather than being locked into a cycle of buying new seed every season, seed can be saved and stored for future use. “What we have to do to combat the very narrow genetic basis to our seed is get as many people as possible growing as wide a diversity of seeds as possible,” says Kate McEvoy of  Real Seeds , a small-scale producer specialising in open pollinated seed for organic growing. Sally Oates’s garden can be heard before it is seen. Situated among acre upon acre of bare, intensively farmed fields her comparatively small plot of land appears to be a lone island of sweet, thundering birdsong. Oates says her garden, enclosed by luscious green hedges, provides its own compost and its own seeds. “What I would encourage is other gardeners to get together locally and form what is called a seed circle so within the group they can grow their favourite old varieties. When they have surplus seeds they can just exchange them. Even a few gardeners getting together, you can have quite a variety of seeds between you.” A jar of beans saved from this season’s crop (top left), and a variety of seeds from last season preserved by Stroud seed guardian Deirdre Pyzer using the essential tools of the trade: paper bags, jars, an ice-cream tub and a pencil for labelling Simon Allen, another of Stroud’s seed guardians, adds: “It doesn’t need a knowledge of genetics, it just needs observation and care.” Richardson explains that “after a number of years, the seed is more adapted to the soils, climate and conditions that it’s been grown in, if the strongest specimens are selected. It’s essentially a better crop grown in Stroud because over the years it has evolved to the conditions here. It becomes a landrace.” Seed guardian Annie Page, whose polytunnels teem with bright red tomatoes, describes her garden as her sanctuary. It’s not difficult to see why. Rows of cabbages and Thrupp parsnips stand proud in the morning sun that streams into the steep valley. “One of the landrace varieties we all grow is called the Thrupp parsnip. Thrupp is a village just outside Stroud, and the lady who saves the seed has been doing it for years. It grows really well in our area. It has adapted so it’s going to be slightly different to parsnip seeds anywhere else in the world. We are developing the seeds by saving them.” Annie Page brandishes a crop of Thrupp parsnips ‘adapted so it’s going to be slightly different to parsnip seeds anywhere else in the world’ Although there are many safeguards around the world for the preservation of seeds, such as the Svalbard Global Seed Vault and the Millennium Seed Bank at Kew, the continual evolution and specialisation of these saved seeds is of significant value to the robustness, resilience and diversity of seed globally. Sinead Fortune, programme manager of the  Seed Sovereignty Programme , says: “By being grown out and maintained by seed guardians, they’re still living and developing. They’re still a real living entity, as opposed to a static seed in a bank somewhere.” McEvoy adds: “The more you have these things being grown on a local scale and by many people, the more resilient it is. You haven’t got just one point of failure. You’ve got multiple backups.” One of the few upsides of the lockdowns over the past year has been  a huge boost in demand for seed . The seed guardians hope this could be the green shoots of a “grow your own” revolution that re-diversifies seed crops. McEvoy says that in the spring not only the Stroud seed bank but “all the home garden seed companies were basically having to just shut down their websites. They had more orders than they could actually get out the door.” Since the first UK lockdown last spring, there has been a surge in vegetable growing Fortune, who works with many national suppliers, wondered if seed might be the new loo-roll, and if people were stockpiling. The question was whether sales were eventually going to come down but “they’ve stayed constantly much, much higher” she says. “This is promising because it means that maybe a shift is really starting to happen. I think those empty shelves in March and April were a bit of a wake-up call for a lot of people; there’s a groundswell going on. That’s very exciting. It might feel quite small just saving beans and growing your own food, but actually I think it is really fundamental “There are brilliant things going on in every single city,” she adds. “There are community gardens and community allotments. If people don’t have a garden or access to land, there are a lot of initiatives to get engaged on all sorts of levels. I would really urge them to see what is going on in the community.” For the seed guardians in Stroud and across the country, the quiet, radical work of drying seeds on window ledges and in airing cupboards continues. Cowgill says the process is “good for the soul” and extends an open invitation to other would-be growers to begin playing in the soil, with potentially hugely positive consequences for the individual and the planet. Josie Cowgill with a handful of saved beans ready to be distributed among the local community She sums up the impact of seed-saving in the context of 2020: “It’s difficult times we are living in. We have got a pandemic, we’ve got climate change, we’ve got biodiversity loss, habitat loss and economic collapse as well. It might feel quite small, just saving beans and growing your own food, but actually I think it is really fundamental. “By doing something infinitesimally small like this tiny little gesture in a tiny little group, in a tiny little country somewhere, you are working towards something that makes you feel more hopeful. It’s a positive step. I’m not saying this is a magic wand or a cure-all, but it’s a positive step.” Find more  age of extinction coverage here , and follow biodiversity reporters  Phoebe Weston  and  Patrick Greenfield  on Twitter for all the latest news and features
Morocco detects first case of UK variant – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Morocco ’s health ministry confirmed its first imported case of the more contagious variant of coronavirus first discovered in the UK. The variant was detected in the northern port of Tangier in a Moroccan national returning from Ireland via Marseille, the ministry said in a statement. Morocco has announced plans to launch a free vaccination campaign targeting 25 million people, or 80% of its population. The country ordered 66m vaccine doses from AstraZeneca and China’s Sinopharm. It has not yet received any. On 23 December, Morocco imposed a nationwide four-week curfew from 9pm to 6am to contain the virus. On Monday, the country said it has recorded a total of 460,144 coronavirus infections, including 7,977 deaths and 16,481 active cases. Health experts have raised concerns over new highly-transmissible mutations of the virus first reported in the UK and South  Africa  and now cropping up in several other countries. A third new variant has since been reported in Brazil. Donald Trump, the US president, has rescinded entry bans imposed because of coronavirus on most non- US  citizens arriving from  Brazil  and much of  Europe , including the  UK , effective 26 January, two officials briefed on the matter told Reuters. The restrictions are set to end on the same day that new Covid-19 test requirements take effect for all international visitors. Joe Biden, the president-elect, once in office could opt to reimpose the restrictions.  Rio de Janeiro  has kicked off its coronavirus vaccination campaign with what is likely to prove the most breathtaking immunisation launch ceremony on earth. Two Brazilian women, aged 80 and 59, received their first shot of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine at the feet of Rio’s Christ the Redeemer statue at dusk on Monday. The  spectacular televised event  on Corcovado mountain was attended by Rio’s media-savvy mayor, Eduardo Paes, and state governor Cláudio Castro. Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro – who is from Rio but has repeatedly undermined containment measures and vaccination and has attacked the Chinese vaccine – was a notable absence. Rio is one of the Brazilian states worst-hit by Covid-19, having registered more than 27,000 of Brazil’s 209,000 deaths. If the beachside state capital was a country, it would have one of the worst national Covid death rates. Ahead of the ceremony Paes, who took office early this month, tried to strike a positive note. “The start of vaccination is not the end of the pandemic but it is a light at the end of the tunnel,” he  tweeted , urging residents to continue wearing masks and respecting containment measures. Vaccination began in Brazil on Sunday after the country’s health regulator approved the emergency use of vaccines produced by China’s Sinovac and Oxford/AstraZeneca. More than 37,000 people with a symptomless Covid-19 infection have been detected through rapid lateral flow testing in the  UK , the chief medical adviser for NHS Test and Trace has said. Dr Susan Hopkins said the devices, which can give results in less than 30 minutes, were being rolled out across the country to enable those with no coronavirus symptoms to be tested. Lateral flow tests are regularly used by NHS staff and were the main method of testing during a mass pilot scheme in Liverpool, but some experts have questioned their accuracy. Dr Hopkins was asked at a Downing Street press briefing on Monday about the availability of the devices for teachers and supermarket workers who are yet to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. She said: “We are rolling out lateral flow devices throughout the country through community testing sites and also in workplaces to allow people to get tested where they are asymptomatic to reduce the spread of disease. “We’ve detected more than 37,000 individuals through lateral flow tests over the last number of weeks and we will continue to roll them out rapidly as an additional tool to help get this virus under control.” A new variant of the coronavirus first identified in  South Africa  is more contagious than earlier versions, experts said, but there is no evidence that it is more deadly. The new variant is 50% more contagious, said epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim, co-chair of the health ministry’s scientific committee. “There is no evidence the new Covid variant is more severe than the original variant,” he added. The experts drew their conclusions about the variant – now the dominant strain in South  Africa  – from an analysis of data collected from the main infection clusters across the country. With more than 1.3 million people infected, South Africa has recorded more cases than any other country on the continent and has also suffered more deaths, with 37,105 registered. The second wave of the virus has stretched South Africa’s health system to its limits. Health minister Zweli Mkhize on Monday said there had been a 23% fall in infections, but that the number of hospital admissions was up by 18.3% on the previous week. Dr Waasila Jassat, another member of the expert panel, said that even though admissions were up, the death rate from the virus in hospitals had not changed from the first wave of the virus. Brazil  on Monday reported 23,671 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the new total to 8,511,770, the country’s health ministry said. Deaths rose by 452 to 210,299 in Brazil, which has the world’s highest death toll from the pandemic outside the US.  Mexican  president Andrés Manuel López Obrador said the government aimed to compensate for a reduction in deliveries of Covid-19 vaccine doses from Pfizer Inc with those from other providers. The World Health Organization (WHO) said it was in advanced talks with Pfizer about including its vaccine in the agency’s portfolio of shots to be shared with poorer countries. Mexico had been expecting weekly deliveries of some 400,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine developed with Germany’s BioNTech SE. As a result of the US drugmaker’s WHO agreements, Mexico would for now only be receiving half that, López Obrador told a news conference. It was not clear how long the reduction would last. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is currently the only one being administered in Mexico, which has reported the fourth-highest death toll from the pandemic worldwide. Mexico has also signed deals to acquire vaccines from Britain’s AstraZeneca Plc and China’s CanSino Biologics. The country has approved the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot and expects to have it by March. It is still reviewing the CanSino vaccine. It is due to make the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and foreign minister Marcelo Ebrard said on Twitter that the active ingredient would on Monday be sent to Mexico from Argentina, allowing manufacturers to start the final packaging process. Mexico said it also expects to approve the Sputnik V vaccine for use soon, though it is likely to acquire fewer doses than it had previously suggested. Brazil’s  health minister Eduardo Pazuello said a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in the Amazonian city of Manaus was not tied to a new variant of the virus, and was instead the same coronavirus that caused the first wave of the disease.  Manaus has made headlines in recent days for its high death rate and a shortage of oxygen tanks for patients who develop severe cases of Covid-19. 
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Kevin Lasagna and other footballers with surnames that are tasty dishes:	“Udinese have a player named Kevin Lasagna,”  notes Yuval Hyman.  “Do you know of any other players with a tasty dish as a surname?” Finding specific delicious meals in a footballer’s surname is no easy feat (or treat) but Tim Postins jumped at the opportunity to combine a few ingredients and serve up some choice dishes on the back of this question. “Adam Curry (currently on loan to Alfreton Town from Hull) would operate well with Declan Rice (West Ham 2016-present). And then there’s Mark Fish (ex-Bolton and Charlton) but only if Worthing’s striker James Lemon is putting the squeeze on. Plus the former Margate defender Paul Lamb who’d go well with a dash of Scott Mint(o). Or maybe you’d prefer a Patrick Berger with a portion of Jonas Fries?” Milton has written in with a menu that has a distinctly Mediterranean flavour. “The last name of  Víctor Espárrago , a winner of Libertadores and Intercontinental Cups, and coach of many teams in Spain, means ‘asparagus’ though it is debatable whether that counts as a tasty dish.”  If Yotam Ottolenghi’s cooking, then yes it probably does . “In Spanish there are the last names Zarza (blackberry) and Piña (pineapple) – Barcelona’s Clàudia Pina and former Mexico forward Enrique López Zarza are two examples.” If Frank Leboeuf was given a roasting he could be served up for Sunday lunch and Real Madrid’s wing-back Nacho would count as a dish if he had former Bristol City forward Paul Cheesley melted down and served up alongside him. And sticking with the cheesy theme, who can forget Massimo Maccarone at Middlesbrough? “Football Weekly posited that Erling Haaland and Alexander Sorloth may be the tallest strike partnership ever, both being 6ft 4in,”  writes Dylan Kenny.  “However, I think Jan Koller and Vratislav Lokvenc could be an even taller ‘big man, big man” duo. Did they ever play together? Is there a taller pair of forwards out there?” “It seems that Jan Koller (6ft 7 1/2in) and Vratislav Lokvenc (6ft 4in) did play together at least once – during the Czech Republic v France game at Euro 2000,” writes Nicholas Mandalos. “Lokvenc joined the fray just after half-time. I can’t be bothered to work out what overall height this gives them but I’m sure some anorak will [12 ft 11 1/2in – Knowledge Anorak Ed].” Tom Leonard thinks he can reach higher. “I’m not sure you could ever call them a ‘strike partnership’ but Peter Crouch (6ft 7in) and Nwankwo Kanu (6ft 5in) played more than a few games together at Portsmouth.” Two games together – against  Milan  and Heerenveen in the 2008-09 Uefa Cup – counts as a strike partnership in our book, Tom. Their combined height is a lofty 13ft. Can anyone take us higher? “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,”  reports Alex Crane.  “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” There are hundreds of cases of father and son playing professionally, so it’s only logical that there should be a few refereeing examples. “Scottish referee Andrew Dallas is the son of Hugh,” writes Keith Legg. “Both refereed in the Scottish top flight, so have been at all the current SPFL Premiership grounds, as well as some European and international ones too.” Chris Matterface also has a cracking tale to tell. “In 2009, Clive Oliver took charge of the League Two play-off final between Gillingham and Shrewsbury at Wembley,” he writes. “The following day his son Michael, then aged just 24, was the man in black for the League One play-off final between Millwall and Scunthorpe on the same ground. The older Oliver was arguably instrumental in Gillingham gaining promotion when he awarded a corner in the last minute from which the only goal was scored; replays showed it should actually have been a goal-kick. Mind you, as a Gills fan I am not complaining!” “A while back  there was a question and answer  about who would be Premier League champions if boxing rules were used,”  mails Michael Avilés. “Just wanted to share that I did some number-crunching and spreadsheet-reading and came up with a list of champions on a running basis. As a high-school chemistry teacher I tend to be a little familiar with number crunching, and  this  was a nice little micro-hobby to help pass time over Christmas break. A few things that jumped out at me: Manchester United never actually held the title when they won the Treble; and the game where Steven Gerrard slipped and Chelsea ended up winning also cost Liverpool the title under these rules!” “Steve Kabba has scored for Crystal Palace, Grimsby Town and Sheffield United this season,”  wrote Andy Holt way back in January 2003.  “Not counting own goals, what is the largest number of teams any player has scored for in a single season? I can’t imagine it would be many more than Steve’s achievement.” “Didn’t Tony Cottee score for four teams in four different divisions a couple of seasons ago, those being Leicester, Norwich, Millwall and Barnet,” mused Martin Smith. Although he was on the right track, Martin was wide of the mark. While Cottee  played  for four different clubs in four different divisions in 2001 (doubling up as Barnet’s hapless gaffer and steering them to relegation into non-league football for good measure), he blew his chance of making history by scoring only for Norwich and Barnet. “Cameroon international goalkeeper Fabrice Ondoa, 25, has played 44 times for his country since 2014, yet has only made a total of 38 league appearances,” writes Andrew Blackburne. “Is there anyone else who has more international caps for fewer domestic outings?” After Roma's debacle tonight, has any team ever lost a match by default after making too many substitutions before? Also, what's the shortest gap between red cards awarded for separate incidents - can anyone beat the 41s managed by Mancini and Pau Lopez tonight? “Some years ago I read a newspaper story of an ill-disciplined non-league team the rest of teams in the league refused to play, therefore allowing them to claim all points. As a result they were promoted and no longer a problem for the division. Any thoughts on who this was?” asks Chris Davis. @TheKnowledge_GU   @oilysailor  who was the oldest u21 international cap? Surely someone played at age 23 and 364 days. “With Tom Cairney not getting game time, Joachim Andersen is currently captaining Fulham,” writes Jim Miles. “Has there ever been an occasion where a loanee was the full-time captain?” Newport vs Brighton ended at 10.30pm last Sunday, surely the latest a match has ever ended on that day. But what's the latest in the evening a domestic match in the UK has ever finished? “A work colleague alerted me to the fact that Obafemi Martins is still playing, and while verifying this by checking his Wikipedia page, I noticed Martins only played six times for Birmingham and yet scored one cup final winner (the 89th-minute gift in the 2011 League Cup final). He featured in about seven minutes of League Cup action for Birmingham and scored the competition-winning goal. Can anyone boast such an impressive games- or minutes-to-cup-final-winning goal ratios?” wonders Michael Pilcher. One for  @TheKnowledge_GU , surely there can't have been many goals scored directly from a goal kick in England's top four divisions? @TheKnowledge_GU  Brazil have never won the World Cup when they have been drawn in the group stages with Scotland (1974, 1982, 1990 & 1998). Can any other pairing of countries beat this? •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
‘We’ll see’: 12 phrases parents use and what they really mean:	Parents, eh? With their lack of meme culture, nostalgic stories about Woolworths and all that pointless fury over software updates, how is it that your parents are somehow still in charge? But to better understand their weird ways, you need to know how to survive in a world that speaks an archaic language about floppy discs and “hanging up” the phone. And with this handy guide, you will be well equipped to take charge of the household – no matter how old you are. Just give your parents some old cassette tapes and tell them they need rewinding with a pencil; that’ll teach them. Quick translation:  “No.” In-depth translation:  “I’m too tired for a conversation about this right now, so I’m delaying the inevitable. But have no doubt, it’s a no.” Quick translation:  “We both know you think I’m an idiot.” In-depth translation:  “Yes, I know I said I wanted more eye contact from you and less screen time, but now you’re looking at me, it’s with disrespect. So just go stare at a book or something – no, not that book.” Quick translation:  “I honestly can’t think of another reason.” In-depth translation:  “You’re starting to realise I’m a human being who doesn’t always behave rationally, or have good reasons for doing things. And I hate that you’re figuring that out.” Quick translation:  “Shut the door.” In-depth translation:  “I know you weren’t born in a barn because I was very much present during your birth. But I was told to shut doors when I was growing up, so I’m going to do the same to you.” Quick translation:  “I don’t care.” In-depth translation:  “I mean, I  could  care, but then I’d have to get involved in this debate and possibly end up being the bad guy. I don’t want to be the bad guy, I like being the nice parent who sits in this chair pretending to read War and Peace with a copy of Fifty Shades of Grey hidden inside.” Quick translation:  “I want grandchildren.” In-depth translation:  “I’ve been brainwashed my entire life into believing that the only happily-ever-after for humans is settling down with a partner and starting a family. I would like some reassurance that this is on your agenda.” Quick translation:  “I don’t understand.” In-depth translation:  “Look, can you just bloody well send this email for me because I don’t get what you’re telling me about the reply-all function. And while we’re here, who or what is Depop? Is it anything to do with that clock website TikTok?” Quick translation:  “I’m worried.” In-depth translation:  “I know you’re not on Facebook but I need you to read this thing about vaccines and reassure me it’s nonsense. Oh, and then I need you to clear out all the viruses I’ve accidentally downloaded.” Quick translation:  “Please stop being sad.” In-depth translation:  “I’m pretending to be cross right now because I don’t know how to deal with your feelings. I know, rationally, it’s perfectly healthy for you to have emotions and express them. And actually I’m also feeling a bit emotional, which is why I’m lashing out.” Quick translation:  “Do it yourself.” In-depth translation:  “I am sick of feeling that the emotional and physical labour around here always comes down to me, and I need you to help. But I also don’t want you to help because, then, how would I be the martyr?” Quick translation:  “I’m trying to help.” In-depth translation:  “Soon you’ll understand that life can suck in a big way, and even though this decision seems stupid to you right now, I’m hoping you’ll get it eventually. But you probably won’t.” Quick translation:  “Don’t talk to anyone at all.” In-depth translation:  “There are a lot of things in the world   that scare me these days. I want to keep you safe, but I don’t know how. Please teach me in a way that makes me still feel like the adult in this situation.” Need help talking to dad about milk? Visit  oatly.com/helpdad
Binged Bridgerton? Find your next lockdown watch with our TV quiz:	 Stuart Heritage  Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.00 GMT   Last modified on Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.03 GMT   Lockdown three is a nightmare for television viewers. All the good stuff – the stuff you really wanted to watch – was wolfed down in the first two lockdowns, and now chronic indecision has set in. You now spend your evenings scrolling endlessly through streaming menus, from Netflix to Disney+ to iPlayer, desperately looking for something – anything – to fit your mood. Well – fear not. Take this personality quiz and, based on your answers, we will provide you with the perfect series to watch, and some wild cards, too. Grab a pen and paper, and enjoy.  A.  Approximately 125 hours B.  Approximately 56 hours C.  Approximately 26 hours D.  Exactly 22 hours and 32 minutes A.  A bit of fun escapism B.  An excuse to laugh C.  An opportunity to demonstrate my intellectualism D.  A chance to witness the relentless cruelty of humanity A.  That we are decent people who usually do the right thing B.  That we are flawed and messy, but often bound by a common cause C.  That we exist to be exploited by larger interests for money D.  That we are meaningless pawns destined to be slaughtered by our indifferent masters A.  Wacky, inspirational, occasionally melancholy B.  Gross, offensive, borderline illegal C.  Sophisticated, luxurious, aloof D.  Dry, gruelling, genuinely horrific A.  Candid and earnest B.  Obnoxious and loud C.  Knowing and superior D.  I don’t understand. What is a ‘laugh’? A.  Trippy imagery and a thumping electronic theme B.  Ironic wholesomeness C.  High-end glamour D.  Just loads and loads of burning human faces, if possible A.  James Corden B.  Josh Groban C.  Monica Bellucci D.  General Hasso von Manteuffel A.  My children B.  My partner C.  Nobody D.  The group of ghosts who live in my house A.  “Hate is always foolish, and love is always wise” B.  “I am untethered, and my rage knows no bounds” C.  “Who wants good news in this ocean of misery and drama?” D.  “Down this road on a summer day in 1944, the soldiers came. Nobody lives here now” A.  Happy, uplifted, slightly frustrated about declining quality B.  Happy, dirty, slightly frustrated about declining quality C.  Happy, intelligent, continental D.  Completely, irreparably depressed Answers Mostly As: Doctor Who You need something bright and fun to distract you from the relentless drudgery of lockdown, and ideally something family-friendly. This is a perfect opportunity for you to watch all 167 episodes of Doctor Who currently available on iPlayer; every new-Who episode ever made. True, it won’t all be plain sailing, because Doctor Who is lumpy by nature, but what else are you going to do with your time? Wild cards:   Chilling Adventures of Sabrina  (Netflix) | The Great Pottery Throw Down (All4) | The Vicar of Dibley (iPlayer) | Absolutely Fabulous (Britbox)  Mostly Bs: It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia You want comedy, and lots of it, which is why you should watch  It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia , 14 seasons of which are on Netflix. If you haven’t seen it, you have missed out on one of the grimiest, most amoral sitcoms in television history. One episode is called Mac Kills His Dad, for instance. But even if you have seen the show, it’s worth rewatching from the beginning, if only for the scene where Danny DeVito crawls out of a sofa naked.  Wild cards:   Pls Like  (iPlayer – series three released on 24 Jan) | Chewing Gum (Netflix) | Crashing (All 4) | Ramy (Amazon Prime) Mostly Cs: Call My Agent! OK, we get it, you’re a smartypants. Your favourite TV show of all time is Mad Men, but a part of you is upset that it was performed in a language you speak. Behold  Call My Agent !, a Paris-set comedy-drama about a talent agency in crisis. This isn’t just great TV, it’s great TV brimming with highbrow cinematic and literary references. You want a show where Jean Cocteau is cited for a punchline? This is for you. Better yet, a new series comes to Netflix this week. Get started now and you’ll be all caught up in plenty of time. Wild cards:  Trigonometry  (iPlayer) |  Pretend It’s a City  (Netflix) | The Bureau (Amazon Prime) | Succession (Sky Atlantic/Now TV) | Mostly Ds: The World at War You dislike fiction, and lightness, and fun. Therefore the only option for you is  The World at War , ITV’s 26-part 1973 monolithic documentary about the causes and consequences of the second world war, narrated in doomy tones by Laurence Olivier. In all honesty, everyone should watch this landmark series at least once. That said, everything is terrible at the moment and this will probably make it worse. The full series is on UKTV Player right now. Just pick your moment, OK? Will you be watching our lockdown picks? And which other unexpected TV treats have you discovered of late? Have your say in the comments. 
'Enough is enough': video of police slamming Indigenous boy face-first to ground rekindles father's rage:	Thirra sits on a bench, on a windy afternoon in a small park in the middle of Sydney’s inner city, below the brown brick public housing tower where his family lives. “If you’ve seen the video, this is where it all happened,” he says. The video he’s speaking about shocked Australia, got a  New South Wales  police officer suspended and is at the centre of a police internal investigation. The grainy phone footage begins midway through an argument between police and a group of teenagers, including Thirra’s 16-year-old son, Kuta. The camera swings around to show an officer pulling Kuta’s hands behind his back. Then he kicks Kuta’s feet out from under him. Kuta hits the ground face-first. Bystanders shout in horror. For Thirra, the background to that encounter stretches back generations. Amid scrutiny of Australia’s record on race and police brutality, Kuta’s treatment attracted attention. The NSW premier, Gladys Berejiklian, said it showed “we still have a long way to go in our country” but the police commissioner, Mick Fuller defended the officer involved. He had a “clean history”, he said. He was having “a bad day”. “Every day is a bad day for Aboriginal people,” Thirra said at the time. “Every day, every year, from year to year. We’re struggling with mental health, we’re struggling with unemployment ... We’re targeted for just being who we are.” Four months later, sitting in the park where it happened, Thirra wants people to know this was not an isolated episode. This has happened to so many Aboriginal people. This has happened to him. Thirra and Kuta’s names have been changed to protect their privacy. Thirra means “many hills” in his Wangkangurru language from the Simpson Desert in  South Australia . Kuta means “brother” in Pitjantjatjara. The first time Thirra met a police officer, he was six years old and was being removed from his traditional lands. He was loaded into the back of a cattle truck. Five families were crammed together in the heat, clinging to sugar bags filled with damper, jam and kangaroo, plus what little belongings they had. They were taken to a reserve near the small town of Marree, 650km north of Adelaide. A welfare officer and a police officer examined Thirra’s teeth and body. The families were divided into houses. Thirra’s new home was a tin shed with a concrete floor. His grandmother and the other elders were sent to live in single quarters. “My grandmother and her mother, they all cried that first night … they were crying for home, I think. They were in a strange place.” A few months later, a police officer came back. Thirra and his four cousins were taken to the train station. He stood on the platform bewildered, holding a bag of food. Then he was put on the train. The police made sure the doors and windows were locked. His nan watched on in distress. “[She was] standing on the platform crying and wondering what was happening,” Thirra said. His cousin started hitting the window. She was crying as well. “What the welfare was saying to us was, ‘You are going to go away for a holiday,’ and that was it,” Thirra says. “That holiday turned out to be two years in a home.” He was sent to Colebrook children’s home in the Adelaide hills. Every night for the first six months he cried himself to sleep. When he was eight he was sent home for a holiday, to where his family was working on a pastoral property at Anna Creek, three hours north-west of Marree. It was a bittersweet reunion. Thirra could no longer speak his language. Conversation with his grandmother was limited. “She would talk to me but I just couldn’t understand, and every time I talk to her it would be English and so there was this huge gap.” He also felt distant from his mother. “I wanted to call her Mum but I couldn’t. And it was hard to say ‘Mum, I love you’ and all that.” One day a police officer and a welfare officer came looking for Thirra, to take him back to Adelaide. Thirra hid.   Eventually they left. He stayed. The first time Thirra thought he might die at the hands of the police was in 1978. He was 18 and living on the Devonport reserve, outside Port Augusta. He was walking home after a night at the pub when a police van pulled up. Two officers grabbed him and threw him in the back. Thirra saw they were crossing the bridge away from town. The doors flew open and he was dragged by his legs on to the dirt of a dark vacant block. A flurry of kicks and whacks of the baton rained down. He curled into a foetal position. “I thought they were gonna kill me right then,” Thirra says. As they drove off he yelled: “Fuck you, pigs!” The car turned around. Thirra got up and ran, but not fast enough. “They were going real fast and flat out and I thought they were gonna run me over, but they bumped me in the back of the leg and I fell into the bushes,” he says. Thirra reached the road and saw the van driving back to town. He had blood all over him. His ribs were broken. With the help of the Aboriginal Legal Rights Movement, Thirra made an official complaint against the officers involved. The matter ended up in court but, as more than 40 years have passed, Thirra is unclear on what they were charged with. He says they were convicted. A lawyer working for the ALRM at the time told Guardian Australia they remember this case going to court but not the outcome. Just a few months later, Thirra says, he saw one of the officers, in uniform, working in a remote community north of Port Augusta. “Once I seen him, all that anger rose up within me,” he says. “Thinking to myself, well, that was just a waste of time.” In the late 90s Thirra was drawn to Redfern in inner  Sydney , where he met his wife, a Yuin woman, and started a family. They have two girls and two boys. Kuta is his oldest son. The first time Kuta was stopped by police was in 2017. He was 13 and came home upset. “I told him if you’re confronting the police or they are harassing you, just give your name and address and don’t say nothing,” Thirra says. These interactions became common. Kuta’s 15-year-old sister was also stopped and searched in a nearby park. Kuta heeded his father’s advice and “kept quiet” – until that day in June. Thirra arrived home to the news that Kuta had been “picked up” by police. Then he learned his son was being taken away in an ambulance. He was at the hospital when he first saw the footage. “He could have broken his neck and he could have died there,” Thirra says. “It brought a lot of anger for me to see him hit the ground like that,” he says. “And this anger – it’s powerful stuff to deal with.” Thirra believes he knows why Kuta swore at a police officer that day. “What can you say? What else can you say to them? … You get to a point where enough’s enough.” Kuta is one of many Aboriginal children whose interactions with police are frequent and overwhelmingly negative. Last year it was revealed that NSW police  disproportionately target Indigenous kids , some as young as nine. The state’s police watchdog described such policing as “intrusive”, involving “unreasonable surveillance” and harassment that could increase their risk of entering the justice system. Nationally,  Indigenous kids make up 53%  of the youth detention population and 65% of all 10- to 13-year-olds in detention. “You’re looking at 10-year-old kids,” Thirra says. “I was forcibly removed when I was six years old. It’s the same thing with a different name. The underlying values of locking up people, taking kids away – it’s the same system, it has never changed.” NSW police say they are continuing to investigate the circumstances surrounding Kuta’s arrest, and the constable involved remains on restricted duties. They did not answer specific questions about the progress of the investigation or whether there have been efforts made to improve relations with Sydney’s Indigenous community or to improve police training. Thirra says decades of consultation, community outreach and cultural awareness training have failed. If criminal charges are not laid against the constable, the family is considering civil action. “People will always say … let it subside and get on with life. But for us as Aboriginal people here in this country, it’s not enough for us. “We say enough is enough.”
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
Portugal's health system 'very close to limit' – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Brazil  had 33,040 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 551 fatalities, the first day in six the death toll has been below 1,000, the health ministry said on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 8,488,099 cases since the pandemic began, and the official death toll has risen to 209,847, according to ministry data. It is the world’s third worst outbreak behind the United States and India. Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the  NHS  in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. Stevens said the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” Stevens said on Sunday. Over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the  UK  government has announced. More than 3.8 million people – including over-80s, care home residents and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will begin to be offered to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups but sites that have enough supply, and capacity to vaccinate more people, will be allowed to offer jabs to the next two cohorts. Ghana ’s Covid-19 infection rates are skyrocketing and include strains of the virus not previously seen in the country, threatening to overwhelm the health system, President Nana Akufo-Addo said on Sunday. Since 5 January, the number of active cases has risen to 1,924 from about 900 , Akufo-Addo said in a speech. There are now  120 severe cases, up from 18 a week ago . The president said that some people arriving from abroad had tested positive for “new variants” of the virus. Last week, Gambia recorded its first two cases of the highly infectious UK variant, in what appears to be the first confirmation of its presence in Africa. Ghana is not yet close to the peak seen during the first wave of infections in the middle of last year, but could quickly reach that level if cases keep rising at the current rate. If they do, the president said he would impose another partial lockdown, despite worries about what that would do to one of west Africa’s largest economies. “Our Covid-19 treatment centres have gone from having zero patients to now being full because of the upsurge in infections,” the president said. “At this current rate ... our healthcare infrastructure will be overwhelmed.” Across Africa, a second coronavirus wave is infecting twice as many people per day than at the height of last year’s first wave  and has yet to peak, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The rise has raised concern across the continent where, unlike in  Europe  and the United States, cash-strapped governments have been unable to secure supply deals with vaccine manufacturers, putting the onus for now on containment. Akufo-Addo said details about access to vaccines and a rollout plan would be announced “very soon”. Schools in  Malawi  will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday. After reporting no positive cases for almost two months, the country has seen a sudden resurgence in coronavirus cases since the middle of last month. The country of 19 million people has reported 12,470 cases of Covid-19 and 314 deaths since the pandemic began last year. Chakwera said  a third of those deaths were reported in the past 16 days , forcing the government to seek additional funding to contain the pandemic at a time when the country is in 4.1tn kwacha ($5.37bn) of debt. The new measures concerning schools and bars will take effect from Monday. Chakwera also said the government has allocated an additional 1.6bn kwacha ($2.1m) in funds to be spent on recruiting frontline healthcare workers, 1,000 intensive care unit beds and 1,000 oxygen cylinders among other requirements. Last week the government reported that two senior cabinet ministers and two other high-profile members of the government had died from Covid-19. Workers in  Melbourne  are expected to return to city offices in large numbers on Monday, with research indicating most feel safe and ready to return after nine months of remote working. Private workplaces in  Victoria  are able to return to 50% capacity from Monday, with public service offices permitted to ramp up to 25%. A Roy Morgan survey of 503 city workers from late November to mid-December shows almost two-thirds were either willing to return to their central  Melbourne  workplaces (44%) or had already (15%). The most commonly cited factors making workers feel safe to return were Covid-safe plans and adherence to health measures. France  reported a further 141 deaths from coronavirus on Sunday, taking the cumulative toll since March to 70,283, the public health authority said. It also reported 16,642 new infections within the previous 24 hours. The infection figures on Sundays are usually lower because fewer tests are taken. The number of daily cases has been hovering around 20,000 for the last week. The health ministry said in a separate statement that 422,127 people had now been vaccinated, up from about 413,000 on Saturday. Eurostar  has said it is facing an existential threat, as business leaders pleaded with the government to step in and save the “vital link” with Europe. A 95% drop in passenger numbers  has brought the cross-Channel train service to its knees, and the company reiterated on Sunday that while government loans had been extended to aviation, international high-speed rail had also been severely affected by the pandemic. Here’s a graphic showing the number of vaccine doses US states have administered, courtesy of ourworldindata.org  Portugal ’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. “Our health system is under a situation of extreme pressure,”  Health  Minister Marta Temido told reporters on Sunday afternoon after a visit to a struggling hospital. “There is a limit and we are very close to it.” The health system, which prior to the pandemic had the  lowest number of critical care beds per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe , can accommodate a maximum of 672 COVID-19 patients in intensive care units (ICUs), according to health ministry data. The number of people in ICUs with COVID-19 reached 647 on Sunday, according to health authority DGS. The Portuguese Association of Hospital Administrators said the number of coronavirus patients needing hospitalisation was likely to dramatically increase over the next week. Three days into a nationwide lockdown, the country of just 10 million people reported 10,385 new cases and 152 fatalities on Sunday, bringing the total number of infections to 549,801, with the death toll increasing to 8,861. According to  ourworldindata.org , supported by Oxford University,  Portugal had the highest number of coronavirus cases in Europe per capita over the last seven days . Most new cases were concentrated in Lisbon, where many patients at the city’s public hospitals have already been transferred elsewhere, including to health units in the country’s second biggest city Porto. The  UK  variant of the coronavirus has killed three residents at a retirement home in northwestern  Belgium  and infected 111 people including 39 staff members, its director Jurgen Duyck told AFP on Sunday. The cluster represents two-thirds of the residents of the De Groene Verte home in the  western Flanders city of  Houthulst  near the border with France. Belgium has suffered one of the worst per capita death rates in the world during the epidemic with its nursing homes representing more than half of overall deaths from the disease, according to the Public  Health  Institute. Mayor Joris Hindryckx said the outbreak prompted a halt to “all social and sporting activities” in the town of around 10,000 people. The source of the contamination is unknown, but the mayor said the infection must have been “indirect” as none of those testing positive was known to have travelled to Britain. Brazil ’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. The vaccines produced by Oxford/AstraZeneca and China’s Sinovac will both now be permitted in South America’s biggest country, which has the world’s second highest Covid death toll with more than 209,000 deaths. The decision was taken on Sunday afternoon after three of Anvisa’s five directors voted for the move. The ruling is a major victory for Brazil’s 212 million citizens - reeling from one of the worst epidemics in the world - but a stinging political defeat for the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro. Bolsonaro has failed to acquire any doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and as a result vaccination with Sinovac’s CoronaVac is likely to begin on Sunday in São Paulo state. São Paulo is governed by one of the president’s biggest political rivals, João Doria, who has championed the Chinese vaccine. Doria will reportedly offer the first shot to a local intensive care nurse called Mônica Calazans on Sunday, making a high-profile pronouncement he hopes will cement his image as Brazil’s Covid saviour in the public imagination. “Brazil is in a rush to save lives,” Doria tweeted on Sunday afternoon. Bolsonaro’s Twitter account remained silent.
Daily Covid testing plans 'paused' in English schools:	The government has told schools to pause the daily coronavirus testing of students and staff in England, five weeks after it was announced as a “milestone moment” by the education secretary,  Gavin Williamson . Public Health  England  (PHE) said the balance of the risks and potential benefits of daily testing were “unclear” after the emergence of the more transmissible variant of Covid-19. Confirming the  Guardian’s story from Tuesday  that the rollout would be halted, PHE said: “In light of this changing situation, we now recommend that the rollout of daily contact testing within schools is paused, other than for schools involved in further evaluation. “This will enable the further detailed evaluation of changing circumstances including, potentially, lower infection rates and modelling work required to understand the benefits of daily contact testing in this new phase of the pandemic.” PHE said schools should continue to test staff twice weekly where possible, and test pupils twice upon return to school, as has been the case since the start of January. The government later insisted that daily contact testing still had the potential to be a valuable tool to help keep pupils in school. “Testing is a vital part of our plan to suppress this virus, and we are consistently guided by expert advice on the best way to structure the programme,” a spokesman said. “NHS test and trace and Public Health England have reviewed their advice, and concluded that in light of the higher prevalence and rates of transmission of the new variant, further evaluation work is required to make sure it is achieving its aim of breaking chains of transmission and reducing cases of the virus in the community. “We are therefore pausing daily contact testing in all but a small number of secondary schools and colleges, where it will continue alongside detailed evaluation.”  Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said headteachers were “relieved” at the decision. He added: “This use of these tests never really made sense because they don’t detect all those with the infection, so we could potentially have ended up with more infectious people in school than under the self-isolation system where close contacts are sent home. We have been making this point to the government repeatedly over the past few weeks. “It is important to understand that this issue is about one specific use of these tests. We support the principle of using them for general mass testing of students and staff because this process should pick up at least a proportion of asymptomatic cases and improve safety. Our concern was purely over the idea of using them as a worse alternative to the existing self-isolation system for close contacts. “Unfortunately, the government’s insistence on first trying to use them in this way and then having to do yet another policy reversal will have thoroughly confused parents, pupils and the wider public.  Schools  will once again be left having to unpick the confusion caused by the government.” Barton said mass testing was an important way of keeping schools open but that it was important for the government to provide clarity about the limitations of lateral flow tests, which provide results in 30 minutes but have failed to detect a significant proportion of infections in some trials. He added: “They are useful in detecting asymptomatic cases but they are not definitive and it is vital that individuals continue to follow the normal safety procedures even if they have a negative result.”
Trump will be first president since Nixon to miss successor's inauguration:	Donald Trump , the first US president to have been impeached twice, refuses to attend president-elect Joe Biden’s inauguration this Wednesday. He is one of seven US presidents ever to have done so, joining the company of John Adams, John Quincy Adams, Martin Van Buren, Andrew Johnson, Woodrow Wilson, and most recently, Richard Nixon. Wilson had had a stroke and Nixon had resigned. Presidents have seldom rejected this norm of attendance, usually seen as an important symbol of the peaceful transition of power. In place of his attendance at the US Capitol, Trump plans to  host an event of his own  at Joint Base Andrews, featuring a military band and a 21-gun salute. On Twitter, the presidential historian Michael Beschloss likened Trump’s behavior to “a three-year-old staging a tantrum”. Like a three-year-old staging a tantrum because it’s not his birthday. "Trump has asked for a major send-off on Inauguration Day next week,” reports CNN. Trump’s refusal to attend and his insistence on an alternative ceremony come amid a presidential transition that has already been marked by irregularities. Most transitions begin shortly after the losing candidate quickly concedes an election; Trump waited to do so until after he had incited violence at the US Capitol based on false claims of election fraud. Though Biden won a clear margin of victory in the popular and electoral votes, he and his team were not given timely access to key briefings, including details about  national security  and the  Covid-19 vaccination rollout . Given these larger omissions, it is perhaps not surprising that the smaller traditional gestures of welcome, usually extended by the departing presidential family, have also been absent. While sitting presidents have often invited their successors and their families to the White House in the days before inauguration, this too was omitted this year. It is an indecorous end to an indecorous presidency.
One of UK's oldest twins dies of Covid days before vaccine letter arrives:	One of Britain’s oldest twins has died of Covid-19 after she and her sister caught the virus at the beginning of January. Doris Hobday, 96, died on 5 January, just days after testing positive for the Sars-CoV-2 virus, and just two days before a letter arrived at her home in Tipton, West Midlands, inviting her for her first dose of coronavirus vaccine. Her sister, Lil Cox, spent two weeks in hospital on oxygen, antibiotics and steroids, but survived, their family said. “They were both still going strong before this virus got them and both were determined to live until 100, they had so much to look forward to,” their family said. “It’s just so cruel that Covid has stopped Doris like this.” News of Hobday’s death was broken on Wednesday morning by Good Morning Britain, a programme on which Cox and Hobday had appeared twice. In a tribute  posted to Facebook , their family said that she and her sister’s health had deteriorated fast after their Covid diagnoses. They said: “We are devastated to announce that Doris didn’t make it ... she passed away on Tuesday 5 January after a short stay in hospital … On the same day Lil was also rushed into hospital and had the fight of her life for two weeks on a mixture of oxygen, steroids, vitamins and antibiotics to keep her alive. “Lil has fought so hard and I’m pleased to inform everyone that she was discharged from hospital on Monday, she was only told then of Doris’s death once she was strong enough to take the news. She is now being comforted by family and staying with her daughter Vivien while she fully regains her strength.” Hobday is to be buried next to her husband, Ray, who died 11 years ago. Her family urged people to take the coronavirus pandemic seriously. “Doris was only a few weeks away from being safe! With her vaccine letter arriving two days after her death ... if you are offered the vaccine please take it, do not refuse it ... Doris didn’t get this choice!”
Majority of Europeans fear Biden unable to fix 'broken' US:	A majority of Europeans believe America’s political system is broken, that  China  will be the world’s leading power within a decade, and that Joe Biden will be unable to halt his country’s decline on the world stage, according to a report. While many welcomed Biden’s victory in November’s US election, more Europeans than not feel that after four years of Donald Trump the US cannot be trusted, according to  the study by the European Council on Foreign Relations . “Europeans like Biden, but they don’t think America will come back as a global leader,” said the thinktank’s director, Mark Leonard. “When George W Bush was president, they were divided about how America should use its power. With Biden entering the White House, they are divided about whether America has power at all.” The survey of 15,000 people in 11 European countries, conducted at the end of last year, found that the shift in European sentiment towards the US in the wake of the Trump presidency had led to a corresponding unwillingness to support Washington in potential international disputes. At least half of respondents in all 11 countries surveyed felt, for example, that their government should remain neutral in any conflict between the US and China, while no more than 40% in any country said they would back Washington against Russia. “It’s clear that the tumultuous Trump presidency has left an indelible imprint on Europe’s attitude towards the US,” said Ivan Krastev, chair of the Centre for Liberal Strategies, an NGO in Sofia, and an ECFR board member. “The majority of Europeans are now sceptical about the capacity of the US to shape the world. It makes many, rightly or wrongly, want to opt for a more independent role for the EU in the world.” In their report, Leonard and Krastev note that while more than 60% of those polled believed the US was “broken”, most evaluated the EU and their own countries’ systems much more positively – an opportunity, they argue, to harness the collective power of the bloc for the benefit and protection of its citizens. The survey found that 51% of those polled did not agree with the statement that under Biden the US was likely to resolve its internal divisions and seek to address international issues such as climate change, peace in the Middle East, relations with China or European security. Amid a widespread sense of growing Chinese superiority, 79% of those polled in Spain, 72% in Portugal, 72% in Italy and 63% in France said they thought China would overtake the US as the world’s leading superpower within the next decade. Just over 32% of all respondents – and a startling 53% of respondents in Germany – felt that after voting for Trump, Americans could not be trusted. Only in Hungary and Poland did significantly more people disagree with that view than agree. Just 10% of those polled saw the US as a “reliable” security partner that would always protect  Europe , while at least 60% in every country polled said they doubted their country could depend on US support in the event of a crisis. The authors say the geopolitical consequences of this shift are significant: two-thirds of those surveyed said it was now important that Europe look after its own defence, including 72% in Portugal, 71% in Sweden, 70% in France and 69% in Poland. At least half of respondents in every country surveyed said they would prefer their government to be neutral in a conflict between the US and China. Across the 11 states surveyed, only 23% of respondents thought their country should take Washington’s side against Russia, with 59% preferring to remain neutral. Between 38% and 48% of respondents in seven countries thought the EU should adopt a tougher international stance on issues such as trade, taxation and regulation, while most countries considered Germany was now a more important country to “have a good relationship” with than the US. The poll also revealed that in nine of the 11 countries – Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and Sweden – where the same question was asked in previous years, the average share of people saying the EU’s political system worked very or fairly well had risen from 46% to 48%. It found that people who believed their own national political system was working, which was more often the case in northern than in southern Europe, were more likely to say the EU was a success. The report identified four “tribes” that went a long way to grouping respondents’ positions, depending on whether they felt the EU, US or China were rising or declining. The biggest tribe, “In Europe we trust”, comprised 35% of respondents, while only 9% belonged to “In America we trust”.
Hospitals in Japan close to collapse as serious Covid cases soar:	Hospitals in Covid-hit regions of  Japan  are on the brink of collapse, medical experts have warned, as the country battles a third wave of infections that has caused record numbers of people to fall seriously ill. Japan reported more than 4,900  coronavirus  infections on Monday, with serious cases rising to a record high of 973, local media reported. Although Japan has  avoided  the huge caseloads and death tolls seen in some other countries, infections have doubled over the past six weeks to about 338,000, according to the public broadcaster  NHK , with 4,623 deaths. The increase, coupled with the discovery of the first recorded community transmissions of a fast-spreading  strain of Covid-19  initially identified in Britain, is adding to pressure on the prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, to move quickly to protect stretched medical services. “What is important is to provide necessary services to people in need. We will exhaust all measures to safeguard the medical system,” Suga said in a policy speech this week, adding that the government was ready to deploy military medical teams to regions struggling to cope with an influx of Covid patients. Suga, whose handling of the pandemic has caused his approval rating to plummet, declared a month-long  state of emergency  in the greater Tokyo area on 7 January that was quickly expanded to cover half the country’s 126 million people. But his own advisers have warned the measures, which include asking bars and restaurants to close early and people to avoid non-essential outings, are unlikely to have much effect. Shigeru Omi, the head of the government’s subcommittee on the pandemic, said they would need to be in place for longer than a month, while the president of the  Japan  Medical Association, Toshio Nakagawa, said Suga should consider bringing the entire country under a state of emergency. Nakagawa was also dismissive of government plans to offer subsidies to hospitals that free up more beds for Covid patients. “There aren’t enough doctors or nurses,” he said. “Even if hospitals are told to increase the number of beds, what can’t be done, can’t be done. If the number of infection cases keeps rising, the healthcare system could be wiped out.” The rise in the number of seriously ill patients is forcing doctors to make tough decisions on who to prioritise for treatment. With the number of deaths projected to exceed 5,000 by the end of the month, some hospitals are reporting a shortage of ventilators and other equipment used to treat patients with severe symptoms. “They are waiting for the end of their lives without ventilators after available drugs failed to turn around their condition,” Hideaki Oka, a professor of infectious disease at the Saitama Medical Centre near Tokyo, told the  Asahi Shimbun  newspaper. “As far as seriously ill Covid-19 patients are concerned, hospitals have already lost the ability to treat them all,” he said. “Fatalities could rise sharply in the days ahead.” Daisuke Kurai, an associate professor of infectious diseases at Kyorin University hospital in Tokyo, said the Covid surge was making it increasingly difficult to attend to patients with other serious illnesses. “The medical care system is already in a state of collapse,” he told the Kyodo news agency. More than 30,000 people with no or mild Covid symptoms have been asked to recuperate at home as more hospitals near capacity. As of last weekend, 14,806 people were being treated in hospital, while a further 7,781 were staying at specially designated hotels and other accommodations, Kyodo said. Hospital bed occupancy in 19 of Japan’s 47 prefectures has reached stage 4 – the most critical level – with the highest numbers concentrated in Tokyo and other urban centres. Three people, all from Shizuoka prefecture south-east of Tokyo, found to have been infected with the more transmissible mutation of Covid-19 had no recent history of travel to the UK or contact with travellers from abroad, media reports said. With six months to go until the  Olympics  are due to open in Tokyo, Japan has detected 45 cases of new Covid variants first identified in Britain, South Africa and Brazil. “We are currently investigating whether the infection is spreading in the region,” said Takaji Wakita, the head of the National Institute of Infectious Diseases.
Sri Lankan holy man’s ‘miracle’ potion for Covid turns sour:	A self-styled Sri Lankan holy man’s supposed miracle potion to prevent Covid-19 has turned sour after a minister who publicly drank it was taken to hospital with the virus. Thousands defied public gathering restrictions to swamp a village in central  Sri Lanka  last month to get the syrup made by Dhammika Bandara. The women and child development minister, Piyal Nishantha de Silva, was among several politicians who consumed the concoction, but parliamentary officials said he had since tested positive for coronavirus and was taken to a treatment centre. Family members of another politician from Bandara’s village had also been infected despite taking the syrup. Pro-government media gave widespread publicity to the holy man, who claimed the formula was revealed to him by Kali, the Hindu goddess of death and destruction of evil. The only ingredients he acknowledged were honey and nutmeg. The government has scrambled to distance itself from Bandara, whose preparation was approved as a food supplement by the official indigenous medicine unit. “Although some parliamentarians took it, the government does not endorse it,” said Keheliya Rambukwella, the minister of mass media. Sri Lanka is in the grip of a coronavirus surge, with the number of cases rising from 3,300 in early October to a total of 53,750 infections now.
Australia’s state by state Covid restrictions and coronavirus lockdown rules explained:	Australian states and territories have different levels of restrictions to contain Covid-19. Here we answer some common questions about restrictions in each state, based on the information available as of 19 January. This article should not be treated as legal advice. It will be updated as restrictions are announced, implemented or repealed. Here are the official state and territory restriction guides for  New South Wales ,  Queensland ,  Victoria ,  Tasmania ,  Western Australia ,  South Australia , the  Northern Territory  and the  ACT . The  Queensland  government lifted a lockdown for greater Brisbane on 11 January, but some restrictions remain in place for anyone who has visited the area since 2 January. Those restrictions include wearing masks in indoor places like shopping centres and supermarkets, gyms and places of worship and libraries. Indoor venues are restricted to one person per four square metres and outdoor venues are restricted to one person per two square metres. Up to 20 people will be allowed in homes and public spaces and up to 100 guests at weddings and funerals. These restrictions will be in place until 22 January. Full details are on the  Queensland Health website . New South Wales:  residences in greater Sydney, Central Coast and Wollongong are allowed a maximum of five visitors.   In the rest of the state, people are allowed a maximum of 50 visitors in their homes at a time. However NSW Health strongly recommends having no more than 30 visitors at a time if the residence has no outdoor area. If there are more than 50 visitors at a home, every person can be held individually responsible for  a breach of the public health order . Victoria:  you can have up to 15 visitors to your home each day. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane you can have 20 people in a home, including those who live there. Everyone else in Queensland can have up to 50 people inside their home. Tasmania:  a maximum of 100 people are allowed to gather at residential premises (including shacks) whether inside or outside. Western Australia:  there is no limit to the number of guests you are allowed as long as there is no more than one person per 2 sq metres. South Australia:  gatherings in private homes are limited to 50 people.   All gatherings must observe the density requirements of one person per 2 sq metres. Northern Territory:  there is no limit on how many people can gather indoors or outdoors, but physical distancing is required. Gatherings of more than 100 require the completion of a  Covid-19 checklist . ACT:  there is no limit on visitors. States and territories have agreed that anyone catching domestic or international flights must wear a mask on the plane and in the airport. Some states have additional mask-wearing requirements to control outbreaks. New South Wales:  in the greater Sydney area, it is mandatory to wear masks in  many indoor settings , including shops, public transport and places of worship. You must also wear a mask at the SCG for the third Test and A-league games. Victoria:  from 18 January, masks no long need to be worn in all public indoor settings. They must still be worn on public transport, in a taxi or ride sharing vehicle, in shopping centres and large retail stores. Queensland:  for anyone who has visited greater Brisbane since 2 January, masks must be worn in indoor places including shopping centres, gyms and on public transport until 22 January. .  New South Wales:  public gatherings in greater Sydney, Central Coast and Wollongong of up to 30 people are allowed. In regional NSW, public gatherings of 100 people are allowed. This limit does not apply if the group of people are all from the same household or if it is a controlled outdoor event. Victoria:  up to 100 people from any number of households can gather outside. 1.5 metres should be maintained between yourself and others not from your household. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, the same restrictions on indoor gatherings apply to outdoor settings which means a maximum of 20 people, including those who live with you. Everywhere else in the state public gatherings are restricted to a maximum of 100; this does not apply to businesses operating with a Covid-safe plan. Tasmania:  up to 250 people are allowed in an undivided indoor space and up to 1,000 in an outdoor space, as long as there is at least 2 sq metres of space per person. Western Australia:  there is no limit on the number allowed at public gatherings as long as there is at least 2 sq metres of space per person. South Australia:  gatherings at public places are capped at 50, with density requirements of one person every 4 sq metres. Northern Territory:  there are no limits but you should maintain physical distancing. Gatherings of more than 100 will require completion of a  Covid-19 checklist . ACT:  up to 500 people   can gather together outdoors as long as 2 sq metres of space per person is maintained. If people wish to hold gatherings of greater than 500 people, they must seek an exemption in accordance with the  COVID Safe Event Protocol . Visitors cannot enter an aged care facility in any state if they have recently been overseas, been in recent contact with a confirmed case of Covid-19, or feel unwell. New South Wales:  NSW Health  provides guidelines  for residential aged care facilities. No visitors are allowed at greater Sydney aged care facilities, except for visitors performing essential care functions, until 11.59pm on Wednesday 6 January. People from greater Sydney also cannot visit regional aged care facilities. There are no restrictions on people from regional areas visiting regional aged care facilities, unless they have been in a Covid hotspot, have Covid symptoms or are a close contact of someone who has Covid. Victoria:  there are no longer any restrictions on visits to care facilities in  Victoria . People of any age can visit residents for as long as desired, as long as the rules set by the facility are followed. Face masks must still be worn. Queensland:  no visitors are allowed to aged care facilities and hospitals in the greater Brisbane area. In the rest of the state, residents can have as many visitors as the facility allows, but people who have been in Victoria on or after 21 December 2020 are not allowed to enter residential aged care facilities unless 14 days have passed since they were in Victoria. Employees, contractors, students, volunteers and support persons who have been in Victoria on or after 21 December 2020 may enter a residential aged care facility if the individual obtains a negative Covid-19 test in Queensland after returning from Victoria. Tasmania:  residents can have up to two visitors at one time. There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. Residents are allowed to go outside on trips, and hairdressers can be allowed in. Additional visitors are allowed for end of life support, or if needed to reduce distress and confusion given a resident’s medical condition. Western Australia:  each resident can have one care and support visit a day, with  up to two visitors  at a time. Only immediate social supports, such as family and close friends, professional help or advocacy services can attend. South Australia:  people from NSW and people who have been in Covid hotspots are not permitted to visit SA aged care facilities. Aside from that, up to two people can visit at the same time for care and support. There is no limit to the length of each visit. Workers must wear a mask where physical distancing isn’t possible, and they can work at only one site. Northern Territory:  residents can have up to  two visitors at a time . There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. ACT:  residents can be visited  by up to two people at a time.  There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. New South Wales:  yes, as long as venues observe the 4 sq metre per person rule up to a   cap of 300 for each separate area   at any time. All diners must provide name and contact details, including a phone number or email address, for contact tracing. Food courts have reopened. Victoria:  there are specific directions for differently sized indoor venues. Venues are capped subject to a density rule of one person per 2 sq metres, with no other cap. There are no longer any group booking limitations. Queensland:  Restaurants and cafes in greater Brisbane can reopen with one person per 4 sq metres, except for businesses with a floor space less than 200 sq metres which can have one person per 2 sq metres, up to 50 at a time. Diners must remain seated. Elsewhere in the state, restaurants, cafes, pubs, registered clubs, RSL clubs and hotels with a Covid-safe checklist can seat   any number of patrons as long as the 2 sq metre per person limit is observed. Tasmania:  up to 250 are allowed in an undivided space as long as there is no more than one person every 2 sq metres. Up to 1,000 people are allowed in an undivided outdoor space, density requirements permitting. Western Australia:  cafes and restaurants (including in pubs, bars, hotels, casinos, clubs) can open to up to seated diners, with one person every 2 sq metres. There is no requirement for businesses to maintain a patron register, but they must display a COVID Safety Plan Certificate in a prominent location visible to patrons. South Australia:  restaurants, cafes, pubs, food courts, nightclubs and casinos have density requirements of one person per 2 sq metres. Northern Territory:  all businesses can reopen as long as they have a Covid plan. ACT:  restaurants, cafes and other hospitality venues offering seated dining can host up to one person per 4 sq metres. Venues can register to host one person per 2 sq metres. The only restrictions on travel within states are in  Western Australia  and  South Australia  where there are restrictions on visiting some remote Aboriginal communities. New South Wales:  anyone can enter NSW.  Victoria:  a  permit system is in place for travel to Victoria  from all parts of Australia. It is based on a traffic light system where different areas are classified red, orange and green. From 18 January most of greater Sydney, plus Wollongong and the Blue Mountains, was downgraded to orange which means people in these areas are able to travel to Victoria. They’ll need to get a test on arrival and self-isolate until receiving a negative result. Ten NSW local government areas remain in the red zone. They are: Blacktown, Burwood, Canada Bay, Canterbury-Bankstown, Cumberland, Fairfield, Inner West, Liverpool, Parramatta and Strathfield. People in these areas cannot travel to Victoria without an exemption. Queensland:  the Queensland border is open to all states and territories, unless you have been in a Covid hotspot in the last 14 days or since the hotspot was declared (whichever is shorter). Currently 35 local government areas covering Sydney, Wollongong and the Blue Mountains. Anyone travelling to Queensland who has been in NSW at any time since 1am Friday 11 December must complete a  Queensland Border Declaration Pass  before they enter Queensland.  Tasmania:  Travellers who have been in  high risk locations , which currently includes greater Brisbane and greater Sydney, are required to quarantine for 14 days either at a suitable premises or in government-designated quarantine (fees can apply). You can apply for an exemption as an  essential traveller  for critical work, health, compassionate or other reasons.  There are no restrictions on Tasmanians travelling to other states and territories. Western Australia:  travellers from  medium risk states  are not permitted to enter without an exemption through  G2G PASS . If permitted entry, you must self-quarantine at a suitable premises for 14 days. If a suitable premises is not available, you will be directed to a government-approved quarantine facility at your own expense. Travellers from low risk states are allowed to enter with a G2G PASS, but must quarantine for 14 days as above. Travellers from very low risk states are allowed to enter with a G2G PASS without the need to quarantine. South Australia:  anyone travelling to SA must complete a  cross-border travel registration . People arriving from greater Brisbane will need have a coronavirus test but will no longer have to quarantine. People from greater Sydney, Wollongong and the Central Coast are not allowed to enter, but people from the rest of NSW can go to SA. They must have a coronavirus test on days one, five and 12 after arrival.  Northern Territory:  you can enter provided you fill out a border entry form up to 72 hours before arrival and present it upon entry. You will be required to legally declare you have not been in an area the state considers  a Covid-19 hotspot in the past 28 days . Parts of Sydney are currently deemed a hotspot, although the greater Brisbane area is no longer considered one. Penalties of up to $5,000 and up to three years in prison apply for providing misleading information. Arrivals from a hotspot area must go into 14 days supervised quarantine at the traveller’s expense. ACT:  Ten local government areas in greater Sydney are considered hotspots by the ACT, meaning if you have been in one of the Covid-affected areas in the last two weeks, you will need to quarantine for 14 days. Northern beaches was removed from that list on 19 January. There are no restrictions on travel to other states and territories. New South Wales:  up to  100 can attend a wedding , subject to the 4 sq metre rule indoors and 2 sq metre rule outdoors. For weddings, up to 20 people in the wedding party are permitted on the dance floor. This applies only to members of the official wedding party and dancers cannot be rotated or substituted throughout the celebration. Funerals can be attended by up to 100 providing there is at least 4 sq metre per person. This applies to indoor and outdoor ceremonies.   Those attending will have to provide name and contact details. In greater Sydney – which includes the Central Coast and the Blue Mountains – singing and chanting is not allowed at any indoor venue. Victoria:  Weddings and funerals are subject to a one person per two square metres density rule, with no other caps.   A wedding or funeral held at a private residence is limited to up to 15 people. The four-square metre rule must be applied to limit the number of people on the dance floor and there can only be up to 50 people on the dance floor at one time, if space allows. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, weddings and funerals are limited to 100 guests. Outside of the affected area, up to 200 can attend weddings and funerals at a professional venue or private residence as long as a Covidsafe plan is in place. Private wedding services in public areas or private homes can have up to 100 people in outdoor public spaces and 50 people in private properties. A record of names and contact details of each guest must be kept for 56 days. Tasmania:  in commercial spaces, up to 250 can gather in an undivided indoor space, and up to 1,000 in an undivided outdoor space. In both cases, the number present must also not exceed one person per 2 sq metres. Up to 100 people can gather at private residences. Rules apply to the number of people allowed to consume alcohol while standing. Western Australia:  there is no limit as long as there is no more than one person every 2 sq m. South Australia:  weddings are capped at 200 for commercial premises, 50 for private residences, and all attendees must register with SA Health. Funerals are capped at 50. Density limits of one person every 2 sq metres apply to both. Northern Territory:  there is no limit but gatherings of more than 100 will be required to complete a Covid-19 checklist. ACT:  there is no cap on the number of people who can attend weddings or funerals, as long as there is no more than one person every 4 sq metres. However organisers for events for between 201 and 500 people are required to notify ACT Health and submit their COVID Safe plan (via the  online form ), and events over 500 will need an exemption in accordance with the  COVID Safe Event Protocol . Dancing at weddings is permitted. New South Wales:  the number of people in a public place of worship must not exceed 100, and the 4 sq metre physical distancing rule must be observed. An outdoor religious service is subject to the one person per 2 sq metre rule. Victoria:  religious gatherings are subject to a one person per 2 sq metres density rule, with no other caps. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, places of worship can have one person per 4 sq metres and visitors must wear a mask indoors. In other parts of the state, places of worship can have one person per 2 sq metres. Tasmania:  up to 250 can gather in an undivided indoor space, as long as there are 2 sq metres per person. Western Australia:  attendance is limited only by the 2 sq metre rule. South Australia:  capped at 200. Attendance is limited only by the 4 sq metre rule. Northern Territory:  there is no limit on how many can attend at the same time but social distancing should be observed. ACT:  capped at 25 people across the entire venue. If a venue wants to have more than 25 people, it can have one person per two square metres of usable space in each indoor and outdoor space (excluding staff) provided they are using the  Check In CBR app . Students in all states and territories are currently on holidays so restrictions are not current. Yes, hairdressers, barbers, nail waxing, tanning and beauty salons, tattoo and massage parlours have reopened across the country. Businesses must meet density limits, and, in  South Australia , service providers must wear a mask. In Victoria, masks are strongly recommended for both the client and the person providing the service. New South Wales:  museums, galleries and libraries, National Trust and Historic Houses Trust properties are   open to guests, as long as 4 sq m is allowed per person and they have a Covid-19 safety plan. For large venues attendance to a ticketed event with allocated seating must not exceed 50% of capacity.   The total number of people in a major recreational facility hosting a non-ticketed or non-seated event must not exceed one person per 4 square m (excluding staff) with no maximum capacity. Victoria:  entertainment and cultural venues such as music venues, museums, indoor and outdoor cinemas, and the casino are open, subject to capacity restrictions. Night clubs are also able to reopen.   Brothels and strip clubs have reopened, but must have Covid-safe plans in place and follow strict patron limits. Queensland:  libraries, museums, art galleries, historic sites, indoor cinemas, concert venues, theatres, arenas, auditoriums, stadiums, nightclubs, outdoor amusement parks, zoos and arcades can reopen with a Covidsafe plan.  Tasmania:  up to 250 can attend each undivided space in indoor recreational facilities, such as libraries, arcades, play centres, cinemas, museums, national institutions, historic sites and galleries, the 2 sq metre rule permitting. Up to 1,000 are allowed in each undivided outdoor space. Western Australia:  community facilities, libraries, galleries, museums, theatres, auditoriums, cinemas and concert venues can reopen, as can Perth zoo, wildlife and amusement parks, arcades, skate rinks and indoor play centres. All venues can have as many people as the one person per 2 sq metre rule allows. There is a 50% capacity cap on major sport and entertainment venues, such as the Optus Stadium, HBF Park and RAC Arena. All events are allowed, except for large scale, multi-stage music festivals. Unseated performances can go ahead at concert halls, live music venues, bars, pubs and nightclubs, and the casino gaming floor can reopen under temporary restrictions. South Australia:  venues are open, but   density requirements must be observed, with a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres allowed at cinemas, theatres, concert venues, zoos, galleries, museums and historic sites. Northern Territory:  public libraries, art galleries, museums, zoos, cinemas and theatres, music halls, nightclubs, amusement parks, community centres, stadiums, sporting facility and similar entertainment venues are open. ACT:  movie theatres, indoor amusement centres, arcades, outdoor and indoor play centres, betting agencies, outdoor amusements and attractions, community and youth centres, galleries, museums, national institutions, libraries historic sites and zoos can sell seated (when applicable) tickets at no more than 50% of capacity of each venue. There can only be one person per 2 sq metres throughout the venue as long as the venue has the  Check In CBR app . New South Wales:  gyms, fitness centres and studios (such as dance studios) may open for up to 30 a class. The total in a facility must not exceed one person in 4 sq metres, excluding staff. Indoor pools and saunas have also reopened subject to the one person per 4 sq metre rule in greater Sydney and one person per 2 sq metre rule in regional NSW. Community sporting competitions and training can go ahead as long as the number in a facility does not exceed one person every 4 sq metres, excluding staff, to a maximum of 500. You can use outdoor gym equipment in public, with caution, and enjoy activities such as fishing, hunting and boating. Victoria:  Personal training is allowed  and exercise in a group of up to 100 in a public place is permitted. For indoor exercise classes, the cap is 50 people. In general, gyms are subject to the one per 4 sq metre density rule when staffed and the one per 8 sq metres when unstaffed. Outdoor sport recreational facilities, such as tennis courts, golf courses or bowling greens, are open with some restrictions. Outdoor and indoor pools have opened, with restrictions on capacity. Queensland:  Gyms, health clubs, yoga studios and community sports clubs can open for up to one person per 2 sq metres. People can gather outside (capped at 20 people in greater Brisbane), play non-contact sport and participate in outdoor group training and boot camps with physical distancing. Parks, playgrounds, skateparks and pools are open with physical distancing rules. Tasmania:  gatherings are limited to 1,000 people in the outdoors of a premises for community sport and 250 for an undivided space in an indoor premises, or a maximum of one person per  2 sq metres . Indoor pools are limited to 250 people in each single undivided space, or a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres. Outdoor pools are limited to a maximum of 1,000 people in the whole outdoor area of premises, or a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres. Western Australia:  gyms, health clubs, and indoor sports centres can reopen for up to one person per 2 sq metres. Gyms can operate unstaffed but must undergo regular cleaning. Contact sport and training has recommenced, and playgrounds, outdoor gym equipment and skate parks can be used. South Australia:  sport (including sports training), fitness and recreation activities are all subject to the  one person per 2 sq metres rule . Northern Territory:  gyms, fitness studios and indoor training activities such as Cross Fit are allowed. You can also officiate, participate and support team sports, such as football, basketball, soccer and netball. ACT:  gyms and fitness centres are open to up to 500 people, subject to the one person per 2 sq m if they have the  Check In CBR app  and 4 sq metres per person if they don’t. Full contact training for sport, dance and martial arts, as well as circuit training, is allowed. Generally, enforcement is left up to the discretion of police officers. States have taken different approaches. For example, the ACT   says it will issue a warning while Victoria has adopted a more hardline attitude to those breaking social distancing rules. The NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller said he would review all physical-distancing fines. “If I think it’s unreasonable, it will be withdrawn immediately and we’ll make personal contact with the individual,” he said. Not all states have specified this but it appears fines can be appealed using the same process as other fines issued by police. Information on how to lodge an appeal should be available on your state or territory’s government website. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales  health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the  NSW Health website . NSW  Health  is asking anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed below to get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received. If symptoms appear, please isolate and get tested again. Village Tavern, Auburn:  Monday 28 – Tuesday 29 December, 6pm Monday – 4am Tuesday Village Tavern, Auburn:  Thursday 7 – Friday 8 January, 6pm Thursday – 4am Friday Village Tavern, Auburn:  Wednesday 13 – Thursday 14 January, 6pm Wednesday – 4am Thursday Auburn Hotel, Auburn:  Tuesday 12 January,   6pm – close Berala:  Berala Hotel, Wednesday 30 December, 6pm – close If you have been to the Auburn Central shopping centre or the Auburn shops along Queen St and South Parade at any time since 1 January 2021, and have had symptoms, you should get tested and isolate until you receive a negative result. All previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Europe can only fix its relationship with Africa if it exorcises its colonial ghosts:	Black Lives Matter protests last summer sparked an uncomfortable reckoning for many European nations with a legacy of slavery and colonialism. Excavating this dark history via revised school curriculums and initiatives such as  Black History Month  is difficult. But it is badly needed, and not just to dispel the self-congratulatory and entirely false narratives about Europe’s “civilisational” past still being driven by nationalist and populist politicians. The new conversation is urgently required if the EU is to salvage flagging efforts to launch a so-called  partnership of equals  with African nations. And it is needed, too, if European governments are to put relations with  African European  citizens on a sounder and more respectful footing. There are encouraging signs. In Germany, BLM protests injected momentum into efforts to  change street  names with colonial-era or racist references. In France, the  armed forces  ministry provided local authorities with a guide to 100 Africans who fought for France in the second world war, so that streets and squares may be named after them. President  Macron  had, in 2019 during a visit to Ivory Coast, denounced the French “hegemonic view and the trappings of colonialism”, which he said were “a grave mistake – a fault of the republic”. In Belgium, authorities responded to protests by removing at least some public monuments to King  Leopold II , whose forces seized Congo in the late 19th century and ran an exploitative regime that led to the deaths of millions. And in an unprecedented step last summer, Belgium’s King Philippe, an indirect descendent of Leopold II,  wrote to the Congolese president , Félix Tshisekedi, to offer his deepest  regret  for the “humiliation and suffering” inflicted during Belgium’s colonial occupation of the country. The pain of the past, said the king, was “revived by the discrimination that is still all too present in our societies”. They may have been a long time coming, and carry only symbolic value, but such gestures matter. Macron’s  recent decision  to invite young Africans rather than their political leaders to a France-Africa summit on biodiversity in July and to involve African Europeans in the effort are also steps in the right direction; as are efforts to bring female entrepreneurs, cities and business leaders into continuing African-European conversations. Because  Europe  and Africa are interconnected and interdependent. They need each other to create jobs and growth on both continents, to   ensure a post-pandemic economic recovery and to tackle climate change. The EU remains the  leading aid, trade and investment  actor across the continent. African  exports  of raw materials, chemicals and petroleum products, minerals and metals as well as fishery and agricultural goods, continue to be the mainstay of many European industries. Yet, even if Africa’s once dynamic growth rates have been slowed by the pandemic, its economic potential, youthful population and plans to build an  African Continental Free Area , (AfCFTA) modelled on the EU single market,   will intensify international rivalry and competition – especially between Europe and China. EU policymakers insist that their policies are better than Beijing’s, and that while China’s investments under the  belt and road initiative  grab global attention, they are worsening Africa’s already  high debt burden  and making debt-relief measures even more urgent. African commentators  accuse  the EU, which makes its aid conditional on human rights and other norms, of harbouring “paternalistic” attitudes, saying the bloc could learn from Beijing on consulting, informing and working with African states as true equals. They have a point. African Union leaders cancelled a much-trailed online EU-Africa mini-summit in early December at the last minute. That followed the postponement because of coronavirus of a full-format meeting scheduled for October. This can not be brushed off as just another routine diplomatic mishap. It is time to come clean. A reset of this relationship is difficult because many increasingly self-confident Africans are understandably sceptical about Europe’s motives. Africa-Europe relations have for years been marked by an imbalanced donor/recipient relationship, with African governments seeking access to EU trade and aid preferences, while European leaders have cultivated privileged ties with African elites and ignored the needs of the continent’s younger generation. Fortress Europe’s aim to keep out African migrants has added to the mistrust. Tasked with picking up the pieces, Portugal, as current holder of the rotating EU presidency, is hoping it can replicate this year a successful EU-Africa summit it organised in 2007. But times have changed. Geopolitics have become more unpredictable, the uncertainties triggered by the pandemic are countless and more countries, including post-Brexit Britain, are vying with the EU for economic opportunities in  Africa . One way forward would be an EU acknowledgment of the damage wreaked by colonialism followed by a recognition by African governments that a new generation of modern European leaders – as EU council President Charles Michel noted last year – can no longer be weighed down by the “ burden of nostalgia ”. A joint statement that admits the missteps of the past but also promises fresh beginnings may not lead to an immediate uptick in EU-Africa relations. But it would represent a very good start. If they are to make good on plans for a  fairer revamp of relations  with African states, EU leaders must take collective action to exorcise the ghosts of Leopold II – and those of other colonial “heroes” who trod similar ground. That will mean addressing African grievances over Europe’s role in the slave trade and the crueller aspects of colonial rule, as well as persistent modern-day discrimination, racism and unconscious bias. It will require a change in Europe’s toxic debate on migration, implementation of a  new EU anti-racism agenda  and stepping up work on “ international partnerships ” to replace the traditional EU policy of aid – or, as it was known in Brussels until recently, “development cooperation”, in which outdated white saviour narratives were firmly embedded. Shada Islam is a Brussels-based commentator on EU affairs. She runs New Horizons project, a strategy, analysis and advisory company
Victoria, NSW and Queensland record no local cases – as it happened:	That’s where I will leave you for today. Here’s what we learned: In US news, outgoing president  Donald Trump  has used his final hours before Joe Biden’s inauguration to pardon or commute the sentence of 143 people including allies including former White House aide  Steve Bannon .  Trump leaves office on Wednesday US time, when Biden is sworn in as the nation’s next president. Among the wave of pardons issued was Bannon, a key adviser in Trump’s 2016 presidential run. Bannon was charged last year with swindling Trump supporters over an effort to raise private funds to build the president’s wall on the U.S.-Mexico border. He has pleaded not guilty. In a White House press release on the pardons, Bannon was described as “an important leader in the conservative movement and is known for his political acumen”. Also among the pardon list was  Elliott Broidy , a former top fundraiser for Trump who pleaded guilty last year to violating foreign lobbying laws, and former  Detroit mayor Kwame Kilpatrick , a Democrat, who was serving a 28-year prison term on corruption charges. Rappers  Lil Wayne  and  Kodak Black  who were prosecuted on federal weapons offences, were also granted pardons. In total, 73 people were issued pardons and 70 had their sentences commuted. AP described Bannon as a “voice of nationalist, outsider conservatism”, who led the conservative Breitbart News before being tapped to serve as chief executive of Trump’s 2016 campaign in its critical final months. He later served as chief strategist to the president during the turbulent early days of Trump’s administration and was at the forefront of many of its most contentious policies, including its travel ban on several majority-Muslim countries. But Bannon, who clashed with other top advisers, was pushed out after less than a year. And his split with Trump deepened after he was quoted in a 2018 book making critical remarks about some of Trump’s adult children. Bannon apologized and soon stepped down as chairman of Breitbart. He and Trump have recently reconciled. Trump has already pardoned a slew of longtime associates and supporters, including his former campaign chairman,  Paul Manafort ;  Charles Kushner , the father of his son-in-law; his longtime friend and adviser  Roger Stone ; and his former national security adviser  Michael Flynn . Here’s our full story: The Department of Home Affairs mistakenly sent outdated letters to visa applicants erroneously telling them to immediately book international return flights out of Australia in the middle of a pandemic or risk having their applications derailed.  Scoop from my colleague  Christopher Knaus . A tropical cyclone could bring damaging winds and heavy rain to parts of Western Australia’s Pilbara region in the state’s north. AAP reports that residents and travellers along the coast from Roebourne, near Karratha, to Bidyadanga, south of Broome, are being urged to prepare for a potentially severe impact on Friday or Saturday. Anyone without appropriate housing should leave immediately or find suitable accommodation, the Department of Fire and Emergency Services said on Wednesday. A tropical low heading towards the coast is expected to intensify and develop into a tropical cyclone in coming days, with a Category 3 impact possible. It would be the first tropical cyclone to hit the West Australian coast this season. DFES assistant commissioner  Paul Ryan  told reporters: A storm surge is not going to be too much of an issue for us in this instance; it’s more the destructive winds, particularly if it’s a [category three]. We’re expecting the rainfall ... will be concentrated around the cell. It won’t be widespread flooding to the area. We do have some at-risk areas that we have identified and we’re planning towards what we need to do to respond accordingly. A Category 3 cyclone would be expected to deliver up to 200mm of rain and wind gusts up to 200km/h. Anyone in the affected area is encouraged to assess their properties for loose items, tie down boats or caravans and prepare a survival kit including a radio, torch, mobile phone charger, food, water and any necessary medication. Holiday-makers camping or travelling in caravans are being urged to leave the Pilbara immediately. Former prime minister  Malcolm Turnbull  has given an interview with Bloomberg in which he seems to criticise Scott Morrison’s relationship with the outgoing US president  Donald Trump .  Malcolm Turnbull weighs in: "as an Australian leader, back-slapping sycophantism is not the way to go" "the reason I was able to get as good outcomes as I did with Trump... because I won his respect, by standing up to him and disagreeing and taking him on"  https://t.co/0GIewML1zH Here are some photos of  Scott Morrison  briefly getting stuck inside an elevator. And that seems to be all from the prime minister.  Morrison is asked about  Anthony Albanese’s  speech criticising him for his relationship with US president Donald Trump. He hits back, accusing Labor of using the Australia-US relationship as “a political play thing”. He says: Personal attacks are not foreign policies. The leader of the opposition thinks sledging me is some sort of foreign policy, he just does not get it. It is the job of every prime minister, of whatever political persuasion you are, and every president of the United States, whatever persuasion they are, to continue to steward what is a very important relationship and that is what I have been doing with the current president [and] what I will be doing with the coming president.  I have had a very warm conversation with president-elect Biden, and I’m looking forward to a very positive relation with president Biden once he is sworn in, and his administration. We have very good dealings and relationships with the current administration.  Morrison is being asked about the government’s emissions reduction targets for 2030. He says “we are going to meet and beat them” several times.  OK the feed is back.  Morrison is being asked by a reporter why he hasn’t visited a coalmine as prime minister, and whether it’s because he’s worried about implications from people in Sydney and  Melbourne . “Why would I not?” he says.  If the opportunity presents I will happily take it. I am happy to meet any Australians where they are working, and doing a great job.” He tells us that he “bumped into a bloke just last week” at the Shoalhaven hotel who works in the mine there. “We had a good chat about what is happening in the mines there,” he says. (I’m sorry I have no idea what the context for this is). Prime minister  Scott Morrison  is speaking to reporters from rural  Queensland . “No one does mining better than Australians,” he says.  Then the ABC’s feed drops out.  I mean I assume he was going somewhere with that statement but also, where’s the lie? Earlier today we told you that Labor leader  Anthony Albanese  had accused the prime minister  Scott Morrison  of  “pandering”  to US president  Donald Trump  in a speech on Wednesday. The party’s shadow foreign minister  Penny Wong  has carried on that criticism. In an interview on Sky News today, she described the Trump administration as “unpredictable and tumultuous”, and accused Morrison of putting his “political interests ahead of the stewardship of the relationship” between Australia and the US. She said: I would point to a few things: I would point to in recent days, his refusal to disavow, to call out the incitement of protesters who stormed the Capitol. I would point to his willingness to effectively attend a campaign rally with President Trump. I would point to his refusal to condemn Mr Christensen and Craig Kelly who are peddling the same lies, which founded the attack on democracy, which was the storming of the Capitol. Morrison has labelled Trump’s comments in the lead up to the Capitol insurrection as  “incredibly disappointing” .  On Wednesday he told 2GB Radio it was “really disappointing” the events at the US Capitol had detracted from the Trump administration’s legacy. “It’s been very disturbing what we’ve seen particularly around Capitol Hill. But it had been a year full of violence, you know, in many ways last year in the United States. And I’m confident about America ... [they’ll] bounce back, they’ll overcome this.” Labor’s shadow housing minister,  Jason Clare , has addressed the “big jump in the number of Homebuilder applications”, describing it as a “good thing”. Clare told reporters in Sydney: The scheme kicked off late last year and it was very slow to start off. And a lot of tradies in the building game lost their jobs. We’re seeing that ramp up now. That’s good. That will hopefully mean that we’ll see tradies who work in building homes for other Aussies get their jobs back.  But a word of warning here - my office is already getting calls from people who applied for the $25,000, signed a contract for a new home, and are now being told by their builder they may not get the money. And the reason for that is the builder is saying they can’t comply with the rules the government has set up.  In particular, that the builder has to start building the house within six months of signing the contract. Now, if people sign up for the scheme, apply for the $25,000 and then miss out for no fault of their own, then I think that’s unfair. I urge the prime minister and the government to apply a bit of common sense here and work with the state governments who are involved in the scheme and make sure that people don’t miss out.” Here’s our full story on the more than 20 refugees who have reportedly been released from detention inside a  Melbourne  hotel today. A coalition of rights groups says Australia should take a step towards ending the mass imprisonment of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people by raising the age of legal responsibility from 10 to at least 14 years old.  The Australian government is set to face questions over the country’s human rights performance tonight (Australian time), as part of the UN human rights council’s universal periodic review process that happens about every five years. Countries that have submitted questions in advance have raised concerns about rates of Indigenous incarceration,  as we reported yesterday . Germany wants to know precisely why Australia has delayed a push to raise the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14 years. Ahead of tonight’s human rights hearing, the Raise the Age coalition has issued a statement with a range of its members urging Australia to take the rights of children seriously, and to commit to raising the age. Monique Hurley , legal director of the Human Rights Law Centre, said children across Australia “should be in schools and playgrounds, not police and prison cells”, while  Cheryl Axleby , the co-chair of Change the Record, said the existing policy was “cruel, harmful and out of step with the rest of the world”. Axleby said: The Australian government has been condemned by tens of thousands of Australians, doctors, lawyers, academics and today comes under the scrutiny of countries like Poland and Germany who want to know why Australia is locking away Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander kids as young as 10 years old.” Priscilla Atkins , the co-chair of National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services, said raising the age was one action that Australian governments could take right away “that will have an immediate – and generational – impact to end the over-incarceration of First Nations kids and to give our kids a brighter future”. Dr Mick Creati , International Child and Adolescent  Health  Specialist and Senior Fellow with the Royal Australasian College of Physicians, said the UN review process was “another opportunity for Australian state and territory governments to be reminded of the urgent need to raise the age of criminal responsibility”. Nolan Hunter , of Amnesty International Australia, said the UN and experts in child development and health agreed “that we must act on this now”. And that’s all from me for today. I’ll hand you over to my colleague  Michael McGowan. Could be some  bushfires in  Victoria  this weekend , the head of the state’s emergency services reckons. The  temperature is going to reach the 40s  in some areas. This just in from AAP: Victorian fire authorities are bracing for a weekend of severe fire danger through northern parts of the state. With the temperature forecast to climb into the 40s in some areas, emergency management commissioner Andrew Crisp has warned Victorians to make sure their bushfire preparations are up to date. He said Mildura will start to warm up on Thursday, while Sunday and Monday are set to be spike days. “It will be a challenging weekend for us,” he said. “There is every chance we will see total fire bans for Sunday and Monday ... with fire danger ratings, particularly up in the north of the state, around ‘severe’.” Another piece from our powerful  Childhood in Custody series  has just been published :
Biden inauguration: Trump to leave White House for Florida before ceremony – live:	Reuters have rounded up some key reactions from world leaders to Joe Biden’s impending arrival in the White House. Here’s a selection: British prime minister Boris Johnson : I look forward to working with him Biden, and with his new administration, strengthening the partnership between our countries and working on our shared priorities: from tackling climate change, building back better from the pandemic and strengthening our transatlantic security. European commission president Ursula von der Leyen : The United States is back. And Europe stands ready. To reconnect with an old and trusted partner, to breathe new life into our cherished alliance. I look forward to working together with Joe Biden. German president Frank-Walter Steinmeier : Today is a good day for democracy. In the United States of America, it has faced tremendous challenges and endured. Despite the attempts to tear at America*s institutional fabric, election workers and governors, the judiciary and Congress, have proven strong. I am greatly relieved that, today,  Joe Biden  is being sworn in as president and will be moving into the White House. I know many people in Germany share this feeling. Italian prime minister Giuseppe Conte : We are looking forward to the Biden presidency, with which we will start working immediately in view of our presidency of the G20. We have a strong common agenda, ranging from the effective multilateralism that we both want to see, to climate change, green and digital transition and social inclusion. We are expecting  Donald Trump  to depart the White House and head for Joint Base Andrews within the next half hour for his “sendoff ceremony”. In the meantime, here are some of the defining images and footage of his time in office, put together by our interactive team and picture desk – updated to include the scenes of the pro-Trump mob ransacking the US Capitol on 6 January. The Biden team have also announced another intention of the incoming administration – to dismantle Trump’s  1776 commission .  CNN report : Joe Biden will issue an executive order to dissolve the 1776 commission, a panel stood up by President  Donald Trump  as a rebuttal to schools applying a more accurate history curriculum around slavery in the US. The commission had been formed as an apparent counter to The New York Times’ 1619 Project, a Pulitzer Prize-winning project aimed at teaching American students about slavery that Trump, speaking last fall, had called “toxic propaganda.” The announcement comes just two days after the commission issued an inflammatory report on Martin Luther King Jr. Day and just hours before Biden will take over from Trump, whose time in office was marked by racist statements and actions. In its report released Monday, the commission asserted that “the Civil Rights Movement was almost immediately turned to programs that ran counter to the lofty ideals of the founders,” specifically criticizing affirmative action policies and arguing that identity politics are “the opposite of King’s hope that his children would ‘live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.’” Larry Arnn, the president of Hillsdale College, who had drawn criticism for his comments in 2013, when he said state officials had visited the college to see whether enough “dark ones” were enrolled, was chosen to chair the commission. Carol Swain, who once wrote that Islam “poses an absolute danger to us and our children,” was chosen as vice chair. Read more here:  CNN – Biden to rescind 1776 commission via executive order The current banner on the White House website may be “promises made, promises kept” but that doesn’t appear to be the case when it comes to “draining the swamp’. Donald Trump  campaigned for the presidency in 2016 with that promise and energised a lot of support. One of his final acts in office though has been to undo his one concrete attempt at it. In the early hours the president rescinded an an executive order he had issued years earlier to bar former White House employees from lobbying the government after they leave their jobs. Originally issued in 2017,  the New York Times reports  that “It expanded on rules adopted during the Obama administration and included a five-year ban for former officials lobbying the agencies they once worked for.” With the revocation of the order, Trump’s newly unemployed aides – and presumably members of his own family – are now once again free to become lobbyists or to work for foreign governments.  The new order states: “Employees and former employees subject to the commitments in Executive Order 13770 will not be subject to those commitments after noon January 20, 2021.” It’s really striking, when you think about the context here: after *months* of then-candidate Trump promising to “drain the swamp” again and again, he signed this order four years ago to show he was trying to do just that. But now? A final-hour dead-of-night reversal —>  https://t.co/enbko1MQDK Associated Press remind us that president  Bill Clinton signed a similar order with weeks left on his final term , allowing former aides to go directly into lobbying after leaving his administration. European commission president  Ursula von der Leyen  has spoken of her relief at the end of the Trump administration, and linked the storming of the US capitol by a pro-Trump mob on 6 January with the murder of British MP Jo Cox at the hand of a right wing extremist. She said in a speech to the European parliament that part of the solution is to clamp down on the tech giants who are able to publish “fake news” with immunity. The relief that many of us are feeling about the change of administration in Washington should not blind us to the fact that, although Donald Trump’s presidency may be history in just a few hours, his movement will not. More than 70 million Americans voted for him in the election. Just a few days ago, several hundred of them stormed the Capitol in Washington, the heart of American democracy. That is what happens when words incite action. That is what happens when hate speech and fake news spread like wildfire through digital media. They become a danger to democracy. Last August, several hundred right-wing extremists tried to storm the Reichstag building in Berlin. It is only thanks to the courage and vigilance of a handful of police officers that they were not successful. And we remember Jo Cox, the British Labour Member of Parliament who was murdered by a right-wing extremist in June 2016, during the torrid days leading up to the Brexit referendum. A deed which still makes us shudder today. We must impose democratic limits on the untrammelled and uncontrolled political power of the internet giants. We want the platforms to be transparent about how their algorithms work. We cannot accept a situation where decisions that have a wide-ranging impact on our democracy are being made by computer programs without any human supervision. Von der Leyen went on to say that while it may have been right for Twitter to switch off Donald Trump’s account, “such serious interference with freedom of expression should be based on laws and not on company rules.” Kevin Liptak at CNN  this morning has an incredibly stark write-up of Trump’s era – and the humbling end of it for a president who has prided himself on his tough guy image and being a “winner”: The all-consuming, camera-hungry, truth-starved era that fixated the nation and exposed its darkest recesses officially concludes at noon Wednesday. The president, addled and mostly friendless, will end his time in the capital a few hours early to spare himself the humiliation of watching his successor be sworn in. He departs a city under militarized fortification meant to prevent a repeat of the riot he incited earlier this month. He leaves office with more than 400,000 Americans dead from a virus he chose to downplay or ignore. Even many of Trump’s onetime supporters are sighing with relief that the White House, and the psychology of its occupant, may no longer rest at the center of the national conversation. At least some of the 74 million Americans who voted for Trump in November are sad to see him go. Scores of them attempted an insurrection at the US Capitol this month to prevent it from happening at all. The less violent view him as a transformative president whose arrival heralded an end to political correctness and whose exit marks a return to special treatment for immigrants, gays and minorities. One thing Trump’s presidency undoubtedly accomplished: revealing in stark fashion the racist, hate-filled, violent undercurrents of American society that many had chosen previously to ignore. It became impossible to overlook as Trump’s presidency concluded with violent riots of White nationalists and neo-Nazis at the Capitol. Read more here:  CNN – Trump departs Washington a pariah as his era in power ends Vermont’s  Sen. Bernie Sanders   writes for us this morning : In this moment of unprecedented crises, Congress and the  Biden administration  must respond through unprecedented action. No more business as usual. No more same old, same old. Democrats , who will now control the White House, the Senate and the House, must summon the courage to demonstrate to the American people that government can effectively and rapidly respond to their pain and anxiety. As the incoming chairman of the Senate budget committee that is exactly what I intend to do. What does all of this mean for the average American? It means that we aggressively crush the pandemic and enable the American people to return to their jobs and schools . This will require a federally led emergency program to produce the quantity of vaccines that we need and get them into people’s arms as quickly as possible. It means that during the severe economic downturn we’re experiencing, we must make sure that all Americans have the financial resources they need to live with dignity . We must increase the $600 in direct payments for every working-class adult and child that was recently passed to $2,000, raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, expand unemployment benefits and prevent eviction, homelessness and hunger. It means that, during this raging pandemic, we must guarantee healthcare to all . We must also end the international embarrassment of the United States being the only major country on Earth not to provide paid family and medical leave to workers. It means making pre-kindergarten and childcare universal and available to every family in America . Despite what you may have heard, there is no reason why we cannot do  all  of these things.  Read more here:  Bernie Sanders – Joe Biden must put an end to business as usual. Here’s where to start Reuters report that  the Kremlin has said this morning it remained committed to extending the New Start nuclear arms control treaty with the United States  and would welcome efforts promised by the administration of president-elect  Joe Biden  to reach agreement. The New Start (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) accord, which was signed in 2010 and expires in February, limits the numbers of strategic nuclear warheads, missiles and bombers that Russia and the United States can deploy. “Russia and its president are in favour of preserving this agreement,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters on a conference call. “If our American colleagues will in fact demonstrate a political will to preserve this pact by extending it, this can only be welcomed.” Biden’s choice for secretary of state,  Antony Blinken , said on Tuesday that the incoming US administration would seek to extend the pact and decide how long an extension to pursue. Russian President  Vladimir Putin  last year called on Washington to extend the last major nuclear arms pact between the two countries for a year without any conditions. A failure to extend New Start could fuel a potential arms race and tensions between Moscow and Washington – a relationship which is expected to be very different from the cosiness of the Trump-Putin era. Here’s  Amanda Holpuch  in New York and  Lauren Gambino  in Washington with a bit more detail on that proposed Biden immigration plan for us: Biden administration  officials briefed reporters on Tuesday on the incoming president’s day one immigration plans. They include executive orders to reverse Trump’s attempt to exclude undocumented people from the census, end the travel ban, roll back a Trump-era policy on deportation priorities and end an emergency declaration Trump used to divert funds to the wall on the US-Mexico border. Biden will also unveil legislation that creates a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, calls for increased technology at the border and attempts to address the root causes of immigration. He will also issue a presidential memo to underline the administration’s support for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (Daca) program, which allows people who were brought to the US as children without legal documents to temporarily get work visas and be protected from deportation. Trump ended Daca in 2017, but the decision was embroiled in legal challenges and eventually rejected by the supreme court. In another memo, Biden will extend a program that protected roughly 4,000 Liberians in the US who  hold a protected immigration status  known as Deferred Enforced Departure (DED). An interior enforcement executive order will reverse an order Trump signed five days after he took office that dramatically  expanded interior immigration law enforcement  by no longer prioritizing the deportation of criminals.  Biden will also end the travel ban. The order will also instruct the state department to restart visa processing for the affected countries and to develop a proposal to remedy harms caused by the bans, including those who had visas denied. It also allows for increased screening and vetting of travelers through information sharing with foreign governments. The incoming administration emphasized it plans to address the root causes of migration, including by sending aid to the Central American countries where the  climate crisis , violence, corruption and poverty have driven an increase in family immigration. Read more here:  Biden plans day-one immigration moves to reverse ‘inhumane’ Trump policies Joe Biden is expected to sign 15 executive orders and make further instructions after he is sworn in as US president  undoing policies put in place by outgoing president  Donald Trump  and making his first moves on the pandemic, climate change and racial justic. Biden will sign the executive orders and memorandums in the Oval Office in the afternoon, and ask agencies to take steps in two additional areas, said incoming Press Secretary  Jen Psaki . Introducing the plans, the Biden-Harris transition team said in  a statement : The president-elect’s day one executive actions will protect workers from Covid-19, including by ensuring that federal employees and contractors wear masks and follow other CDC guidelines, setting an example for employers around the country. They will provide relief to American workers who have lost their jobs or had their hours or wages slashed through no fault of their own, by extending the pause on student debt and the eviction and foreclosure moratorium. They will help spur the growth of American manufacturing and supply chains, competitiveness of our industries, and creation of good union jobs by directing agencies to consider revising vehicle fuel economy and emissions standards, methane emissions standards, and appliance and building efficiency standards. And, they’ll take steps to prevent workplace discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity, and revoke President Trump’s damaging executive order which limited critical diversity and inclusion training in the workplace. On Covid the president-elect is proposing to: On the environment, including a broad heading of “Roll back president Trump’s environmental actions in order to protect public health and the environment and restore science” Biden intends to: On immigration, the set of actions are: In addition, Biden intends among his first acts: Today’s inauguration ceremony will be quite unlike any seen in Washington DC before. Kevin Freking at Associated Press has put together a handy guide of what is different this year. Joe Biden’s oath of office is actually the only essential part of the day.  The Constitution sets out a 35-word oath for the new president. Most presidents make it 39 by tacking on “so help me God” – a tradition whose origins are unclear.  Chief Justice John Roberts  will swear in Biden;  Justice Sonya Sotomayor  will swear in  Kamala Harris  as vice president. The ceremony will start at 11am in Washington – 4pm in London – and Biden will be sworn in at noon ET (5pm GMT). Harris is sworn in before that. Biden then gives a speech, which is usually designed to set the tone and the policies the new administration will pursue. Biden’s theme is “America United” – a stark contrast to  Donald Trump ’s 2017 speech which spoke of  “American carnage” . There won’t be crowds as usual because of the Covid pandemic. Trump began his term as president with press secretary  Sean Spicer arguing with reality  over the size of the crowd at the 2017 inauguration. At least Trump will this time be justified in saying that he had a bigger crowd than someone else.  About 200,000 small US state and territorial flags have been installed on the National Mall instead of a crowd, representing those who can’t attend. Vice president  Mike Pence  and most members of Congress are expected to attend. Pence is notably preferring the inauguration to attending Donald Trump’s sendoff ceremony at Joint Base Andrews earlier in the day (8am ET/1pm GMT).  Former presidents  Barack Obama ,  George W. Bush  and  Bill Clinton  and former first ladies  Michelle Obama ,  Laura Bush  and  Hillary Clinton  are all also expected to attend. The traditional  Pass in Review  ceremony where the new commander-in-chief inspects their troops will take place – but participants will socially distance to deter the spread of coronavirus. There will be no traditional congressional lunch. Biden, Harris and the former presidents and their partners will then participate in a wreath-laying ceremony at  Arlington National Cemetery’s Tomb of the Unknown Soldier . After that the traditional inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House has been dramatically scaled back to little more than a photo opportunity, and there will be no crowds in attendance. Biden will be escorted by the military. In place of inauguration parties and balls, Democratic Parties and advocacy groups will hold virtual balls, and actor Tom Hanks will host a 90-minute prime-time TV special celebration in the evening. Images of a heavily militarized Washington have left local residents disoriented, and prompted condemnation from military veterans in Congress “I expected this in Baghdad. I never imagined this in Washington,” said Seth Moulton, a Massachusetts congressman who fought in Iraq, to the Guardian. “It’s hard to see the pantheon of our democracy fortified like the war zones I used to know,” tweeted Jason Crow, a Colorado congressman, saying that he had fought in Iraq and Afghanistan “so we could enjoy peace at home”. Other American veterans said the images from Washington were surreal, but not exactly surprising. Matt Gallagher, a writer and Army veteran who served in Iraq, described “this strange sense of inevitability”, as he looked at the photographs of concertina wire and traffic control points and “young national guardsmen, many of whom were probably born around 9/11”. There’s been plenty of pushback to attempts to compare the current state of Washington DC to a war zone. “The troops are not speaking a foreign language, manning checkpoints, traveling in convoys so secure that they would be authorized to shoot cars that drive in between them. They’re not raiding homes. Let’s not trivialize military occupation,” Laila Al-Arian, an American journalist, wrote last week. Tom Porter, a policy spokesman for the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, told the Guardian that veterans had been making plenty of dark jokes about Washington’s Green Zone, asking whether the city was now disposing of trash and human waste by  setting it on fire with jet fuel  in giant “ burn pits ”, as the military has done in the Middle East. “Those that have actually been to a war zone know that our city and Capitol does not actually resemble a war zone,” he said, adding that he thought officials should have chosen a different name for the secure area of Washington during inauguration. Read more of Lois Beckett’s report here:  ‘This is not freedom’: a militarized US Capitol is being called a ‘war zone’ The most high profile of  Donald Trump’s pardons , to his former aide  Steve Bannon , may have repercussions within the Republican party, according to Josh Gerstein and Kyle Cheney at Politico. Bannon was a key adviser in Trump’s 2016 presidential run. He was charged last year with swindling Trump supporters over an effort to raise private funds to build the president’s wall on the US-Mexico border. He has pleaded not guilty. Gerstein and Cheney write: While Trump did not issue a self-pardon covering his own actions on 6 January, and he turned aside pardon requests from others accused of inciting or participating in the assault on Congress, Bannon was also among those who stoked anger in advance of the riots. “All hell will break loose tomorrow. It will be quite extraordinarily different. All I can say is strap in,” Bannon said on his War Room podcast on 5 January. “Tomorrow is game day. So many people said, man, if I was in revolution I would be in Washington. Well, this is your time in history.” Bannon frequently used similar wartime imagery to urge Trump supporters to contest the 2020 election results. He has also been a frequent antagonist of Sen. Mitch McConnell, the Republican leader, most notably when he helped propel the doomed candidacy of Republican Roy Moore — derailed by sexual assault allegations — over McConnell’s preferred candidate Luther Strange in an Alabama special election. With Trump’s impeachment trial looming, the Bannon pardon could push some Republican senators toward convicting Trump and potentially banning him from running for president again, but will probably be seen as less provocative than would a self-pardon or pardons for his closest family members. Read more here:  Politico – Trump pardons dozens, including Steve Bannon, as he exits White House Axios this morning have  a story labelled a scoop  about  the extreme precautions that the Biden team are taking to prevent the president-elect being exposed to Covid . It marks a stark contrast to the laissez-faire attitude of the Trump White House to enforcing anti-Covid guidelines. Hans Nichols writes: The incoming administration is planning extraordinary steps to protect its most prized commodity,  Joe Biden , including requiring daily employee Covid tests and N95 masks at all times, according to new guidance sent to some incoming employees Tuesday. The president-elect is 78 years old and therefore a high risk for the virus and its worst effects, despite having received the vaccine. While President Trump’s team was nonchalant about Covid protocols — leading to several super-spreader episodes — the new rules will apply to all White House aides in “high proximity to principals.” Besides protecting Biden, he and his team want to model best practices and are insisting that West Wing officials abide by the highest standards. Biden is asking the nation to “mask up” for the first 100 days of his administration. The guidance was sent to incoming staffers who will have “proximity” to any White House “principals,” generally defined as heads of departments like the National Security Council and the National Economic Council. Read more here:  Axios – Joe Biden’s Covid-19 bubble Our picture desk has put together  some of the most striking images as Washington DC  prepares for the inauguration of Joe Biden while swamped with security after the 6 January assault on the Capitol.  You can view the gallery here:  Washington on edge before Biden inauguration - in pictures Yesterday the US recorded 168,058 new coronavirus cases, and 2,550 further deaths. According to  Johns Hopkins university figures  the US has now recorded a total of 24,233,738 cases and 401,443 deaths. The  Covid Tracking Project  records that 123,820 were hospitalized with Covid in the US. CNN reported overnight that the Trump administration has  left the incoming Biden administration with ‘confusing’ Covid-19 vaccine numbers and the states in limbo . States across the country say they’re running low on coronavirus vaccine supply, with many officials insisting the vaccine delivery numbers reported by the Trump administration don’t align with what they are seeing on the ground. A source close to the Biden transition team said there is enormous concern among the incoming administration about the accuracy of the numbers that have been released by the federal government. It was only within the last few days that the transition team was given access to Tiberius, the system that shows states how many doses are available to them and allows states to determine delivery locations. Despite frustration, the source said Biden’s team has been hesitant to broadcast just how they were left in the dark out of concern that the Trump administration would stop cooperating altogether. Joe Biden  must overcome a pandemic, rebuild an economy, tackle racist insurrectionists and the ex-president who incited them, and reassert American leadership across a distrustful world. Somehow he must do all that while also confirming his senior officials in a Senate with no working majority. So far the Biden team shows no sign of limiting its ambition in terms of what it hopes Congress will take up – and what it will push through executive action – in its first days and weeks in power. In addition to  signing  a flurry of executive orders, rejoining the Paris climate accords and restarting the Iran nuclear deal, Biden will also  propose  sweeping immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship for the undocumented. Comprehensive reform of the nation’s broken immigration system proved beyond the capabilities of both Bush and Obama. It was Bush’s failure to enact immigration reform in 2007 that effectively marked the end of his second-term agenda, as Republicans turned towards a nativist agenda that  Donald Trump  placed at the heart of his campaign and presidency. The Biden team may be marking a sharp break with the Trump years in prioritizing immigration reform. But what are their realistic prospects for legislative progress in the first year of the Biden presidency? Obama veterans think there may be one good reason why Biden can feel more optimistic about political progress than their own experience in 2009, when Republicans obstructed their action from the outset, would dictate. That reason is the legacy of one  Donald Trump . “I think the difference between this and 2009 is that I believe there’s going to be a significant number of Republicans in Congress who think that their party needs a course correction here,” said Joel Benenson, who served as strategist and pollster to both Obama and Hillary Clinton’s campaigns. “It doesn’t mean they are suddenly going to be liberal Rockefeller Republicans, but the damage that Trump has done to the party and its image – and it has exacerbated through the events of the last two weeks – is giving them pause. “I don’t think it’s a major shift ideologically, but they have to recognize they are losing large and important sections of the electorate, and that’s going to be problematic for them. They know for their long-term prospects they can’t just be a base party. The biggest political failure of Donald Trump is that he didn’t fundamentally understand that to win the presidency, you have to win the center.” Read more of Richard Wolffe’s analysis here:  Biden prepares ambitious agenda even as he cleans up Trump’s mess
Coronavirus live news: WHO says UK variant detected in 60 countries; Dutch government set to introduce curfew:	The threat of the B117 coronavirus mutation first discovered in Britain taking hold in  Germany  was a key factor behind the government decision to increase the length and scale of lockdown measures  Angela Merkel  has said. Following marathon talks between the government and leaders of the 16 Länder yesterday afternoon, Merkel, the German leader, said it was imperative to take measures to prevent the spread of mutations which experts say are far more infectious than the previous strain. She warned that Germany faced “British conditions” if it failed to stop  the spread of the B117 mutation  in particular, which is known to have been in the country for several weeks. “If we get British conditions,” she said “we would not be talking about whether schools should open or not, but about ambulances and overcrowded hospitals... but if all the rules are kept, we have a fair chance”, she said in response to a question as to when lockdown conditions might be relaxed. Despite a light fall in registered coronavirus cases – the figure stood at 16,000 on Wednesday, while 1148 deaths had been registered in the previous 24 hours - a current lockdown in place since before Christmas is to be extended.  Schools and nurseries as well as non-essential shops and hairdressers will remain closed until at least February 14.  Employers will be obliged to allow their employees to work from home wherever possible, to reduce the number of people on public transport and in work places. Medical masks will be obligatory on public transport, in shops as well as places of worship. Merkel said that the decision to maintain homeschooling had been the most difficult decision she and the other leaders had made, following 11 hours of consultation, including with eight prominent experts. “We wrestled for a long time to decide what is necessary regarding children and schools,” Merkel said. “We all know that it is incredibly restrictive for the children and parents affected by this. But there are indications which must be taken very seriously that the mutation B117 spreads more intensely amongst children and young people than was the case with the previous virus and we need to take these indications seriously.” Merkel has repeatedly said the 7-day incidence rate needs to be brought below 50 cases for every 100,000 inhabitants. Nationwide it currently stands at 124 per 100,000, but with huge regional differences. French health officials have advised people against wearing home-made fabric masks as they offer less protection against highly contagious new Covid-19 variants. The  scientific committee , which reports back to the French government, says Category 2 masks are unlikely to halt the spread of the “English variant” or new coronavirus strains from  Brazil  and  South Africa . The experts’ advice, presented to ministers on Monday but not published, also suggested  France  double its social distancing rule from 1m to 2m. France’s Haut Conseil de Santé Publique (High Council for Public Health – HCSP) decided over the weekend that many cloth masks, often preferred because they can be washed and reused, did not guarantee protection against the new variants. “Category 2 or material masks only filter 70%, while Category 1 masks, like surgical masks, can go as high as 95% if worn properly. As the variant is more easily transmitted, it is logical to use masks with the highest filtering power,” Daniel Camus, of the Pasteur Institute in Lille and a HCSP member told France Info. “We are not questioning the masks used up to now…but as we have no new weapons against them (new strains) the only thing we can do is to improve the weapons we already have,” Camus added. Home-made barrier masks made under Europe-wide established  specifications  are consider Category 1. However, even though they are subject to  minimum requirements  making them more efficient filters, the HSPC said they may not guarantee the correct level of protection. Didier Lepelletier, co-president of the committee’s Covid-19 working group said everyone should now choose Category 1 masks adding that home-made masks “have not been tested in terms of their performance”. Yesterday UK recorded a further 1,610 coronavirus deaths – the highest number since the pandemic began. But what received less attention was the total number of excess deaths during  #COVID19 : now well over 100,000. Deaths which could have been entirely avoided. Unforgivable  https://t.co/kS2AqIGBzv A Covid vaccine developed by Pfizer and BioNTech appears to protect against a  coronavirus variant spreading rapidly across the UK . PA Media reports: T he results come amid growing fears that the variant, dubbed B117, has mutations that may reduce the effectiveness of the vaccines designed to protect against Covid-19. In a new study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed, researchers from BioNTech collected blood samples from 16 people who had received the Pfizer vaccine in previous clinical trials. They found that a lab-made version of the virus – with all the mutations resembling the B117 variant – was neutralised by antibodies.  Dublin ’s annual  St Patrick’s Day parade  has been cancelled in light of the pandemic for the second year in a row, as organisers confirm virtual events will be held instead. St. Patrick’s Festival returns from March 12 to 17 with six great virtual days and nights of online events! See our full statement and sign up for news and updates at  https://t.co/AIawjx4TQ0   #stpatricksfestival   pic.twitter.com/CYvvt9GgqT Russia ’s sovereign wealth fund RDIF has filed for registration of  Sputnik V  in the EU and expects it to be reviewed in February, moving it closer to wider adoption across the world. See the latest Covid death and case numbers  from earlier . Sputnik V and European Medical Agency teams held the Scientific Review of  #SputnikV  on Jan 19. RDIF filed for Sputnik V registration in the EU and expects it to be reviewed in February. Based on these reviews EMA will decide on the authorization of Sputnik V for the EU.  pic.twitter.com/dq7HNjOHVA The Vatican  began offering free vaccinations against coronavirus to  Rome ’s homeless on Wednesday, according to Reuters. Reuters reports: The vaccinations took place in the atrium of the Paul VI Hall, the huge auditorium where weekly papal general audiences take place but which has been largely disused because of the coronavirus pandemic. They were overseen by Cardinal Konrad Krajewski, 57, the Polish head of the papal charities office, who has taken on a leading personal role in looking after Rome’s homeless.  Turkey  has vaccinated more than 1 million people in the first week of its nationwide inoculation programme, health ministry data shows. The programme was launched last Thursday, with health workers the first to receive the  Covid jabs developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech Ltd . More than 600,000 people were vaccinated in the first two days, though the pace has slowed to about 100,000 per day since then, Reuters reported. Morning everyone, this is Yohannes Lowe. I’ll be running the live blog until the evening. Please feel free to drop me a message on  Twitter  if you have any coverage suggestions.  The Dutch government is set to add the first nationwide curfew since the second world war to its already broad lockdown on Wednesday in a bid to limit the spread of new coronavirus mutations in the  Netherlands , broadcaster RTL said. The curfew would allow only people with pressing needs to leave their homes between 8.30pm and 4.30am as of Friday night, RTL said, citing government sources. Schools and non-essential shops have already been closed since mid-December, following the shutdown of bars and restaurants two months earlier. This lockdown will remain in place until at least 9 February, the prime minister  Mark Rutte  said last week. The introduction of the first night curfew since that imposed on the Dutch by German occupiers in the second world war is highly contentious, and various political parties have already said they will never back it. The government is discussing the curfew and other possible measures on Wednesday morning, and has said it will announce its decisions early in the afternoon. It will then seek the backing of parliament for its measures in a debate. The curfew however can be imposed without the backing of opposition parties. The government is also considering whether to ban travel to and from the  UK  and  South Africa , RTL said, to limit the spread of the highly contagious variants of the virus which were first discovered there. Infections in the Netherlands have decreased steadily in the past three weeks, but health authorities say the new variants will lead to a new surge by next month if social distancing measures are not tightened. The Dutch government currently has a caretaker status, as Rutte last Friday handed his resignation to King Willem-Alexander following a damning report  on his cabinet’s handling of childcare subsidies . Rutte has said he will remain able to take decisions on Covid-19 policies until a new government is formed after 17 March elections, seeking broad support for measures from both coalition and opposition parties. Jeanne Becart, the mayor of the  Paris  suburb of  Garches , said public health officials told her to get ready to administer 1,200 Covid-19 vaccines a week. But for this week, the vaccination centre she set up has only been allocated 420 doses. “I am a bit angry,” Bécart said inside the vaccination hub off the town square, where over the course of Monday the 15 volunteers, nurses and doctors on duty between them vaccinated 90 patients. She had a plea for the French president,  Emmanuel Macron : “Please Mr President, buy vaccines whatever the cost.” France is not experiencing problems with the supply of vaccines, according to government officials. They say that, apart from minor fluctuations, the country is getting the doses from the manufacturers that were allocated to it. The problem for France is that demand has exploded and is far outstripping the number of jabs available. Many French people were initially sceptical, but as they have seen acquaintances get vaccinated with no adverse effects, large numbers decided the benefits outweigh the risks, say health officials. “People have understood now that the vaccination is the solution,” said Barbara Thery, head of a vaccination centre in Le Cannet, just outside  Cannes . “So the relationship between the number of people who come forward and want to be vaccinated, and the speed at which we can do it, is not what we need,” she said. Her centre has enough doses for 50 vaccinations per day but could easily dispense 200 a day if it had the doses, she said. France has approved both the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines for use. The government ditched a plan to initially give the vaccine only to those in elderly people’s homes, meaning everyone 75 and over – a total of more than 6 million people in France – became eligible for the jab, but without the doses in place to vaccinate them straight away. The health minister,  Olivier Véran,  said as fast as they were being produced, the vaccines were being shipped to vaccination centres. A health ministry official said the supply was speeding up and the government was on track to meet its target of vaccinating 2.4 million people by the end of February. In  Saint-Denis , on the northern edge of Paris, the local mayor’s office set up a vaccination centre in a municipal building. For this week, it has been allocated 132 doses. “Unfortunately that does not match the need,” said Katy Bontinck, the deputy mayor in charge of health. Because of the limited doses, the centre only opens on weekday afternoons. The  Portuguese  economy minister,  Pedro Siza Vieira,  has tested positive for Covid-19 and is in self-isolation, his office reported late on Tuesday, the third cabinet member to be diagnosed with the virus in a week. He had already been in quarantine at home since Saturday as a precautionary measure after the fnance minister,  João Leão ,  tested positive following a meeting with top EU officials. Siza Vieira and the prime minister,  Antonio Costa,  were also at that meeting. Siza Vieira was the third minister to be diagnosed with the coronavirus in the past week, following Leão and the labour minister  Ana Mendes Godinho . Portugal, currently reporting the highest average of new cases per capita worldwide according to the ourworldindata.org website supported by Oxford University, has had 566,958 confirmed coronavirus cases and 9,246 deaths so far and went back into lockdown on Friday. The spread of coronavirus in  France  could accelerate sharply in the coming months due to the emergence of a more contagious variant, two  Paris  hospital executives said on Wednesday, raising fears of a third lockdown in the country. Karine Lacombe, head of infectious diseases at Paris’s Saint Antoine hospital, and Martin Hirsch, the director general of the Paris hospitals system, both warned of the extra strain this could put on healthcare infrastructure. The two previous lockdowns enforced by the government last year were aimed at preventing hospitals from being overwhelmed by patients with Covid-19. “We know this variant spreads much more quickly and, above all, it is more infectious. So, yes, we think that it will change the dynamic of the pandemic in the weeks to come,” Lacombe told BFM TV. The spread of this variant, first detected in  England , has prompted the  UK ,  Germany  and  Ireland  to reimpose strict lockdowns. France has stopped short such a measure for now – opting instead for a national 6pm curfew – but members of the government have warned it is not off the table. “All the models reckon that some time between mid-February, early February, so in about 15 days or three weeks time and by mid-March, we will have an increase that could risk, if we cannot do otherwise, resembling what the English, the Irish and the Germans have been witnessing recently,” Hirsh said on France Info radio. Tuesday’s figures show the seven-day moving average of new infections, which averages out daily data reporting irregularities, increased to 18,820, the highest since 23 November. The number of patients in intensive care units for the disease has now gone up for 10 consecutive days, to 2,839, a sequence unseen since early November, when France had just entered its second lockdown. “We fear it will be extremely tough, especially in March. On a local level … when the number of admissions in ICU units will ramp up, we probably will need more restrictive measures than the curfew,” Lacombe said. “We must remain alert and act as soon as we spot a deterioration of the indicators.”  Zimbabwe’s  foreign minister,  Sibusiso Moyo , has died after contracting Covid-19, presidential spokesman  George Charamba  said on Wednesday. Moyo, a former army general who rose to national fame when he announced the military coup that led to the removal of the late long-serving leader Robert Mugabe in November 2017, died at a local hospital early on Wednesday, Charamba said. “The nation will be kept apprised of further developments regarding this untimely demise of the late minister, himself a decorated soldier and freedom fighter,” Charamba said. Moyo was one of several generals who, after helping plot the coup, were rewarded with senior positions in the president  Emmerson Mnangagwa ’s cabinet and the ruling Zanu-PF party. Another cabinet minister, the retired general and agriculture minister  Perrance Shiri , died of the virus last July. Zimbabwe has suffered a surge in Covid-19 infections, with more than half of the 28,675 total cases and 825 deaths being recorded since New Year’s Day.
'It gives us hope': migrants stranded in Mexico buoyed by prospect of Biden reform:	Selma López, 31, has spent nearly a year holed up in a two-room house not far from Mexico’s border with the US, along with her 11-year-old son Darikson and another woman who also made the long journey from Honduras in search of a new life. They are among thousands of people stranded south of the frontier by a Trump administration policy known as migrant protection protocols (MPP), which obliges asylum seekers to await their court hearings in some of Mexico’s most dangerous cities, instead of in the US. Children and adults have been  raped, kidnapped and murdered while awaiting their court date . In Piedras Negras, police routinely harass migrants, said López. Earlier this week, a mysterious white car followed her as she walked to the store. And as a Garifuna woman, she has suffered overt racism and anti-Black insults from locals. But López’s mood brightens when conversation turned to the US presidential inauguration – and what it might mean for her and thousands of others. “We’re encouraged and feeling a little hopeful,” said López, who fled northern Honduras after gangsters threatened to kill Darikson for not making protection payments. “It’s giving us a little hope that we can at least enter the US and fight our cases there.” Joe Biden has promised to do away with MPP and restore the asylum process, raising hopes among MPP participants that their claims will be treated seriously – and that they won’t have to risk their lives while waiting. Biden plans to restore asylum and refugee programs and officials from the incoming administration say MPP will be addressed in an executive order in the near future.  But they cautioned it could take months to address all the changes to the immigration system introduced by Trump. Activists on the border have tried to temper migrants’ enthusiasm. “They think things are going change immediately. I’m trying to make them understand it’s not that easy,“ said Israel Rodríguez, a Baptist pastor, who feeds migrants in Piedras Negras. Piedras Negras, a city of factories opposite Eagle Pass, Texas, attracted asylum seekers because of safety perceptions, according to Rodrigúez. But MPP participants must attend hearings in Laredo, Texas, a journey of 125 miles through cartel territory. The threats do not just come from criminals: police in Piedras Negras regularly detain and extort migrants – and even destroy immigration documents. The local government has closed down migrant shelters under the pretext of the coronavirus and in December ordered them from providing hot meals for migrants left homeless. “They’re making charity illegal,” said Dominican brother Obed Cuellar, director of a diocesan migrant shelter. “There’s a way of thinking here that migrants come to destroy the city or make it dirty … or they’re taking our jobs.” Mexico’s president,  Andrés Manuel López Obrador , came to office promising not to do the US’s “dirty work” on migration matters. But he immediately went along with the MPP scheme and promised to provide the participants and their children with access to health and education, employment opportunities and shelter. Lawyers and activists say little of that help has materialized, but volunteers from Mexico and the US have provided MPP participants with everything from food and clothing to legal and medical advice. Within Mexico, MPP largely went unnoticed as its participants were largely out of sight and out of mind. But a lawyer representing a number of MPP participants said the program served its purpose for the Trump administration, however. “The cornerstone of MPP is xenophobia. And it worked because 68,000 people were kept out of the US,” said Charlene D’Cruz, a border fellow for Lawyers for Good Government’s  Project Corazon . “What MPP did was show people stuck at the border and that was enough for Trump’s base to say that he did what he set out to do: keep all the ‘Mexican rapists’ out.” The pictures from Matamoros – tucked into the extreme north-east corner of Mexico – were at times shocking as MPP participants lived in the squalor of a tent camp along the Rio Grande. The camp has been flooded out, infested with snakes and insects and eventually infiltrated by criminal groups – which charge $500 for permission to cross the frontier and inflict severe beatings on those not paying. “My son [age five] saw someone being beaten by the river. … He’s traumatized,” said Marlen, 24,a Salvadoran asylum seeker. But people at the camp felt they had particular reason for optimism: in December 2019 Jill Biden came here and helped serve meals to the migrants. “This is the only place along the border the now first lady visited. That’s why they’re so hopeful,” said Juan Sierra. “We think Biden is going to push an immigration reform,” said José Luis Guerra, a skinny Cuban. “With Trump, there wasn’t any reason for hope.”
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
