No power, no water, no hope: inside Europe’s largest shanty town:	D espite the daily trials her family has to endure – a pandemic, three months with no electricity and now days without running water since Storm Filomena froze the pipes and left Madrid under a lingering duvet of snow – Sara Benayad has not forgotten the importance of hospitality. She would welcome the powers-that-be to join her in the novel ritual into which the absence of water has forced her. Every night before bed, Benayad fills saucepans and buckets with snow that must be melted on the gas stove the next morning so there is water for washing and for the dishes. “I’d really like anyone who’s responsible for this to come and spend the night with us,” she says. “We’d be honoured to have them. They can sleep in my house and suffer and live what we’re living. Maybe then they’d do something.” Filomena has brought Madrid’s heaviest snows in 50 years , claimed four lives, torn the limbs off tens of thousands of trees and managed the rare feat of leaving the capital in a state of icy, suspended animation. But no part of Spain has been hit quite as mercilessly as the Cañada Real,  the shanty town 12km from the centre of Madrid  that is home to Benayad and 8,500 other people, most of them of Moroccan or Roma descent. Since the beginning of October, the 4,500 people who live in Sectors 5 and 6 of Europe’s largest informal settlement  have been without power . The electricity provider, Naturgy, says it has never cut off the supply to the Cañada Real and blames the outages on huge surges in the two sectors that mean the network is forced to shut down for safety reasons.  It says there are only four registered users in the two sectors – despite there being some 1,500 houses in the area – adding that it has continued to provide electricity “despite the serious economic damages” caused by people illegally tapping the supply. The regional government of Madrid says the surges are due to marijuana plantations in the shanty town that have been hooked up to the supply and are drawing so much power that the system trips time and time again. The people of Sectors 5 and 6 dispute the claims but say they are beside the point. The lack of electricity, they say, is putting their lives – and the lives of 1,800 children in the area – in grave danger. If the situation was desperate before, Filomena has brought the Cañada Real to the brink. “We’ve had lots of difficult times here,” says Beatriz Aragón, a doctor who has worked in the town since 2007. “We’ve had loads of fires and floods but they happened and then they stopped. And we’ve had winter power cuts before. But we’ve never seen anything like this.” The death of a 74-year-old man  who lived in Sector 6 has led to a legal complaint against the authorities, while Aragón says between 40 and 50 people have suffered from carbon monoxide poisoning because of the butane heaters used by those who can afford them. “We’re seeing children with chilblains because their hands have been destroyed by the cold, and respiratory infections,” says the doctor. “But the most worrying thing is how all this will play out with  the third wave of Covid . One family told me yesterday they had no way to keep warm so they all shared a bed with their daughter, who’s got a fever. ‘If we don’t do that, we’ll freeze,’ they said. Having this in the middle of a pandemic is just a perfect storm.” Aragón and her colleagues have been advising mothers and babies who can stay with relatives elsewhere to leave the Cañada Real until the temperature begins to rise. “It’s not what you want to do during a pandemic, but you’ve got to choose between what’s bad and what would be worse.” Aura Morales, who works for the socio-educational  Barró Association , is equally blunt in her assessment of the damage that is being done to the town’s younger residents. “Everything gets worse if you don’t have electricity,” she says. “Some of the kids are doing their homework inside cold cars so they can see what they’re doing.” Other children use their parents’ mobiles to try to keep up with their lessons while schools in the region remain closed because of the snow. The phones serve a dual purpose: once lessons have been downloaded, the built-in torches are used so children can see what they’re writing after the sun goes down. Loubna El Azmani, a community worker who lives with her family in Sector 6, says the people of the town are doing everything they can to explain their desperate circumstances to the outside world. “We’ve demonstrated and written letters and reported the situation to the authorities,” she says. “Everybody knows what’s going on here but nobody wants to react. But they need to before there’s an ever greater tragedy here.” Towards the end of December, a group of UN special rapporteurs  called on the Spanish government to ensure that the power was restored immediately , warning: “The lack of electricity not only violates these children’s right to adequate housing, it is having a very serious effect on their rights to health, food, water, sanitation and education.” The problem, however, is that responsibility for the Cañada Real is shared between three local town halls (including Madrid city hall), the government of the Madrid region, and the central government’s delegate to the region. Between the drip-drip of the slowly thawing ice, locals swear they can just make out the sound of the buck being passed once again. Almost four years after a deal was signed to rehouse hundreds of families, 130 have been rehomed by the regional government and Madrid city hall. It is, as a spokesman for the regional government points out, a gradual process. “The idea is to spread families out across the region so that you don’t end up with more ghettos,” he says. “It’s very complicated – it’s not like buying cars and sticking them in a garage; it’s about finding homes for people.” In the meantime, the city and regional governments have been offering residents emergency shelter and butane canisters to see them through Filomena and its aftermath. According to Madrid city hall, of the 17 families identified as being especially vulnerable, only two took up the offer of moving to a shelter. Some residents say they have turned down the offer because they are afraid of mixing with others during the Covid pandemic, and are puzzled as to why temporary accommodation is being proffered when all they want is their electricity back. As the wait goes on, the children of the Cañada Real do what children do in the snow. The younger ones build snowmen, throw snowballs and slide down the frozen embankments on rubbish sacks. The older ones toss sheets of cardboard on to makeshift bonfires for a few seconds of flaring warmth or dash about, aware that they will be warmer rushing around outside than they would be indoors. The town’s older residents are finding it far harder to cope with the lack of power, both literal and figurative. “Morale has gone through the floor,” says Benayad, who gave up her job in a recycling business a month ago so she could look after her family. “This is a national disgrace – and it’s happening in a developed country in  Europe  in 2021.” If the authorities are serious about getting people out of the Cañada Real, she adds, they need to offer clear solutions. “The way things are going, the only people they’ll manage to get out of here are the dead ones.” Additional reporting by Pablo García Sacristán
UK records 1,248 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  The hospital system in the Amazon city of Manaus is collapsing from a second wave of Covid-19 and it is running out of oxygen , Brazilian health minister Eduardo Pazuello has said. Speaking on a webcast with president  Jair Bolsonaro  at his side, Pazuello said the city’s hospitals were short of medical staff as deaths surge again.  Amazonas state has appealed to the United States to send a military transport plane with oxygen cylinders. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Britain reported 1,248 new deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test on Thursday, down from a record high of more than 1,500 the previous day.  The number of people in the UK to have been given a first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine as of 13 January is 2,918,252, according to Public Health England, a rise of 278,943 from the figures published on Wednesday. A total of 437,977 people have received a second dose in the UK as of January 13, a rise of 9,745 from the previous day, PHE added. Earlier in the day, a number of NHS staff gathered outside Downing Street to protest over the government’s handling of the pandemic. Wearing PPE and carrying a sign which read “You failed the public, you failed the NHS, Boris must go”, the five campaigners arrived at 8pm, the scheduled start time of the Clap For Heroes. Nobody was heard clapping along Whitehall in the heart of Westminster as one nurse told reporters: “The situation in hospitals is so severe, we are stretched across all ICUs.” ICU nurse Ameera Sheikh told reporters: “It’s been very difficult, very challenging. “We’re stressed out and very anxious, there’s a lot of PTSD amongst staff, staff are going off sick ... leaving nurses very short, which increases the risk of patients deteriorating and ultimately patients dying. “This is the government’s fault, they need to take responsibility, they need to provide us with better pay and better working conditions.” As the first groups from Central America reached the Guatemalan border as part of a caravan aiming to reach the United States , regional governments are using coronavirus measures as the latest tool to curtail migration. Small groups of migrants arrived in the  Honduran  border town of   Corinto  on Thursday afternoon, where they were stopped by police demanding negative coronavirus tests, according to local media. Hundreds more have amassed outside the bus terminal in San Pedro Sula in advance of the caravan’s formal departure on Friday morning, according to footage from local television outlets. Guatemala ,  Honduras ,  El Salvador  and  Mexico  issued a joint declaration earlier this week imposing coordinated health measures to deter migration, including requirements to produce negative coronavirus tests at border checkpoints. The tightening by Mexican and Central American authorities, coupled with pandemic-linked US border restrictions in place since March, represent a sweeping effort to use public health regulations to deter movement along one of the world’s busiest migration routes at a time when a fierce second wave of coronavirus is sweeping the region. In Mexico, the pandemic has killed nearly 137,000 people and the capital’s hospitals are spiking with Covid-19 cases. This week’s caravan, slated to depart  Honduras  on Friday, would be the first of the year and comes six days before US president-elect Joe Biden takes office. Yet, Central American and Mexican authorities are stepping up efforts to stop migrants well before the US border, which will likely be a relief for Biden, whose aides have privately expressed concerns about the prospect of growing numbers of migrants seeking to enter the US in the early days of his administration. On Thursday,  Guatemala  cited the pandemic in order to declare emergency powers in seven Guatemalan border provinces migrants frequently transit through en route to the Mexican border. The measures limit public demonstrations and allow authorities to disperse any public meeting, group or demonstration by force. Honduras and Guatemala have announced they will deploy thousands of soldiers to preemptively stop caravan members not complying with health regulations, while Mexico deployed agents to the border with Guatemala. In online forums, migrants hoping to join the caravan expressed concern on Thursday about the crackdown, with some suggesting searching for “blind points” where they could cross the borders undetected by authorities. Central America is reeling from economic crises, high rates of violence, and the devastating fallout of two major hurricanes that battered the region in November. “We barely have food to eat, how do they think we are going to pay for these (coronavirus) tests?” said 29-year-old Ulises Santos from El Salvador, who is hoping to join the caravan. Migration experts say the public health measures are part of a broader effort by Central American and Mexican authorities, under pressure from Washington, to stop migrants before they reach US territory. “The US border is moving further and further south,” said renowned Honduran human rights activist  Ismael Moreno . “The goal (of local police) is to stop migrants, whether through repression, threats, extortion, or requirements to present a Covid-19 test.”  The Gambia has registered two cases of a British-identified coronavirus mutation which is likely more infectious , the tiny West African state’s government said. Gambian health minister  Ahmadou Samateh  told lawmakers the strain was detected in two people entering the country - both of whom were asymptomatic. “People coming from 20 hot-spot countries, like the UK, Spain, France and Sweden must face another test because we have detected the new variant,” he said. “This one transmits faster”. Coronavirus  variant B117 likely emerged in southeastern England in September, according to  Imperial College London . The  World Health Organization  says it has already spread to 50 countries worldwide. This strain is believed to be more easily transmissible because of a mutation of the spike protein, the part of the virus which latches on to human cells. A former British colony of some two million people, The Gambia is the smallest country on mainland  Africa . Health officials in the poor nation have registered 3,890 coronavirus cases to date, with over 125 fatalities. Samateh said the government was engaged in “initial talks” to procure a consignment of Covid-19 vaccines, which it expects to acquire in several months. Turkey has vaccinated more than 285,000 people  as it began administering Covid-19 shots developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech to health workers on Thursday.  President  Tayyip Erdoğan  also received his first dose of the vaccine in Ankara. He urged political leaders and lawmakers to endorse the inoculation process and called on Turks not to heed criticism of the vaccine. Health minister  Fahrettin Koca  also urged citizens to get vaccinated as soon as their turn came, saying it was the “most important way” to beat the pandemic. At a research hospital in Istanbul, 30 clinics were set up to administer the vaccine. Health workers were given a first dose, with a second to be given 28 days later. Surgeon general  Nurettin Yiyit  said the hospital could vaccinate around 1,800 people a day and that its 3,500 staff, including nurses and janitors, could be vaccinated in two days. As of 8.32pm, Turkey had vaccinated 285,940 people, according to health ministry data. Asked about the rapid pace of the vaccinations, Turkey’s health ministry said vaccines had been distributed across the country at the start of the week and distribution from provincial storage centres had taken place overnight, after emergency authorisation for the vaccinations was granted. Seriously ill Covid patients are being transferred from overstretched UK capital London hospitals to intensive care units almost 300 miles away in Newcastle , the Guardian can reveal. The crisis engulfing the capital’s hospitals is so severe that in recent days patients have also been moved 67 miles to  Northampton , 125 miles to  Birmingham  and 167 miles to  Sheffield . NHS England has told hospitals in the north of England, the Midlands and other areas to open up hundreds of extra ICU beds to take patients from London, the south-east and east, where the new variant has pushed Covid hospital admissions to new levels. It is the latest dramatic illustration of the increasingly difficult situation confronting the health service. Hospitals across the UK are battling to provide care for 36,489 people with Covid, an increase of 5,872 in seven days. There were a further 48,682 confirmed cases reported on Thursday but Public Health England said that UK deaths data had been delayed due to a “processing issue”. The number of people who have received a Covid-19 vaccine in Israel has passed the two million threshold, with the prime minister saying there was “light at the end of the tunnel”. Israel “will become the first country to emerge from the corona crisis,” prime minister  Benjamin Netanyahu  said. “I am the second millionth,” to be vaccinated in Israel, read a sign held by 22-year-old Margaret Alsoso as she received her first dose of the vaccine in the city of  Ramla near Tel Aviv . Netanyahu - who faces yet another re-election contest and a corruption trial over the coming weeks - has sought to highlight his personal role in the inoculation campaign. The prime minister was the first to get the jab on 19 December, when Israel launched its inoculation campaign with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. In early January authorities said two million people would receive a two-dose Covid-19 vaccine by the end of the month. As of Thursday only 150,000 people had received their two doses. But as Israel pushes ahead aggressively with its vaccination drive, it is also witnessing a surge in the pandemic with some 9,000 coronavirus cases registered daily. The country, currently in its third national lockdown, has recorded more than 523,000 cases, including around 3,850 deaths, according to the health ministry. On Thursday, Netanyahu urged Israelis to respect lockdown restrictions. Amnesty International has called on Israel to provide coronavirus vaccine doses to Palestinians in the occupied  West Bank  and  Gaza , saying the Jewish state is obliged to do so under international law. As coronavirus continues to tear across the US without any sign of slowing down, officials have warned there is a “full resurgence” in most major population centres – and that the country could see an additional 92,000 deaths in less than a month. There have been more than 23m confirmed Covid-19 cases in the US and 385,503 deaths, Johns Hopkins University’s most recent data  revealed . White House coronavirus taskforce reports from 10 January, obtained by  CNN , said they were seeing a “full resurgence” of the virus in “nearly all metro areas” and advocated for “aggressive action”. The report, which is sent to states, suggested measures such as using “two or three-ply and well-fitting” masks, enforcing “strict” social distancing” and more aggressively testing young adults. Officials worried that there was “significant, continued deterioration from  California  across the Sunbelt and up into the south-east, mid-Atlantic and north-east”. These regions effectively comprise all of the continental US. The reports were quoted as stating that there was a “clear continuation of the pre-holiday high rate of spread as measured by rising test positivity, increased cases, increased hospitalization rates and rising fatalities”. Additional date compiled by the New York Times indicate that a record number of deaths almost daily in the US largely stems from skyrocketing cases in California and  Arizona . In  Los Angeles  county, there is a Covid-19 death every eight minutes. Chilean authorities remain confident in a vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac despite jitters elsewhere , after researchers in Brazil said its efficacy was lower than initially suggested. Rodrigo Yañez , the Chilean trade undersecretary tasked with procuring Covid vaccines for the country, said Chile’s health regulator was assessing all the available data and would announce its decision on an emergency roll-out for the inoculation soon. He said vaccines would serve their critical purpose if they helped diminish severe symptoms, hospitalisations and deaths. This week, researchers in  Brazil  released late-stage trial clinical data showing the Sinovac vaccine was 50.4% effective at preventing symptomatic infections, including “very mild” cases. The previous week they said the vaccine, called CoronaVac, showed 78% efficacy against “mild-to-severe” cases. “The numbers in Brazil are good though they could be misleading in terms of focusing only on the 50% because the target is to avoid people filling the hospitals and fatalities,” he told Reuters. “It should be very effective with the more severe symptoms of the disease, provided that the clinical data supports what was announced this week.” Chile paid $3.5m to host a clinical trial of the vaccine and has also ordered 60m doses to be administered to its population of 18 million over three years. The country’s regulator sent two inspectors to the Sinovac factory in  Beijing  in November ahead of the expected arrival of the first doses in Chile in mid-January. Chile has already started vaccinating its health workers using a Pfizer developed shot and its regulator is also weighing approval of AstraZeneca’s for emergency use. The disappointing Brazilian efficacy news prompted  Malaysia  and  Singapore , which also have purchase agreements with Sinovac, to say on Wednesday that they would seek more data from the Chinese firm on efficacy rates before they approved and bought supplies. Sinovac vaccination campaigns are  already underway in  Indonesia  and  Turkey , with Turkish president  Tayyip Erdoğan  receiving the jab on Thursday. Yañez told Reuters the Chilean Public Health Institute would look at the data from Brazil as well as Turkey and Indonesia, which reported efficacy of 91.25% and 65.3% efficacy respectively based on interim trial data. He said Sinovac’s vaccine wasn’t the only one which has raised doubts, pointing to experts in Australia who had questioned whether herd immunity could be achieved from the 62% efficacy reported for the AstraZeneca vaccine. “The common flu vaccine is between 50% and 60% effective - we run massive vaccination campaigns with those levels of efficacy,” he said. “We are in a position where we need to put a stop to the more severe impact of Covid-19. No vaccine so far is capable of proving that it also stops infections spreading. At the end of the day all of them are more or less efficient in helping you avoid the impact.” The US tennis player Tennys Sandgren has arrived in Melbourne after Tennis Australia reportedly intervened so he could board a charter flight despite testing positive for coronavirus . In a series of tweets on Thursday, Australian time, Sandgren initially suggested he would not be able to board the flight for the  Australian Open , writing “Covid positive over thanksgiving” and “Covid positive on Monday”. Later, Sandgren, a quarter-finalist at last year’s open, added it appeared he would able to board the chartered flight before lauding the Tennis Australia chief executive,  Craig Tiley , as a “wizard”. “Wow I’m on the plane. Maybe I just held my breath too long,” he said in a tweet. He then explained his first positive test was in November and he was now “totally recovered”. “I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point.” A lot couch virologists out there. My two tests were less than 8 weeks a part. I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point. Totally recovered! The Australian Open suggested Victorian health authorities had given Sandgren the all-clear to fly. The tournament’s official Twitter account said people who had recovered and were “non-infectious can continue to shed the virus for several months”. “Victorian government public health experts assess each case based on additional detailed medical records to ensure they are not infectious before checking in to the charter flights,” the Australian Open said. “Players and their teams are tested every day from their arrival in Australia, a much stricter process than for anyone else in hotel quarantine.” A group representing major US airlines has backed president-elect Joe Biden’s plan to mandate facial coverings for all air passengers , but asked him to lift it once the coronavirus pandemic ends and give them flexibilities in enforcing it. Airlines for America , which represents American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and others, asked Biden in a letter seen by Reuters to “allow air carriers to maintain their existing policies and practices which are aimed at de-escalating conflict in-flight and allowing the aircraft to continue while providing a consequential enforcement backstop on the ground”. Twitter has lifted restrictions briefly imposed on the official account promoting the Russian Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine. The account was restricted for around an hour earlier in the day with a notice saying Twitter had seen “some unusual activity” on the page. “This account was temporarily locked in error by an automated spam filter. This action has been reversed and the account is now fully operational,” Twitter said in a statement. The Sputnik V account said that, according to an explanation from Twitter, the brief shut down was due to “a possible security breach from Virginia, USA”. The account did not provide any further details. 
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Starwatch: Orion's treats for the naked-eye star watcher:	The mighty constellation of Orion the hunter is one of the greatest sights in the night sky. To those of us in the northern hemisphere, it is currently bolt upright in the south during the late evening. Orion’s right shoulder is marked by the red star of Betelgeuse, and his left foot is signified by the white star of Rigel. Fainter stars, Bellatrix and Saiph, mark out the opposite shoulder and foot. The three stars of Orion’s belt, Alnitak, Alnilam and Mintaka, are easy to spot. The real prize for naked-eye starwatchers is located below this trio of stars. Orion’s sword consists of a further three stars, considerably fainter than the belt. Find the darkest site you can and allow your eyes to get accustomed to the dark. The second star in the sword should appear fuzzy to you, and pinkish. That’s because it isn’t a star at all – it’s the Orion nebula, a star-forming cloud 1,300 light years away. Thousands of stars are forming there. From Sydney, Australia, look north and remember that everything described here will appear upside down.
Carbon capture is vital to meeting climate goals, scientists tell green critics:	Engineers and geologists have strongly criticised green groups who last week claimed that carbon capture and storage schemes – for reducing fossil fuel emissions – are costly mistakes. The scientists insisted that such schemes are vital weapons in the battle against global heating and warn that failure to set up ways to trap carbon dioxide and store it underground would make it almost impossible to hold net emissions to below zero by 2050. “ Carbon capture and storage  is going to be the only effective way we have in the short term to prevent our steel industry, cement manufacture and many other processes from continuing to pour emissions into the atmosphere,” said Professor Stuart Haszeldine, of Edinburgh University. “If we are to have any hope of keeping global temperature [increases] down below 2 degrees C then we desperately need to develop ways to capture and store carbon dioxide.” Carbon capture and storage involves the extraction of emissions from power plants and factories, condensing them and then pumping the resulting carbon dioxide into underground stores. Britain is considered to be well placed to develop and operate such technology given its many depleted North Sea oil fields where this sequestrated carbon dioxide could be stored. Several CCS development programmes have been launched over the past 20 years but have been cancelled as governments have vacillated over funding. However, Boris Johnson – as part of his commitment to fight climate change – has pledged £1bn of public funds to help develop  four major CCS schemes  in Britain by 2030 as part of his plan for a “green industrial revolution”. The aim is to make the UK a “world leader” in the technology and create thousands of jobs. But campaigners at Global Witness and  Friends of the Earth  Scotland said last week that a reliance on CCS was not a reliable way to decarbonise the energy system, and published a paper last Monday from the Tyndall Manchester climate change research centre that they said proved that CCS has a “history of over-promising and under-delivering”. Both groups claimed CCS would not make “a meaningful contribution to 2030 climate targets” despite the investment, and instead urged the construction of more renewable energy plants to be given priority. But the claims were last week dismissed by engineers and geologists. “These claims are quite unfair,” said Michael Stephenson, director of science and technology at the British Geological Survey. “The science behind carbon capture and storage is extremely good. It offers us a genuine solution to some of the problems we face in trying to tackle global warming.” At present, most successes in reducing UK carbon emissions have come from the power industry where renewable energy sources have taken over electricity generation from coal, gas and oil plants. However, some industries – such as steel and cement industries – emit vast amounts of carbon dioxide on top of those produced by generating the power they consume. It will be much more difficult to bring down carbon emissions from these plants even though these industries are vital to the UK’s economic strength. This point was stressed by Haszeldine. “When CCS was first touted, it was seen as a way of cleaning up electricity generated by fossil fuels, in particular those burning coal. But now it is clear it can play a key role in cleaning up other industries. “We just need to push ahead with its development so that Britain can find ways of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The longer we delay then the worst things are going to be and claims that CCS will not work do not help.” Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, was also critical of the green groups’ claims. “The opposition to CCS technology from some campaigners seems driven by a hatred of fossil fuel companies that is preventing a level-headed understanding of how we can stop climate change,” he told the  Observer . “Together with dithering policymakers, they share responsibility for stopping the UK from leading a global effort to develop this technology.”
Plotting the future: the ‘seed guardians’ bringing variety to UK gardens:	I t’s a fine, crisp day and the first frost of the season, a significant occasion for any gardener and one that has not gone unnoticed by the seed guardians of the  Stroud Community Seed Bank . Beth Richardson, a 27-year-old student midwife and coordinator at the seed bank, meets me by a big compost heap that steams on contact with the icy cold air. The heap, a valuable group resource, belongs to the allotment where Beth grows her crops. In allotment greenhouses and back-garden potting sheds across towns, cities and villages in the UK, communities of local growers are digging deep and planting the seeds for a richer, more diverse and more resilient food system. It is  a trend being repeated  all over the world. Seed guardian Beth Richardson digging on her allotment plot in Stroud “Seeds are so powerful, so vital to life, but the range and variety of seeds that the big companies provide are very narrow,” says Josie Cowgill, one of the Stroud seed bank’s 30-strong growers and seed-savers. “In our small way, we are trying to, in each of our gardens or on the land that we grow food on, increase the biodiversity within our plots and within Stroud.” The more you have these things being grown on a local scale and by many people, the more resilient it is The Stroud Community Seed Bank in Gloucestershire is one of hundreds of initiatives across the UK focusing its seed-saving efforts on “open pollinated seed”, which – providing there is no cross pollination – will reliably produce viable, true-to-type plants year after year. Rather than being locked into a cycle of buying new seed every season, seed can be saved and stored for future use. “What we have to do to combat the very narrow genetic basis to our seed is get as many people as possible growing as wide a diversity of seeds as possible,” says Kate McEvoy of  Real Seeds , a small-scale producer specialising in open pollinated seed for organic growing. Sally Oates’s garden can be heard before it is seen. Situated among acre upon acre of bare, intensively farmed fields her comparatively small plot of land appears to be a lone island of sweet, thundering birdsong. Oates says her garden, enclosed by luscious green hedges, provides its own compost and its own seeds. “What I would encourage is other gardeners to get together locally and form what is called a seed circle so within the group they can grow their favourite old varieties. When they have surplus seeds they can just exchange them. Even a few gardeners getting together, you can have quite a variety of seeds between you.” A jar of beans saved from this season’s crop (top left), and a variety of seeds from last season preserved by Stroud seed guardian Deirdre Pyzer using the essential tools of the trade: paper bags, jars, an ice-cream tub and a pencil for labelling Simon Allen, another of Stroud’s seed guardians, adds: “It doesn’t need a knowledge of genetics, it just needs observation and care.” Richardson explains that “after a number of years, the seed is more adapted to the soils, climate and conditions that it’s been grown in, if the strongest specimens are selected. It’s essentially a better crop grown in Stroud because over the years it has evolved to the conditions here. It becomes a landrace.” Seed guardian Annie Page, whose polytunnels teem with bright red tomatoes, describes her garden as her sanctuary. It’s not difficult to see why. Rows of cabbages and Thrupp parsnips stand proud in the morning sun that streams into the steep valley. “One of the landrace varieties we all grow is called the Thrupp parsnip. Thrupp is a village just outside Stroud, and the lady who saves the seed has been doing it for years. It grows really well in our area. It has adapted so it’s going to be slightly different to parsnip seeds anywhere else in the world. We are developing the seeds by saving them.” Annie Page brandishes a crop of Thrupp parsnips ‘adapted so it’s going to be slightly different to parsnip seeds anywhere else in the world’ Although there are many safeguards around the world for the preservation of seeds, such as the Svalbard Global Seed Vault and the Millennium Seed Bank at Kew, the continual evolution and specialisation of these saved seeds is of significant value to the robustness, resilience and diversity of seed globally. Sinead Fortune, programme manager of the  Seed Sovereignty Programme , says: “By being grown out and maintained by seed guardians, they’re still living and developing. They’re still a real living entity, as opposed to a static seed in a bank somewhere.” McEvoy adds: “The more you have these things being grown on a local scale and by many people, the more resilient it is. You haven’t got just one point of failure. You’ve got multiple backups.” One of the few upsides of the lockdowns over the past year has been  a huge boost in demand for seed . The seed guardians hope this could be the green shoots of a “grow your own” revolution that re-diversifies seed crops. McEvoy says that in the spring not only the Stroud seed bank but “all the home garden seed companies were basically having to just shut down their websites. They had more orders than they could actually get out the door.” Since the first UK lockdown last spring, there has been a surge in vegetable growing Fortune, who works with many national suppliers, wondered if seed might be the new loo-roll, and if people were stockpiling. The question was whether sales were eventually going to come down but “they’ve stayed constantly much, much higher” she says. “This is promising because it means that maybe a shift is really starting to happen. I think those empty shelves in March and April were a bit of a wake-up call for a lot of people; there’s a groundswell going on. That’s very exciting. It might feel quite small just saving beans and growing your own food, but actually I think it is really fundamental “There are brilliant things going on in every single city,” she adds. “There are community gardens and community allotments. If people don’t have a garden or access to land, there are a lot of initiatives to get engaged on all sorts of levels. I would really urge them to see what is going on in the community.” For the seed guardians in Stroud and across the country, the quiet, radical work of drying seeds on window ledges and in airing cupboards continues. Cowgill says the process is “good for the soul” and extends an open invitation to other would-be growers to begin playing in the soil, with potentially hugely positive consequences for the individual and the planet. Josie Cowgill with a handful of saved beans ready to be distributed among the local community She sums up the impact of seed-saving in the context of 2020: “It’s difficult times we are living in. We have got a pandemic, we’ve got climate change, we’ve got biodiversity loss, habitat loss and economic collapse as well. It might feel quite small, just saving beans and growing your own food, but actually I think it is really fundamental. “By doing something infinitesimally small like this tiny little gesture in a tiny little group, in a tiny little country somewhere, you are working towards something that makes you feel more hopeful. It’s a positive step. I’m not saying this is a magic wand or a cure-all, but it’s a positive step.” Find more  age of extinction coverage here , and follow biodiversity reporters  Phoebe Weston  and  Patrick Greenfield  on Twitter for all the latest news and features
European car sales see record fall, as pandemic hits oil demand – business live:	Bitcoin and Tesla shares are more likely to halve in value than double over the next 12 months, according to Deutsche Bank’s latest survey of investors. The monthly survey found widespread agreement that there are some bubbles in the markets (which have rallied strongly since crashing last spring). Asset prices look bubbliest in the cryptocurrency market, and in US tech stocks, according to the poll of 627 market professionals. It was conducted last week by Deutche strategist Jim Reid [among readers of his  Early Morning Reid  daily research].  It found that: More than half of people surveyed by Deutsche Bank think Bitcoin and Tesla are more likely to halve than double.  pic.twitter.com/LAL4kCy9A5 Sky News is reporting that the City’s last-remaining open outcry trading ring, at the London Metal Exchange (LME), could be consigned to history. Such a move would end an era of traders  gesticulating  and calling out buy and sell orders to each other.  That practice has mainly moved to electronic systems in recent years, but carries on at the LME - although  the ring has been closed since March due to the pandemic . Here’s the details: Sky News has learnt that the LME is expected to propose the end of its open outcry structure in a consultation document to be published later on Tuesday. It will be regarded as a historic moment for one of the most identifiable practices in the City of London, and is likely to meet stiff resistance from some LME brokers. The LME Ring underpins roughly $50bn of metal trades every day, and has been operational since the 1800s, surviving two world wars in the process. It has, however, been temporarily shut as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, and had not been scheduled to resume trading until social distancing protocols had been abandoned. Revealed: The London Metal Exchange's plan to close its historic trading Ring will be unveiled this afternoon, framed in the context of an effort to modernise a City tradition dating back to the 1800s and improve the market's transparency.  https://t.co/mXDrd76Sje The Boeing 737 Max will be approved to fly once more in the EU from next week, another critical step in its return to service after two fatal crashes. Patrick Ky, executive director of the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), said it would publish an updated airworthiness directive next week, following in the footsteps of regulators in the US and Brazil. The plane was grounded worldwide after crashes in Indonesia and Ethiopia caused by a faulty sensor, which repeatedly triggered a system that pushed the nose down.  346 people died in the two accidents. The 737 Max will be able to return to service as soon as Boeing has updated software and rewired some components, and airlines have trained their pilots in the changes. Ky said  the version of the 737 Max bought by Irish airline Ryanair  will be certified “in the coming weeks”, meaning it will likely be ready for service in the summer. Domestic airlines in Brazil and the US are already operating commercial flights using the plane.  German economic sentiment has picked up this month despite the ongoing pandemic, according to the latest healthcheck from the ZEW Institute: Good news for the Eurozone business morale: German ZEW Economic Sentiment rises to 61.8 in January, from previous 55.0 and more than expected 60.0 @graemewearden German ZEW Survey Expectations Jan: 61.8 (exp 59.4; prev 55.0)  - ZEW Survey Current Situation Jan: -66.4 (exp -68.3; prev -66.5) Shares in online electricals retailer AO World have dropped 6% this morning, as the pandemic drives up its costs and forces customers to cancel contracts AO, which sells washing machines, freezers, laptops etc over the web, reported its “strongest ever peak trading period” over the Black Friday period and in the run up to Christmas. UK revenues jumped by over 67% in the last quarter of 2020, and surged 77.4% in Germany, as shoppers turned to online retailers as the high street locked down. But, AO also warns that complying with social distancing rules is pushing up its costs, particularly as some customers return products (the ‘reverse supply chain’) or cancel warranties as household budgets tighten. We have incurred significantly higher costs as we negotiate some of the operational challenges of working in a Covid compliant environment, particularly in the reverse supply chain. We have also seen a slightly increased rate of cancellation of individual consumers’ long term contracts in mobile and warranties, driven by Covid impacts on customers behavior.  In the long term, AO is still optimistic that the lockdown will boost demand for electrical goods, due to the “structural shift online”, and the move towards home working.  David Madden of CMC Markets says: AO’s costs have increased ‘significantly’ due to the Covid-19 environment, which appears to be weighing on the share price. The company is investing in its business – warehouses, vehicles and staff – so it is clearly optimistic in its outlook.  AO  (-6%) has dropped to the bottom of the  FTSE  250 this morning; fellow retailers  Next  (-3%) and  Kingfisher  (-2.4%) are also down. Taking a long position on bitcoin is now the most crowded trade in finance, overtaking “long tech”. That’s the message from Bank of America’s latest monthly fund manager survey, which also showed that taking a short position on the US dollar is the third-most crowded trade. #Bitcoin  overtakes "Long tech" as most crowded trade in BofA fund manager survey. Long Bitcoin jumps to top w/36% of FMS investors saying it is the most “crowded trade” dethroning “Long tech” for first time since Oct’19. #2 Long Tech, #3 Short US dollar, #4 Long Corporate Bonds.  pic.twitter.com/dmXe9E8I6e Bitcoin has more than doubled over the last five weeks, amid signs that some institutional investors are seeing cryptocurrencies as a credible asset class. It’s up around 3% today at $37,400, below the record high near $42,000 set earlier this month. Fund managers also repored that the top ‘tail risks’ are the possibility of problems with the vaccine rollout (30%), the Federal Reserve easing its asset purchases (29%), and a Wall Street bubble (18%). BofA Fund Manager Survey: - Long bitcoin most crowded trade, then long tech, short USD - Vaccine rollout issues, taper tantrum & wall st bubble top tail risks - >83% expect steeper curve - 41% (record) see small caps > large caps over nxt 12 mths Oil demand also saw an “unprecedented collapse” last year, according to the latest monthly report from the International Energy Agency. The IEA says that demand dropped by 8.8 million barrels per day (bpd) in 2020. And with the pandemic weighing on the global economy, the group has cut its forecast for global oil demand in 2021 by 300,000 barrels per day, to 5.5m bpd. The IEA explains : For now, a resurgence in Covid-19 cases is slowing the rebound, but a widespread vaccination effort and an acceleration in economic activity is expected to spur stronger growth in the second half of the year. For the first quarter of 2021, it has cut its forecast by 580,000 barrels per day.  The global vaccine roll-out is putting fundamentals on a stronger trajectory for the year, with both supply and demand shifting back into growth mode following 2020’s unprecedented collapse. But it will take more time for oil demand to recover fully as renewed lockdowns in a number of countries weigh on fuel sales. This has contributed to us revising down our forecast for global oil demand by 0.6 mb/d for 1Q21 and 0.3 mb/d for 2021 as a whole.  Our January Oil Market Report is out now: •  Global oil demand is expected to increase by 6% to 96.6 mb/d in 2021 after an unprecedented drop in 2020 •  Global supply is set to rise by 1.2 mb/d this year, with OPEC+ driving the growth Read more ⬇️  https://t.co/bY3S6vNJlt IEA cuts 2021 oil demand forecast  https://t.co/vntBmlhLxk European stock markets have opened higher, with the  FTSE  100 index up 26 points or 0.4% at 6746 points. Travel stocks are among the risers, amid reports that demand for holidays is rising as Covid-19 vaccines are rolled out. Jet engine maker  Rolls-Royce  is leading the Footsie risers, up 4.5% at 109p, with airline group  IAG  up 2.3%. Hotel group  Intercontinental  (+1.4%) and budget airlines  easyJet  (+5%) and  Wizz  Air  (+3.7%) are also rallying. Investors are also hopeful of an economic recovery this year as Joe Biden’s administration pushes through its $1.9bn stimulus programme. As flagged earlier, Treasury Secretary nominee Janet Yellen  is expected  to argue for more sending at her confirmation hearing today. As  Paul Donovan  of  UBS Wealth Management  puts it: If the growth rate generated by government investment in infrastructure or people exceeds the cost of borrowing, it is a worthwhile exercise. Given the structural changes ahead, investing in people may be more important.  And on t he car sales figures ,  Donovan  adds:  European car registrations fell again in December—it will be interesting to see whether transport demand shifts if more people work from home and shop online.  The drop in European car sales last year  will go a little way towards fighting the climate emergency.... ... and so will a new technological breakthrough - a fast-charging battery that could help the electric car industry replace petrol and diesel cars. My colleague Damian Carrington explains: Batteries capable of fully charging in five minutes have been produced in a factory for the first time, marking a significant step towards electric cars becoming as fast to charge as filling up petrol or diesel vehicles. Electric vehicles are a vital part of action to tackle the climate crisis but running out of charge during a journey is a worry for drivers. The new lithium-ion batteries were developed by the Israeli company  StoreDot  and manufactured by Eve Energy in China on standard production lines. StoreDot has already demonstrated its “extreme fast-charging” battery in phones, drones and scooters and the 1,000 batteries it has now produced are to showcase its technology to carmakers and other companies. Daimler, BP, Samsung and TDK have all invested StoreDot, which has raised $130m to date and was named a  Bloomberg New Energy Finance Pioneer  in 2020. The batteries can be fully charged in five minutes but this would require much higher-powered chargers than used today. Using available charging infrastructure, StoreDot is aiming to deliver 100 miles of charge to a car battery in five minutes in 2025. Electric car batteries with five-minute charging times produced  - first factory production means recharging could soon be as fast as filling up petrol or diesel vehicles Story by me https://t.co/PNEaJqS2P7 VW Group  (which includes Volkswagen, Skoda, and Audi) sold the most cars across the EU last year, with sales down 21.6 % at 2.54 million. PSA Group  (including Peugeot, Citreon and Opel/Vauxhall) saw its sales slump 29% to 1.5m, followed by  Renault Group  (Renault, Dacia, Lada) with 1.1m cars sales (down 25%). 🇪🇺 Passenger  #car  registrations: 🔻2️⃣4️⃣% in 2020; -3.3% in December.  👉 "2020 saw the biggest yearly drop in EU car demand since records began, with new-car registrations 🚘 falling by 3 million units compared to 2019." PRESS RELEASE:  https://t.co/7fjYQwpPmW   pic.twitter.com/vtk6hlA4Wq Across Europe as a whole, car sales slumped by over 24% last year -- with almsot four million fewer new vehicles hitting the road. Some 11,961,182 car registrations were recorded in total across  the EU , the UK, and Iceland, Norway and Switzerland -- down from 15.8m in 2019. Europe’s car industry only managed one month of sales growth in 2020,  Bloomberg point out: Carmakers managed to better cope with government measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus as the year rolled on, helped by subsidies and dealers embracing online-ordering tools. But the collapse in sales in March, April and May proved difficult to come back from, with the industry managing a single month of growth all year. By contrast, China’s auto market  expanded  throughout the second half.  Europe Car Sales Drop Most on Record in Year Bedeviled by Virus  https://t.co/TLXY7XQAj7 Following Brexit, the UK car market isn’t included in  ACEA’s count of EU car sales  -- but it suffered an even bigger slump last year. UK car sales slumped by over 29% in 2020 to 1.63m, from 2.3m a year ( according to data from the SMMT earlier this month ). Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. Europe’s car industry has suffered its biggest ever drop in sales, as the Covid-19 pandemic dealt an “unprecedented” to the sector. Car sales across the European Union slumped by 23.7% last year, new data shows, the worst slump on record. Just 9.9m new vehicles were registered in 2020, down from 13m in 2019, as lockdown restrictions hammered demand.  Industry body ACEA reports that: Containment measures – including full‐ scale lockdowns and other restrictions throughout the year – had an unprecedented impact on car sales across the European Union. 2020 saw the biggest yearly drop in car demand. Every EU country saw double-digit sales falls in 2020, ACEA reports.  Spain  posted the sharpest drop (‐32.3%), followed closely by  Italy  (‐27.9%). Sales fell by over 25% in  France , and dropped 19% in  Germany . European Car Sales fall 24% in 2020, biggest decline on record.. 🇪🇺🚗 European new car sales drop by 3.7% y/y in December - ACEA ACEA said 2020 saw the biggest yearly drop in car demand since records began, with new car registrations falling by 24.3% compared to 2019. The worst slump came in March and April, predictably, when the coronavirus outbreak hit Europe’s economy. But sales have remained weak since. In December, new registrations fell by 3.3%, the third monthly decline in a row, as the second wave of Covid-19 forced fresh lockdown restrictions. European stock markets are set to rise, ahead of Janet Yellen’s confirmation hearing at the Senate.  The Treasury Secretary noninee is expected to explain that - with interest rates so low - the US should spend heavily to ensure the economic recovery. The  Financial Times  explains: Janet Yellen  will lay out the case for President-elect Joe Biden’s proposed $1.9tn relief package at her confirmation hearing as Treasury secretary, arguing that “the smartest thing we can do is act big”. In prepared remarks obtained by the Financial Times ahead of her appearance before the Senate finance committee on Tuesday, Ms Yellen said the US risked “a longer, more painful recession” and “long-term scarring” if it did not move quickly to inject more government spending into the economy.  European Opening Calls: #FTSE  6758 +0.55% #DAX  13947 +0.71% #CAC  5654 +0.65% #AEX  654 +0.58% #MIB  22674 +0.78% #IBEX  8289 +0.41% #OMX  1974 +0.59% #STOXX  3623 +0.57% #IGOpeningCall
India pull off stunning win over Australia to seal series – as it happened:	Sorry to everyone who emailed in during that thrilling final session. I had no time to get to any of them, but looking at them now they complement the drama of India’s push for victory. And they are worth reading. So here they are. “Scott - can’t breath!” writes  Samanda Black . “This is the second time I have been stuck in Jaipur when India decide to spank the Australians in Australia. For the love of!?!?I work in a block printing factory, so out my office door are a bunch of guys I do not want to face. Same thing happened in Jan 2018 and now again. Extraordinary cricket, gritty Indians and “Say NO to 4 day tests”!! Wish I was Latvian and could watch it impassionately with just full blown admiration, rather than begrudgingly having to admit we’ve lost. Bugger, but outstanding.” “So are India a better team without Virat Kohli,” asks  David Toze . “Where would you rate this in the pantheon of great series?” asks  Tane Aikman . “Surely not far behind the 2005 Ashes. Greatest overseas win of all time?” Right up there, Tane. ‘Can‘t wait to get you to the Gabba.’  “Tim Paine looks even more foolish now,” writes  Tom . “Superb achievement from this massively deleted India side. Thanks for the coverage throughout the series.” “Fantastic commentary, Scott. Great match and series,” writes William Hargreaves. You’re welcome, Bill. The pleasure is definitely ours. Here is a match report for a quick round-up of an extraordinary day. A truly remarkable end to a scarcely believable series. The record books will show India winning by three wickets in Brisbane and retaining the Border-Gavaskar Trophy courtesy of a 2-1 series verdict, but the bare facts tell none of the story. This was a win for the ages by India, one that will be trumpeted on the subcontinent as possibly their greatest in Test history. At no stage did they have anything going for them. Australia had not lost at the Gabba since 1988. India were beset by injuries. No team had scored anything like 329 to win a Test match in Brisbane. India didn’t even have to win, a draw being enough for the visitors to retain series honours as the current holders of the trophy. But India batted to a plan on the final day of the final Test, getting home with three overs to spare to seal a triumph that will live long in the memory. India have showed immense courage and character this series, especially after being skittled for an all-time low of 36 in Adelaide, but today they portrayed a deadly intent that typifies the new India.  Cheteshwar Pujara was India’s glue on the final day, taking blow after blow in an innings of 56 that consumed 211 deliveries. It allowed the likes of Shubman Gill (91) and Rishabh Pant (89 not out) to flourish, the latter guiding the visitors home in style with a knock of equal parts composure and class.  Australia are in for some soul-searching after again failing to knock India over on the final day of a Test match. They should have done better after Adelaide, with their tails up and India’s personnel in disarray. They were held at bay in Sydney and then beaten by the better team in Brisbane. Australia played their part in a memorable series, but they were second best. India were, quite simply, breathtaking. 97th over: India 329-7 (Pant 89, Saini 0) Pant drives Hazlewood past mid-off for four to seal an incredible win for India. They could have batted for a draw, but they batted to a plan today and have won with three overs to spare. India win the series 2-1 and retain the Border-Gavaskar Trophy. Wow. WOW. For the first time in more than three decades, Australia are beaten at the Gabba. Which means, against ALL odds, India win the series 2-1! Unbelievable scenes 😮 #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/KJyD7zu0rM Pant shows his versatility, and agility, to get India to within six runs of victory with a swivelled hook off one foot to send Hazlewood to the fine-leg fence. A single then puts Thakur on strike. Two scampered runs behind square put India within three runs of victory but Thakur perishes going for the money shot, picking out Lyon at midwicket. The batsmen cross and Pant is back on strike. 96th over: India 318-6 (Pant 80, Thakur 0)  Pant takes Lyon for a single before Sundar does the same to put his partner back on strike. Good move. Pant picks Lyon’s length up early and sweeps out of the middle for three more through midwicket.  But that stroke puts Sundar back on strike and he does something he doesn’t really need to do, attempting a reverse sweep that he drags back onto his stumps. Australia’s pulse returns as Lyon takes his 399th Test wicket.  India need 10 runs off four overs to win. 95th over: India 313-5 (Pant 76, Sundar 21)  Hazlewood now on for Cummins. Two runs to Pant, then two more to deep backward square thanks to brilliant running. And after a nurdled single, India’s target is now inside 20 runs. And luck is on their side, too. Sundar looks to turn Hazlewood behind square but misses, could easily have got an edge, but in the end the ball ricochets off his thigh pad and over gully for four leg-byes. Time, or overs, is now no longer an issue for India. And nor is wickets, save for an unexpected collapse. This Test, this series, is India’s for the taking.  They now need 15 runs off five overs to win. 94th over: India 304-5 (Pant 71, Sundar 21) Four! Four!  Pant takes Lyon for eight runs in two deliveries, scooping over the keeper’s head before dropping onto one knee and sweeping over midwicket. Such confidence. A single follows. And then four byes follow as Sundar lets one go, only for all and sundry to watch on as the ball bites out of a crack and beats the lot en route to the boundary. Sundar then picks up two through the covers to make it 15 from the over.  Six overs to go. India need 24 runs to win. 93rd over: India 289-5 (Pant 62, Sundar 19)  Cummins again. The man’s heart is as big as Phar Lap’s. As big as Pujara’s. Pant collects a single before Sundar drives on the up, giving Australia hope of a catch but Labuschagne is very deep at mid-off. More saving a single than there for the catch. Sundar then dispels any doubt India might have put the cue in the rack as he steps inside a short one from Cummins and swivels around his hips for a  massive six!  Another four follow as the debutant flashes hard outside off and slices to third man. Eleven runs from the over. Surely that’s Cummins done for now. 92nd over: India 278-5 (Pant 61, Sundar 9)  Lyon to Pant, who wants to move things on after watching on at the non-striker’s end the previous over. The Indian swings hard outside off, misses, then defends, then picks up a single past point. Sundar gets one of his own before a misfield at backward point not only gifts Pant a run but keeps him on strike for the over to come.  Eight overs remaining. India need 50 runs to win. 91st over: India 275-5 (Pant 59, Sundar 8)  Paine goes to the well again with Cummins. He must be tiring. Sundar cuts nicely out of the middle but a sharp piece of fielding by Lyon at backward point makes it a dot ball. If Cummins is fatigued he’s not showing it. He digs one in short to Sundar, plenty of pace, and Sundar does pretty well to fend the ball down to safely. But with no catchers near the bat, there was no danger anyway. Maiden over. “Will Australia continue using Cummins in one end for rest of the innings?,” asks  S. Balaji . “Can he be strong for another 5 overs?” I can’t imagine he continues. Hazlewood is out there. Just try getting the ball out of his hands, though! 90th over: India 275-5 (Pant 59, Sundar 8)  Lyon rips through his over, giving India precious little time to think through their next move. Not much thinking is required, however, when runs are the only thing on your mind. Sundar flashes outside off with maximum intent, but he miscues the shot and looks in trouble before the balls lands safely between the infield and the fielder at deep point. Two from the over. 89th over: India 273-5 (Pant 58, Sundar 7)  Cummins continues, one wicket away from yet another five-wicket haul. India are now needing almost a run a ball. Right on cue, Sundar devours a fullish one from Cummins and drives past mid-off for four. Glorious shot from a man on debut. In this situation. Quite remarkable. Here’s the Agarwal dismissal. WICKET! Agarwal drives Cummins on the up but it goes straight to Wade!  #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/xkCafg6IE9 88th over: India 267-5 (Pant 58, Sundar 1)  Lyon again. Sundar is the new man at the crease. He batted well in the first innings -  his  first innings! - but the fate of the match, the series, rests with Pant. He takes a single with two balls remaining. But Sundar has no desire to see off the last two balls and put Pant back on strike, taking a single which precedes a failed reverse sweep from Pant. Yes, a reverse sweep on day five of a Test match. This series, huh? 87th over: India 265-5 (Pant 57, Sundar 0) Cummins again! He is THE MAN. Agarwal goes chasing outside off but doesn’t get a lot of his attempted drive, picking out Wade at short cover. Another twist to this tale, and again Cummins is the architect. 87th over: India 265-4 (Pant 57, Agarwal 9)  Agarwal hangs his bat outside off to Cummins and it looks like the outside edge is beaten, but Australia like it and send the not-out decision upstairs.  Review! Not out!  Australia burn yet another review. They have just one left. 86th over: India 265-4 (Pant 57, Agarwal 9)  Lyon resumes after the drinks break, playing in his 100th Test and needing just two wickets for 400 in Test cricket. But - pace, turn - it all comes the same to India as Pant sweeps deftly for four more. Six from the over. That will do India nicely. 85th over: India 259-4 (Pant 51, Agarwal 9)  Shot!  Cummins is full again and now it’s Agarwal’s turn to cash in as the right-hander drives down the ground for four. A single elsewhere in the over as India keep a grip on the required rate. Time for drinks. We all need one.  There are 15 overs remaining. India need 69 runs to win. Australia need six wickets. “India have been brilliant again,” writes  David Bertram . “I do hope they close it out. Any thoughts on how England will fare? (And as an aside you have to look at this Australian team and think the ashes are there for the taking if you can cope with the short ball).” India have been brilliant. But sorry, David, I have no time to lie down and think of England. 84th over: India 254-4 (Pant 50, Agarwal 5)  No-ball from Hazlewood. Australia do not need that. They also don’t need Hazlewood wide and full outside off, a delivery which draws a cover drive from Pant to move to 49. And then some luck for Agarwal, who chops outside off and lives to fight on as the inside edge teases across the face of the stumps. Pant then urges his partner through for a quick single that take him to fifty. Australia need Pant out of this situation. He holds the key. “If Australia don’t win this series, where does that leave Paine’s captaincy?” asks  Tanay Padhi.  “His side have 5 players who would be in a serious conversation for a world test XI, up against an Indian third team. They’re also not that much more pleasant than the 2018 vintage he was brought in to reform.” I would think nobody escapes the spotlight in this audit, Tanay. Is Pant the man for India?  #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/K4vTD58R9i 83rd over: India 248-4 (Pant 46, Agarwal 4)  A picture of stillness, Pant stays in his crease and punches Cummins down the ground for two. Wonderful timing. Cummins then overpitches and it’s not his best delivery, Pant driving through the covers to take four more runs off the victory target. Lovely way for Cummins to end the over, nipping one away from Agarwal and hard into Paine’s gloves. “Dear Scott,” writes  Colum Fordham . “With Vesuvius shrouded in the golden glow of dawn, this incredible match (nay series) is coming to its denouement. Two more sharply contrasting styles of batsmen at the cricket - test cricketer par excellence in Pujara and T20 swashbuckler Pant - could not exist as India have the total within their sights. Thanks to you and Geoff for your vivid word pictures of this scintilating series. Great coverage!” Trust me, the pleasure is all ours. 82nd over: India 241-4 (Pant 39, Agarwal 4)  Hazlewood from the other end. Pant flirts with one outside off, then decides against it, as the ball catches the toe of the bat before trickling to slip. Hazlewood then strays down leg and beats batter and keeper for four byes before Pant steps into a full one and drives sumptuously through the covers for four. A quick single follows. India chasing victory. Ain’t no doubt about it. At the end of the over, Hazlewood lets out an almighty appeal for leg before but Agarwal survives. Too high? A bit of bat? Who cares ... no review from Paine. 81st over: India 232-4 (Pant 34, Agarwal 4) The new ball is taken. Cummins gets it. Of course.  And it looks like he’s struck!  He traps Pujara on the crease, Australia rise in appeal. Pujara is given out leg before.  But a review is forthcoming. OUT!  The ball is shown to be no more than touching the leg bail, but given the umpire’s call is out ... the decision remains. Australia - and that man, Cummins - have struck. Pujara’s marathon study in defiance comes to an close. He walks off, shaking his head in disbelief. He’s seen them not given, as have we all. Agarwal gets off the mark with two runs to mid-on and then gets two more down the ground. It took Cummins only two balls to strike with the newy!  An epic innings ends... Live  #AUSvIND :  https://t.co/qvYTMSiZsl   pic.twitter.com/kKazQFD3Km 80th over: India 228-3 (Pujara 56, Pant 34)  Pujara uses his feet and knocks Lyon to mid-on for one. Very useful over from Lyon, who maintains an outside-off line before setting up Pant with an arm ball that  juuuuuuuuuust  misses off-stump. New ball is due.  India need 100 runs to win off 20 overs.  You do the math. @scott_heinrich  have The Indians missed a trick by not scoring before the new ball? Or, do they figure the quicks will go for boundaries? Don’t think they’ve missed a trick at all. Scoring on the fifth evening of any Test match with an old ball is never easy. They’re looking to score. They might be as happy to see the new ball as Australia will be. 79th over: India 227-3 (Pujara 55, Pant 34)  Starc continues, wide on the crease angling in across to the right-handed Pujara. It’s a good over until he overcorrects as Pujara flicks his wrists and turns the paceman backward of square for three. Rain now descending on the Gabba. But it looks like a sun shower. Nothing dastardly about it. New ball due in one over. 78th over: India 224-3 (Pujara 52, Pant 34)  More bounce and turn for Lyon, not what you’d normally expect on a fifth-day deck, but there’s enough there to keep the Indians guessing. A maiden over, which if nothing else pushes the asking rate that little bit higher. 77th over: India 224-3 (Pujara 52, Pant 34)  Starc continues. He’s brisk again but short and wide outside off isn’t much use and he’s lucky that Pant picks out deep backward point for only a single. Starc looks more dangerous around the wicket to the right-handed Pujara, and there’s a shout nworth making as the right-hander is rapped on the pads right on the crease. But that angle is severe. Looks to be heading down leg and no review is forthcoming. Starc finishes the over way down leg, almost pleading with Pujara to clip away fine for four runs. Actually, they’re leg-byes. Regardless, the over goes for five runs. Eight days ago  @scott_heinrich .  Redemption looks a way off yet.  https://t.co/3f0rcwx9Nz Hmmmmmmmmm. 76th over: India 219-3 (Pujara 52, Pant 33)  As expected, Lyon returns from the other end. Around the wicket to the left-handed Pant, he gets good turn off a length and beats the Indian’s outside edge. Lyon does it again later in the over with a straighter one that doesn’t miss off-stump by that far. Five dots balls make way for a release from Pant, who charges the spinner but barely does better than miscue a slog down to long-on for one. 75th over: India 218-3 (Pujara 52, Pant 32)  Now Starc from the other end. Instigated by the skipper or Starc himself? Better from the big man, over the wicket to Pant. Faster, with more intent. Pant looks interested in a bouncer but it’s quick, and straight, and beats the chasing blade. Pant retains the strike with a hurried single.  Twenty-five overs remaining. India need 110 runs to win. Australia need seven wickets. @scott_heinrich  Great Test soon to complete at the Gabba. Where is Harsha Bogle when we need him. Loving the ABC commentators but with India in with a BIG chance to win... India = Huge Chance To Win. 74th over: India 217-3 (Pujara 52, Pant 31)  Starc is pulled after one over as Paine turns to Labuschagne. Pujara gleefully accepts one that turns wide away from off, cutting late for four to register one of the bravest, most heroic half-centuries these tired eyes have witnessed. What a stoic effort. Pujara is the wall that cannot be scaled. Determined. 50. Pujara.  #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/x9uSMjRGQb 73rd over: India 213-3 (Pujara 48, Pant 31)  Australia rise to the cries of “Catch!!!” as Pant flashes at Lyon outside off-stump, but his leading edge lands just short of gully. India maintain near their their required rate with four runs from the over. 72nd over: India 209-3 (Pujara 47, Pant 28)  Starc returns top the attack, some time before the new ball is due. Big, big call by Paine. Starc hasn’t had a great series but this has been a particularly ordinary match for the left-armer. And it’s more of the same from Starc, who is short, wide and not very handsome to Pant - four runs! There are singles elsewhere in the over and that’s eight runs from the over. 71st over: India 201-3 (Pujara 45, Pant 22)  Lyon again to Pant for the latest chapter of an exchange that could decide this Test. The spinner gets one to turn square out of a crack, which Smith collects at slip, but the over ends up belonging to Pant, who moves his feet and cracks a huge six over long-on. Big shot. Big statement. The 200 is passed by India. 70th over: India 194-3 (Pujara 44, Pant 16)  The Pant-Lyon-Paine triangular soiree from the previous over shows India will go chasing if the carrot is dangled. No carrot from Hazlewood in this over, however, as a single to Pujara is the only notable occurrence.  69th over: India 193-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 16)  Lyon again, possibly bowling from even wider on the crease in search of those footmarks. No bat-pad, however. Pant looks happy to defend. That is, until, mid-on is brought up and Pant goes waltzing down the pitch, looking to hit high and long down the ground. He misses the lot but, sadly for Australia, so does Paine and so does first slip as the ball races away for four byes. The ball did look to rise sharply but that must go down as a missed stumping chance. Just check this out! Pant can't resist! And Lyon can't believe it. Live  #AUSvIND :  https://t.co/qvYTMSiZsl   pic.twitter.com/XQFhAO1bpX 68th over: India 189-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 16)  Around the wicket, Hazlewood to Pant. The Indian prods defensively at one and looks to be in a bit of discomfort. Or did it just keep low? If Pant is in any pain it doesn’t show, with two through the covers and three pulled square coming from the following two deliveries. With India’s run-rate now creeping above four, these are the overs they want. If not exactly need. Wickets, however, are what Australia need. Badly. 67th over: India 184-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 11)  Finally, after 20 dot balls, scoring for the session is under way as Pant takes a single past cover. But that’s it for the over. If anyone thought India would come out swinging, or anything remotely like it, think again. 66th over: India 183-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 10)  Pujara drives at a Hazlewood half-volley but can’t beat the bowler. The Australian follows up with a zippy delivery that moves markedly off the seam, but it’s a wasted effort with Pujara showing no interest at all. Yet another maiden. Matty Hayden, on the telly, is remarking how Paine should take the new ball when it’s available but that he can’t rely on Starc, who according to Haydos has displayed poor body language and has lacked confidence all Test. The camera shot pans to Starc, who lets out a huge yawn standing detached in the deep. 65th over: India 183-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 10)  Lyon from the other end. If Australia are to win, he’ll be taking his 400th Test wicket and then some. One slip for Pant. Off-side field stacked. Pant refuses each of the baited hooks. Another maiden. 64th over: India 183-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 10)  And we are back. For the final stanza of a series few will forget. Strap yourselves in. Hazlewood begins for Australia. Pujara tries to pull out of his shot but the ball catches the end of the bat before it dribbles to slip. Hazlewood mixes his length but Pujara isn’t one to fall for trickery. Imagine playing poker against this gent. A bit of seam movement off the cracks in there for the paceman, also. A maiden to kick off the final evening of the final Test. “Intriguingly set up,” writes  Will Ellen . “Here’s hoping for the thrilling ending that this magnificent series deserves. All 4 results still possible on the final session of the fifth day. A fifth day that will bury, once and for all, and forever and a day, the ludicrous idea of turning Test Match  Cricket  into a 4 day crash bang wallop fest. Leave this form of the game as it is, there is nothing else like it. India’s resilience in this series has amazed me, we could be in for something special here.” Oh yeah, I forgot about the tie. That rarest of exquisite birds. Given how this series has gone, you might as well install it as the favourite. One hundred runs scored at a cost of two wickets on the final afternoon. Australia will be overjoyed to see the back of Gill and Rahane, both of whom scored with purpose, but they still need seven wickets to win this match and regain the Border-Gavasker Trophy. With men still in the hutch, India will look to push on for victory after tea. With a possible 37 overs still to play, 145 looks within their grasp. Should they reel the runs in, it will be a record Test chase at the Gabba. Anything looks possible in the final session. Don’t go anywhere. 63rd over: India 183-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 10)  That’s got to smart. Pant tries to defend Cummins, angling into the left-hander from around the wicket, but misreads the line and is struck high on the thigh or groin area. Pujara, for once, isn’t the one hurting. But he can feel Pant’s pain and goes to the striker’s end to check on his partner. What a nice fellow. Pant sees India safely to tea, but not before Cummins beats his outside edge with one that looks to just seam away slightly. 62nd over: India 183-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 10)  Pant drives Lyon backward of point for two before going to the same part of the field for one more. It’s a brisk over from Lyon, quick enough to ensure there is another over prior to tea. 61st over: India 180-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 7)  Cummins watches on with hands on head as Pant splits slip and gully for four more, but it was a shot played with soft hands and a closed face. A good ball, no argument, but a low-risk shot from a man who has it in him to take this match, this series, right away from Australia. Pant finishes the over with a controlled hook shot, above his head, for a single past square. “Notwithstanding Lot’s more to be said and done today’,” writes  Ian Swan . “At what point would Tim Paine offer / concede the draw? A balancing act of wickets required, runs required, time and overs remaining - or will he play to the very end?” If wickets are still required and the umpires aren’t removing the bails, Paine would play until the wee small hours I’d wager! 60th over: India 175-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 2)  Pujara turns Lyon square and sets off what he thinks is a sure single. Pant, however, has other ideas and sends his partner back from fully halfway down the crease. A direct hit from Cummins at midwicket might have made things interesting, but his throw to Paine is wide and Pujara dives to make his ground. Good over from Lyon to keep Pujara planted. 59th over: India 175-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 2)  Pant gets off the mark as Pant does, with a breezy pull shot past square for two that might have brought two more had the ball been struck cleaner. Pant sees off the remainder of Cummins’ over defensively. And India can afford to be measured. With a possible 41 overs still remaining to be bowled, an asking rate south of four is all that’s required. 58th over: India 173-3 (Pujara 43, Pant 0)  Lyon to Pujara, who is ready for the ball outside off but waits for the straighter ones and capitalises when he gets them, first collecting two backward of square before concluding the over with a boundary clipped to fine-leg. 57th over: India 167-3 (Pujara 37, Pant 0) Hazlewood off, Cummins on. No surprise there. Paine needs another breakthrough and Cummins is the go-to man, even moreso given Starc’s struggles today.  And Cummins delivers! Again!  But a horrible, horrible shot from Rahane, who sets up to ramp the ball over the slip cordon, gets cramped a little, and does nothing more than edge the ball into the gloves of his Australia counterpart. All well and good to bat with intent, but that was nothing short of suicide. A shrink-wrapped treat for Australia. Australia, again, are back in it. But out strolls Pant ... GONE. Cummins gets the Indian captain and things starting to happen here at the Gabba! 3/167, and Rishabh Pant to the crease 👀  #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/3bISYT1dmx 56th over: India 163-2 (Pujara 34, Rahane 23)  Rahane has had ants in his pants facing Lyon so far today and this over it pays dividends with a huge, beautiful six high over long-on. Australia then think - hope? - they have their man as the short midwicket pouches a catch, but instead of bat onto pad ... it was only pad. No review. India going along nicely after the loss of Gill.  Given Pujara’s brush with pain today, he’ll be happy to watch on from the non-striker’s end as his skipper scores. The Day 5 adventures of Cheteshwar Pujara  #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/OhGxN3bRy4 55th over: India 156-2 (Pujara 34, Rahane 16)  Australia might have been guilty of being too short this morning but they want Rahane driving, especially in the mood he’s in, and Hazlewood almost cashes in as the India skipper swings and misses at a full delivery outside off-stump. The fast bowler beats the outside edge again next ball as Pujara is cramped a little for room but still attempts to cut. Good, attacking bowling. 54th over: India 153-2 (Pujara 34, Rahane 13)  Lyon, two strikes short of his 400th Test wicket, continues. He persists wide of off and both batsmen are watchful. Neither can get him away until Lyon delivers a straighter one, which turns away from Pujara and is duly turned past square for four. 53rd over: India 148-2 (Pujara 30, Rahane 12)  Excellent shot and even better running as Rahane drives Hazlewood square and the batsmen scamper through for an all-run four. This is not the batting of a man, of a skipper, who wants to bat out the draw. And that’s no bad thing for Australia. It means they have a chance. Two balls later, four more follow from Pujara’s blade but it was a streaky collect after he tried to pull the bat away from one outside off and top-edged over the slip cordon. Nine from the over. 52nd over: India 139-2 (Pujara 26, Rahane 7)  Wow. Lyon is quite wide outside off-stump, enticing Rahane to rocvk back and prepare for the cut shot, but the ball spits almost diagonally onto the pads of the batsman. It draws a big grin from Lyon and a wry smile from Rahane. There’s some action in them there footmarks. 51st over: India 138-2 (Pujara 26, Rahane 6)  Hazlewood to Rahane. The quick is short, as expected, but slightly down leg, inviting the new batsman at the crease to roll his wrists and pick up four runs to fine-leg. An good show of intent from the India skipper. If they are thinking only of the draw, he might have stepped inside that one. A single follows.  And then Pujara gets hit again!  He tries to get under a Hazlewood short ball but it’s a deadly one - head height, fast, and nipping back into the right-hander - and Pujara gets hit flush on the helmet. He gets struck with such force that the rear strap comes clean off. But Pujara, of course, is still standing. It takes more than three of the best fast bowlers in the world, each of whom want blood, to bring this man down. New helmet, same Pujara. He blocks the last ball of the over as it nothing happened.
Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Arrivals in UK could be asked to stay in quarantine hotels, Raab says:	People arriving in the UK could be asked to stay in quarantine hotels under plans being considered by ministers to try to deal with the spread of the pandemic, the foreign secretary,  Dominic Raab , has said. Raab said the government had “considered all of the possibilities” when asked about reports in the Sunday Times that ministers have ordered plans to be drawn up for the creation of quarantine hotels for arrivals in Britain. The report says the quarantine hotels, modelled on  New Zealand’s policy  of “directed isolation”, could use GPS and facial-recognition technology to ensure that people are staying isolated. Raab told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “We will consider all the measures in the round. In terms of enforcement, we are going to be strengthening the checks at the border – so when people come in, to make sure that they have filled out the passenger location form, that they have got that negative test that they have to vouch for before they get on the flight. “Also, because the effect of abolishing or suspending the travel corridors is that people go into quarantine and self-isolation for 10 days, we’re making sure that Public Health England checks to make sure people are adhering to those rules. “As well as changing the rules, we are also making sure that we beef up the capacity to make those checks.” Raab dismissed claims that the government had been too slow in setting up border measures to prevent the importation of new coronavirus variants. He told the Andrew Marr show: “I don’t accept that we have been too slow in this – we are broadly the same pace in terms of Canada and Germany.” Raab said the government target was to have delivered the first dose of the vaccine to 17 million people by spring, when restrictions could be lifted. However, he said that the English lockdown was unlikely to be lifted for the whole country at once, with a return to the tier system. “I think it’s right to say that we won’t do it all in one big bang as we phase out the national lockdown and people end up phasing through the tiered approach. We want to make sure that we can do it in a safe and simple way.” He said the government would take advice on the easing of restrictions and publish its “exit plan” in due course. Raab would not be drawn on a Sunday Telegraph article reporting that civil servants believed the vaccination rollout could be speeded up to vaccinate all over-18s in Britain by the end of June, but said he was “quietly confident” that the government would meet this target by September. “When I look at the numbers, I think people just want to hear what the real facts are with this. We’ve vaccinated now over 3 million. If you take the UK compared to other countries around Europe, we’ve got double the vaccination rate of the next leading country, Denmark.” He refused to guarantee that all those who had received the first dose would receive the second within 12 weeks, amid concerns about vaccine supplies. “I think if we follow the roadmap and the supply chains that we have set out, along with the backup that we’ve got because we’ve got the volume of doses – 360 million – and we’ve also got seven suppliers, we ought to be able to deliver on that. “But of course right the way through this pandemic, we’ve had to adapt to all sorts of different things. So we are just focused on making sure we deliver on the roadmap that we’ve got,” Raab said, adding that people get a “very high” level of protection after receiving one dose of a vaccine. The foreign secretary said people should not go on holiday as he warned that the NHS is “on the cusp”. “I think right now people should be staying at home unless it is absolutely necessary, so, no, they shouldn’t be going on holiday – I don’t think that is appropriate,” he told Sky. Jonathan Reynolds, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said he would “look at” the option of quarantine hotels for passengers returning from abroad. Reynolds told Sky’s Ridge on Sunday: “If that is the most effective way to tackle that, I’d look at that. I’m not sure necessarily it is the case.”
How a child psychiatrist and a pub manager’s efforts during Covid-19 put them on the new year honours list:	 Sophie Goddard  Fri 8 Jan 2021  12.37 GMT   Last modified on Fri 8 Jan 2021  12.40 GMT   Among the household names featured on the new year honours list, you’ll find hundreds of key workers and community champions who stepped up during the pandemic and made a huge individual impact. Here, we meet two of them: a child and adolescent psychiatrist and a pub general manager who, thanks to their innovative thinking, enriched the lives of those in their community – and beyond. “During the pandemic, people Zoomed, Skyped and connected with families digitally, so why can’t we connect healthcare the same way,” asks consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist Prof Alka Surajprakash Ahuja, from Cardiff, who was awarded an MBE for her services to the NHS during Covid-19. Ahuja received the honour for her pivotal role in setting up the pioneering  NHS Wales Video Consulting Service , which digitally connects patients with clinicians. As clinical lead for  Technology Enabled Care Cymru , she was tasked last March with rapidly scaling up the service to enable people to access healthcare advice and services from their homes during the pandemic. The service would not only protect the public, but the NHS workforce too. “A lot of people were self-isolating or [Covid-19] positive but needed to continue providing primary and secondary care, as well as in care homes,” she says. Under normal circumstances, it would have taken at least two years to implement the technology. But the pandemic meant the situation was urgent. “It needed to happen within weeks,” says Ahuja. Within just six weeks, the programme had been rolled out to almost 90% of primary care, with Ahuja’s team developing and issuing best practice guidance and toolkits. “This meant people could continue to consult their GP and get the support they needed,” she says. As well as improving patient accessibility and choice, the introduction of video consultations has been shown to reduce travel time, costs and the carbon footprint of both clinicians and patients. Working remotely with a newly-assembled team, Ahuja was able to bring the programme to hospitals as well as GP surgeries. “This meant all the outpatient appointments could continue to happen [covering] intensive care, hospices, oncology wards, mental health units. But I never thought I’d be connecting patients on the Covid ward in intensive care with their families – sometimes to say the final goodbye. I think that’s the thing that really hit me,” she says. In 12 weeks, the programme was available across more than 50 services and 35 specialties in Wales. Almost 100,000 virtual consultations have now taken place, with 93% rating it as “excellent, really good or good”. The programme’s success means the focus was extended to care homes, too. “That was a place where we had the most vulnerable people who needed help, but professionals were very limited in terms of access. It allowed GPs to do virtual rounds, continuing to provide the support and care they needed.” Dentistry, optometry and pharmacy followed, with video appointments revolutionising the way a growing number of patients accessed healthcare. Ahuja’s research into video appointments also led her to investigate their value for schools. “We know schools are not going to be the same for a long, long time. But children and young people still need support for their mental and physical health, so that will hopefully enable remote delivery of care into school settings,” she says. The technology has proved life-changing. “One of our first patients was an elderly gentleman living on his own. He had an appointment with the oncologist – it was a newly diagnosed tumour that was probably cancerous. He was very anxious, which was understandable. What helped was his daughter in London and his son in Singapore could join the appointment virtually, which under normal circumstances wouldn’t be possible. It meant having family for the appointment was much more reassuring and helped contain his anxiety. When we spoke to him, he was in tears. He said: ‘My god, I just couldn’t believe it – it was like my daughter and son sitting next to me in the appointment.’” Despite the punishing workload, witnessing the results has made it worthwhile. “I think one thing that kept us going was that we all believed this was going to make a difference,” she says. “I still remember the day I left my clinical job – it was hard because I thought I’m not going to see my patients and it’s going to be next to impossible. My colleague said: ‘Don’t worry, you’re making history’ and I laughed. Now, I think what we have done has been amazing. Post-Covid, healthcare is not going to be the same – it’s going to change the landscape.” As general manager of the Portsmouth Arms in Basingstoke, Richard Curtis was awarded a BEM for services to charity and the community in Hampshire during the pandemic. At the time of the announcement, he had raised £52,500 for charity through the virtual pub quizzes he has  hosted on Facebook  since the outbreak of the pandemic. With a modest goal of £150, his first quiz – which began the day after pubs closed last March – quickly gained traction, turning into a nightly occurrence. “I never expected it to be anything other than my regulars who come to the pub, and to maybe attract a bit of a local audience,” he says. “We didn’t expect it to go worldwide.” Curtis, who estimates he’s now held around 300 online quizzes since March and is still going strong, has seen his efforts bring together people from around the globe in a bid to help alleviate loneliness and isolation. With the first quiz drawing around 120 participants, at its peak up to 1,500 people were joining online. “From March, it very quickly went from one quiz a week to 18,” he says. “We were doing a children’s one Monday to Friday, which I hosted with my children. I was then doing an adult one every night, and then on Saturday and Sunday I did a themed quiz at three o’clock, another at five, then an adults’ one at eight.” With each quiz filmed inside the pub (Curtis lives upstairs with his wife and three children) it offered “the feel of the pub” for those missing it. “I made a rule that if people couldn’t come to the pub, I wouldn’t be drinking, but that soon turned into people saying: ‘If we donate £200, will you have a beer?’” The biggest quiz – a world record attempt held across VE Day weekend that lasted an astonishing 35 hours – raised more than £21,000 for charity (the world record status is still pending). “The money we raised was beyond anybody’s belief. That weekend there was so much hope for what people could have done, and what they were actually allowed to do,” he says of the weekend, falling during the first national lockdown. The world record attempt was surprisingly gruelling, he says. “I just imagined I’d have to write loads of questions and stay awake. But sitting in that position for so long, my back was shot to pieces. And while staying awake for so long isn’t a problem, constantly talking for that amount of time is. Because I’d been talking for so long, my throat and tongue had swollen up so much that I couldn’t eat. I tried to eat a bacon sandwich at one point and choked, I just couldn’t swallow it.” While the recognition for his efforts has been overwhelming, Curtis says doing nothing wasn’t an option. “I started doing it because I still needed to feel like I had a purpose in the community, even with the pub shut – it was a really scary time,” he says. That same community, it appears, is fully behind him. “The day after the [record-attempting] quiz I saw a few people rustling around the car park. I wandered down in my pyjamas and before I knew it, there were 50 or so people – all socially distanced – clapping. The fact we’ve genuinely had an impact on people’s lives is amazing.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Fight Covid-19) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit  gov.uk/coronavirus . For more information on honours recipients, go to  gov.uk/honours .
Trump saw the economy was his ticket to a second term – then Covid struck:	No time to waste. That was the message from Joe Biden as he announced plans for a $1.9tn (£1.4tn)  stimulus package  only days before his inauguration as US president next week. Combatting the health and economic crises he will inherit from Donald Trump will be top of the agenda for his administration. The latest jobs figures highlight the problem. In the latest week, the number of  new unemployment claims  rose by 181,000 to 965,000, the highest weekly figure since August. Record Covid-19 infection rates during the winter months have led to curbs on activity being strengthened, partly as a result of action by individual states and partly because individuals have become more cautious. As a result, growth has slowed and the improvement in the labour market that followed the initial pandemic shock last spring has gone into reverse. Biden has some experience of this sort of situation because the economy was in similarly poor shape when he became Barack Obama’s vice-president in 2009. Certainly, the economy Trump bequeaths to Biden bears no comparison to the one left to him by Obama. Trump had seen the economy as his ticket to a second term. At last year’s  World Economic Forum  in Davos he told assembled members of the global elite: “America is thriving, America is flourishing, and yes, America is winning again like never before.” Most incumbents tend to be re-elected. Before Trump, the only presidents since the the second world war to have won one election but not a second term were Jimmy Carter and George Bush senior. Sitting presidents who preside over even a moderately well-performing economy tend to win with some ease. And that’s the way it looked like panning out for Trump when he pitched up in Davos. At that point, with unemployment at its lowest since the US was first putting men on the moon in the late 1960s, few would have put much money on Biden capping a long political career with the presidency. Trump’s determination to focus on the economy meant he downplayed the seriousness of the virus and action to prevent its spread was delayed. But by March, businesses were closing, unemployment was threatening to return to the levels of the 1930s and the markets were crashing. As a result, the economy under Trump was divided into two parts: the generally successful first three years followed by a disastrous 2020. By the time he lost to Biden in early November, the US had actually recovered most of the ground lost during the early stages of the pandemic but by then it was too late. In Trump’s first three years in office, growth averaged 2.5% – a solid if by no means exceptional performance. Despite Trump’s assertions, the  US economy  had been growing steadily under Obama from the middle of 2009 onwards, with an average annual expansion of 2.25% a year. If the big boost to defence spending under Trump is put to one side, the growth rates under the last two presidents would be pretty much identical – up to the end of 2019 at least. Figures are not yet in for 2020 but the US looks to have contracted by about 4.5%. The jobs picture looks similar. Under Obama, the jobless rate had more than halved and it was assumed by the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve, America’s central bank, that it could go no lower without inflation picking up. Trump was sceptical about this view and was proved right. Unemployment continued to fall, reaching 3.5% by the end of 2019. The number of jobs created each year was slightly slower than in Obama’s second term, but a tighter labour market meant firms had to pay higher wages and offer jobs to those who had previously found it hard to find work, such as those with poor skills or disabilities. The black unemployment rate fell below 6% for the first time since modern records began in the early 1970s. Real household median income – one guide to living standards – rose by $6,000 in the first three years of Trump’s presidency. In the previous decade and a half it had gone up by little more than $250. These trends ended abruptly with the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate surged to 14.7% and while the trend is once again downwards, at 6.7%, the jobless rate is still almost double its pre-crisis level. There are about 5 million more people unemployed than when Trump came to office. All of which opens up a new chapter in the “what if” school of history. What if the election last November had been held a year earlier? What if the battle for the presidency had been put back a year to November 2021? Would the result have been different? The fact that the election was so close suggests it might well have been. Trump secured almost 47% of the vote and would be on course for a second term had a few thousand members of the public in a handful of swing states switched their votes to him. But he could not prevent Covid-19 from causing serious damage to the economy and he could not delay polling day. Had he accepted defeat gracefully, Trump might have been viewed as a president who, with the benefit of vaccines and the expected strong recovery in 2021, could have turned things round for an autumn election. He might have been seen as an unlucky president rather than a bad loser.
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
Portugal's health system 'very close to limit' – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Brazil  had 33,040 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 551 fatalities, the first day in six the death toll has been below 1,000, the health ministry said on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 8,488,099 cases since the pandemic began, and the official death toll has risen to 209,847, according to ministry data. It is the world’s third worst outbreak behind the United States and India. Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the  NHS  in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. Stevens said the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” Stevens said on Sunday. Over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the  UK  government has announced. More than 3.8 million people – including over-80s, care home residents and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will begin to be offered to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups but sites that have enough supply, and capacity to vaccinate more people, will be allowed to offer jabs to the next two cohorts. Ghana ’s Covid-19 infection rates are skyrocketing and include strains of the virus not previously seen in the country, threatening to overwhelm the health system, President Nana Akufo-Addo said on Sunday. Since 5 January, the number of active cases has risen to 1,924 from about 900 , Akufo-Addo said in a speech. There are now  120 severe cases, up from 18 a week ago . The president said that some people arriving from abroad had tested positive for “new variants” of the virus. Last week, Gambia recorded its first two cases of the highly infectious UK variant, in what appears to be the first confirmation of its presence in Africa. Ghana is not yet close to the peak seen during the first wave of infections in the middle of last year, but could quickly reach that level if cases keep rising at the current rate. If they do, the president said he would impose another partial lockdown, despite worries about what that would do to one of west Africa’s largest economies. “Our Covid-19 treatment centres have gone from having zero patients to now being full because of the upsurge in infections,” the president said. “At this current rate ... our healthcare infrastructure will be overwhelmed.” Across Africa, a second coronavirus wave is infecting twice as many people per day than at the height of last year’s first wave  and has yet to peak, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The rise has raised concern across the continent where, unlike in  Europe  and the United States, cash-strapped governments have been unable to secure supply deals with vaccine manufacturers, putting the onus for now on containment. Akufo-Addo said details about access to vaccines and a rollout plan would be announced “very soon”. Schools in  Malawi  will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday. After reporting no positive cases for almost two months, the country has seen a sudden resurgence in coronavirus cases since the middle of last month. The country of 19 million people has reported 12,470 cases of Covid-19 and 314 deaths since the pandemic began last year. Chakwera said  a third of those deaths were reported in the past 16 days , forcing the government to seek additional funding to contain the pandemic at a time when the country is in 4.1tn kwacha ($5.37bn) of debt. The new measures concerning schools and bars will take effect from Monday. Chakwera also said the government has allocated an additional 1.6bn kwacha ($2.1m) in funds to be spent on recruiting frontline healthcare workers, 1,000 intensive care unit beds and 1,000 oxygen cylinders among other requirements. Last week the government reported that two senior cabinet ministers and two other high-profile members of the government had died from Covid-19. Workers in  Melbourne  are expected to return to city offices in large numbers on Monday, with research indicating most feel safe and ready to return after nine months of remote working. Private workplaces in  Victoria  are able to return to 50% capacity from Monday, with public service offices permitted to ramp up to 25%. A Roy Morgan survey of 503 city workers from late November to mid-December shows almost two-thirds were either willing to return to their central  Melbourne  workplaces (44%) or had already (15%). The most commonly cited factors making workers feel safe to return were Covid-safe plans and adherence to health measures. France  reported a further 141 deaths from coronavirus on Sunday, taking the cumulative toll since March to 70,283, the public health authority said. It also reported 16,642 new infections within the previous 24 hours. The infection figures on Sundays are usually lower because fewer tests are taken. The number of daily cases has been hovering around 20,000 for the last week. The health ministry said in a separate statement that 422,127 people had now been vaccinated, up from about 413,000 on Saturday. Eurostar  has said it is facing an existential threat, as business leaders pleaded with the government to step in and save the “vital link” with Europe. A 95% drop in passenger numbers  has brought the cross-Channel train service to its knees, and the company reiterated on Sunday that while government loans had been extended to aviation, international high-speed rail had also been severely affected by the pandemic. Here’s a graphic showing the number of vaccine doses US states have administered, courtesy of ourworldindata.org  Portugal ’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. “Our health system is under a situation of extreme pressure,”  Health  Minister Marta Temido told reporters on Sunday afternoon after a visit to a struggling hospital. “There is a limit and we are very close to it.” The health system, which prior to the pandemic had the  lowest number of critical care beds per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe , can accommodate a maximum of 672 COVID-19 patients in intensive care units (ICUs), according to health ministry data. The number of people in ICUs with COVID-19 reached 647 on Sunday, according to health authority DGS. The Portuguese Association of Hospital Administrators said the number of coronavirus patients needing hospitalisation was likely to dramatically increase over the next week. Three days into a nationwide lockdown, the country of just 10 million people reported 10,385 new cases and 152 fatalities on Sunday, bringing the total number of infections to 549,801, with the death toll increasing to 8,861. According to  ourworldindata.org , supported by Oxford University,  Portugal had the highest number of coronavirus cases in Europe per capita over the last seven days . Most new cases were concentrated in Lisbon, where many patients at the city’s public hospitals have already been transferred elsewhere, including to health units in the country’s second biggest city Porto. The  UK  variant of the coronavirus has killed three residents at a retirement home in northwestern  Belgium  and infected 111 people including 39 staff members, its director Jurgen Duyck told AFP on Sunday. The cluster represents two-thirds of the residents of the De Groene Verte home in the  western Flanders city of  Houthulst  near the border with France. Belgium has suffered one of the worst per capita death rates in the world during the epidemic with its nursing homes representing more than half of overall deaths from the disease, according to the Public  Health  Institute. Mayor Joris Hindryckx said the outbreak prompted a halt to “all social and sporting activities” in the town of around 10,000 people. The source of the contamination is unknown, but the mayor said the infection must have been “indirect” as none of those testing positive was known to have travelled to Britain. Brazil ’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. The vaccines produced by Oxford/AstraZeneca and China’s Sinovac will both now be permitted in South America’s biggest country, which has the world’s second highest Covid death toll with more than 209,000 deaths. The decision was taken on Sunday afternoon after three of Anvisa’s five directors voted for the move. The ruling is a major victory for Brazil’s 212 million citizens - reeling from one of the worst epidemics in the world - but a stinging political defeat for the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro. Bolsonaro has failed to acquire any doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and as a result vaccination with Sinovac’s CoronaVac is likely to begin on Sunday in São Paulo state. São Paulo is governed by one of the president’s biggest political rivals, João Doria, who has championed the Chinese vaccine. Doria will reportedly offer the first shot to a local intensive care nurse called Mônica Calazans on Sunday, making a high-profile pronouncement he hopes will cement his image as Brazil’s Covid saviour in the public imagination. “Brazil is in a rush to save lives,” Doria tweeted on Sunday afternoon. Bolsonaro’s Twitter account remained silent.
Banking royal commission: most recommendations have been abandoned or delayed:	More than half of the recommendations made by the banking royal commissioner, Kenneth Hayne, have either been abandoned or are yet to be fully implemented, almost two years after the treasurer received the inquiry’s final report and vowed to take action on all recommendations. Regulators put implementation of some recommendations on hold during the peak of the coronavirus crisis, but consumer groups fear  Josh Frydenberg  has taken advantage of the delay to undermine the pro-regulation consensus established by the royal commission, which followed more than five years of scandal in the financial services industry. Frydenberg said that despite the coronavirus crisis more than 70% of the royal commission’s recommendations requiring action by the executive government had been implemented since he received the report from Hayne at a  frosty handover meeting  in Canberra on 1 February 2019. However, an analysis by Guardian Australia of all 76 of Hayne’s recommendations shows that 45 have yet to be implemented and four have been abandoned. Three, which involve reviews of progress in making changes, are not yet due. Recommendations ditched include Hayne’s very first: that laws requiring banks to lend responsibly not be changed. Instead, Frydenberg in September announced that the laws, which had been attacked by the banks in a  lobbying campaign  and  in parliament  by government backbenchers, would be  repealed entirely  to remove “unnecessary barriers to the flow of credit to households and small businesses”. Gerard Brody, the chief executive of the Consumer Action Law Centre, which provided the royal commission with some of the case studies it examined during hearings, said the government was “just walking away from some of the core recommendations”. “Covid is part of it but there are some very important recommendations that have just fallen aside,” he said. These included a recommendation banning retailers from selling loans to customers at the point of sale, which was supposed to be in place by the end of 2020. “At the moment they act entirely outside of regulation,” he said. “It hasn’t happened.” “Responsible lending, the government has walked that one backwards.” Frydenberg also rejected Hayne’s recommendations that mortgage brokers be banned from receiving commissions over the life of a home loan, and be treated in the same way as financial advisers. And the banks rebuffed Hayne’s recommendation that the banking code be changed to broaden the definition of small business, although the idea is to be considered again during a review this year. Many of the recommendations that are yet to be implemented relate to cleaning up financial advice and superannuation, two of the most troubled parts of the financial services industry. The exposure in the media of widespread malpractice in the financial planning industry, including poor quality advice and fee gouging, was one of the main drivers behind calls for a royal commission. Superannuation was a late addition to the inquiry, but the hearings exposed bad behaviour among bank-run funds that included high fees and poor performance, while largely giving the union-and-employer-controlled industry funds a clean bill of health. Laws bringing into force many of the recommendations in these areas are due to come into force this year, following legislation that passed parliament in December. However, several other important recommendations, including the establishment of a compensation scheme of last resort that would provide payments to consumers who have been ripped off by a financial adviser who then goes broke, have yet to be legislated. Also making slow progress is a national mediation scheme for farm debt – a response to horror stories of heavy-handed action by banks that were aired at the commission’s hearings and by farmers through the media. The agriculture minister, David Littleproud, said the government was still committed to the idea but it required the cooperation of states and territories. “It is disappointing that a national scheme is being stalled by a couple of states and the territories,” he said. The Northern Territory does not have a scheme, Western Australia has a voluntary scheme and until legislation was passed this month Tasmania did not have a scheme. A spokeswoman said the NT’s minister for agriculture, Nicole Manison, was “supportive of a national approach” but this would require consultation with stakeholders and “no formal process has commenced”. Brody said he thought the government had dropped anchors on implementing Hayne’s agenda in full for the same reason it quashed the responsible lending law. “They are wanting a credit-fuelled recovery,” he said. “They don’t want restraints or oversight on credit at the moment, and they’re not concerned at the harm that risks consumers.” Last year, both the corporate regulator, the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, and the prudential regulator, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority, delayed implementation of the Hayne recommendations for which they are responsible for periods of up to six months, citing the coronavirus crisis. The crisis also made it impossible for parliament to sit for long periods last year, delaying the progress of legislation. However, Frydenberg told Guardian Australia that despite the pandemic, “the Morrison government has made substantial progress in implementing recommendations arising from the Hayne royal commission”. “In December alone, the government introduced and passed legislation addressing more than 20 recommendations and introduced new legislation seeking to implement a further four recommendations,” he said. “The government remains focussed on completing implementation of the remaining recommendations of the Hayne royal commission.” This story was updated on 19 January 2021 to correct the status of one recommendation from “abandoned” to “yet to be implemented”.
I can't help being cynical when my future is in the hands of uncontrollable forces:	Name:  Michelle Lim Age:  23 Dreams of:  Being a social worker Last month, I sat in my course’s “town hall” forum on Zoom. It was just an open forum hosted by social work faculty staff about 2021 and the arrangements for this year. I was really only interested in one section of information: placements. Even before starting my semester at the end of August last year, I’d already heard about reduced work placements for social work students. The Australian Association of Social Workers (AASW) sets the industry standard for placement hours for students to be accredited as a social worker. A thousand hours is the standard but because of Covid-19, they’ve lowered it to 800 hours. But I’ve heard some students are struggling to meet even this because agencies won’t accept students anymore. I’ve also found out that some students do their placements online, which I’m not sure is the same as doing a placement physically. Semester one in 2021 is going to be online. This means all the induction and pre-placement work that I’m supposed to complete will be done online. The open forum and placement information materials online say that I may not be guaranteed a placement because of priority for graduating students and that I may have to defer. I can’t afford to defer. Deferring means that I would graduate by 2023, and that’s assuming I can get a full-time placement. I don’t want to have to rely on Centrelink when I’m in my mid 20s or live at home without a steady income. What drew me to social work was the possibility of a full-time job at the end of the degree. I’ve heard that social work and services is a growing industry and that there’s always work in this field. Now with reduced placement hours, it feels like the attraction – and security – is fading. I went to a social work end-of-year drinks with a bunch of graduating students in mid-December, and I asked them how job hunting was. Some got offers, some were still looking. They told me the job market wasn’t looking good; one told me she had secured a job but was on probation for six months. My biggest fear is that when I do get my first job, I’ll screw up because of my lack of experience. This wouldn’t be just a project deadline that I missed, or a typo on a document. I would be dealing with people’s lives, and their problems and wellbeing. What if I misjudged or incorrectly assessed someone and I led them to a worse-off place? What if my inexperience is because of a lack of a meaningful placement opportunity? With the new degree costs kicking in this year, I worry what it’d be like for the future pool of graduates and myself. The government is discouraging those to enter degrees that are considered “irrelevant” and noncompetitive for the future job market. If I started university in 2021 or 2022, I wouldn’t be able to afford the arts degree in international relations that I have. I have no interest in Stem or anything of the like, nor am I good at it. The federal government is making decisions they think is best for the future, but they’re stifling opportunities for young people. This series is called  Dreams interrupted , and I’m telling you dreams will be interrupted when this policy is enacted. Instead of making tertiary education accessible for everyone, it’s only available to the few who can afford it. There’s a tinge of fatalism that jobs will be difficult to come by for those with just an arts degree. But we don’t do an arts degree for a job, we do it because we’re passionate about what we’re studying. I’m lucky that I enjoy my social work degree, and even luckier that it offers work placement. Being able to pivot to a different field is a luxury that not many young people can afford. Since the last time I wrote, I’ve applied for a number of jobs in social services. I fit the selection criteria, but my resume is only filled with volunteering and leadership experience. Nothing paid. They say volunteering is best when you can’t find paid work, but it doesn’t feel like that. Stacking shelves at a supermarket seems more impressive than volunteering at Red Cross to employers. I sound cynical, but I guess one can’t help being cynical when your future lies in the hands of others and uncontrollable forces. So far my optimism about securing a job depletes when I open a dreaded email of rejection. It’s difficult to find solace in an email which says you were incompatible with the requirements when you had thought that you were the perfect fit. Just like a steam engine, it’ll take a bit time to recover from the wounds of rejection but when I do, it’ll be full steam ahead.
Morrison will decide 'over the course of the year' whether to allow international travel – as it happened:	That’s where I’m going to leave you for today. Thanks as always for reading along.  Here’s what we learned today: Fragments of Covid-19 have been detected in sewage at three sites in  Queensland , the state’s health department has said. Queensland’s chief health officer,  Dr Jeannette Young , said in a statement released just now that viral fragments of the virus had been detected at wastewater treatment plants after samples were collected last week. The positive results were detected at three locations: Young said: While this does not mean we have new cases of Covid-19 in these communities, we are treating these detections seriously. A positive sewage result means that someone who has been infected was shedding the virus. Infected people can shed viral fragments and that shedding can happen for several weeks after the person is no longer infectious. If there is a case we are not yet aware of, it is critical we detect it through our testing mechanisms as quickly as possible to contain any potential spread. The Victorian chief health officer,  Brett Sutton , has confirmed that two of the three new cases linked to the Australian Open are players.  Victoria  reported four new cases on Tuesday – all in hotel quarantine. Three of those were Australian Open participants. Sutton said the three Australian Open cases were a female in her 20s and two males in their 30s. Two of them are players, Sutton said. Sutton also confirmed two cases linked to the grand slam had been “reclassified due to evidence of previous infection”. “The reclassified cases are one male in their 30s and one male in their 50s. Further investigations are ongoing to determine any other cases of prior infection which can be safely reclassified,” Sutton said in a statement.  “While two cases of viral shedding were confirmed yesterday, this does not change broader assessment of the player group in hotel quarantine. As yet, none of the three affected flights have been cleared as a result of the two reclassified cases.” Tennis Australia boss  Craig Tiley  has denied that world number one  Novak Djokovic  issued a list of demands over the hotel quarantine rules for Australian Open players, saying they were merely “suggestions”. Speaking to Nine on Tuesday , Tiley confirmed he had hosted a phone hookup with players on Monday night and insisted the “vast majority are happy to be here”. “In the case of Novak, he wrote a note, these weren’t demands, they were suggestions, but he is understanding what two weeks of lockdown means,” Tiley told Nine. “I think the reports we’re seeing and things we are seeing doesn’t represent the entire playing group. For the most part, they have been really good.” My colleague  Melissa Davey  reports that Australian Open tennis players under the strictest quarantine conditions may have their restrictions eased after the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said the positive Covid-19 test results that sparked the hard lockdown may be reclassified as cases of viral shedding. Eagle-eyed reader Caroline has pointed out that both the health minister,  Greg Hunt , and chief medical officer,  Paul Kelly , have perhaps erred in saying that Australia has recorded zero cases of Covid-19 in four of the past five days. NSW reported one new case on Saturday, and six new cases on Sunday. The one case reported on Saturday would have been recorded on Friday, but that still puts it within the past five days.  The Western Australian premier,  Mark McGowan , has taken a shot at the  New South Wales  government for criticising his hardline stance on borders, saying the “constant criticism and carping is getting tiresome”. They need to leave it alone [and] let us act on the best interests of the health of West Australians. A few months ago, maybe six weeks ago, the Melbourne outbreak came about because a Covid-positive person travelled from Sydney to Melbourne. That’s why it happened. So, borders are important.  And that’s all from the chief medical officer. Kelly says Australia is “definitely open” to more international travel bubbles, and says he would “welcome New Zealanders to look at our epidemiological situation and have something more reciprocal than what we have got”. Kelly says Australia will publish “frequent reports” about any adverse vaccine effects once they begin to be rolled out.  Kelly seems to back  Brendan Murphy’s  comment yesterday that international borders are unlikely to reopen in 2021.  On travel, we have to be very careful and we have said this on many occasions, I have said it, the first vaccinations, as they roll out in a few weeks in Australia, will not change everything back to normal. There will be a process through 2021 of returning to some sort of normal ... unfortunately, international borders changes will be one of the last things to change rather than the first.  Kelly says the Pfizer vaccine “will most likely be the first to get approval” in Australia. Kelly makes the point that health officials “do not know how long” the new vaccines work for “because they are so new”.  “So whether we need to do a booster at some point remains to be seen,” he says.  Kelly also says the Therapeutic Goods Administration is in “direct conversation” with its counterparts in Norway and other parts of Europe after Norwegian authorities assessed 13 deaths of frail, elderly people as being potentially associated with Covid-19 vaccination. We know that Norway is looking into those issues very directly and very specifically for each of those cases. At the moment they do point out, and this is publicly available information as well, that in Norway in a normal week 400 people do pass away in their aged care facilities.  So this has to be put in the context of what has happened after people have received vaccines, that needs to be looked at very carefully, and the TGA will take that information into account in their assessment in the coming days and weeks.  Kelly says:  This is exactly the reason why, because of the good situation we are in in Australia on the epidemiology of the disease, we can wait, and had waited to do a full assessment, to get all the information that is coming from other countries that are rolling out the Pfizer vaccine, the AstraZeneca vaccine, the Moderna vaccine and others. The chief medical officer,  Paul Kelly , is giving an update from Canberra.  He notes Australia has recorded zero cases of community transmission in four of the past five days* and compares it with the rest of the world.  “In that same period of time in the last five days there have been a 300,000 cases and 50,000 deaths internationally,” he says. It’s also noteworthy that Kelly says “there is no hotspots in Australia, at least from the commonwealth perspective”.  “Indeed, by any way of looking at hotspots there just are not any,” he says. That will be interesting news to states such as Victoria, South Australia and  Western Australia , which are still classifying parts of Sydney as so-called Covid-19 travel red zones. *Kelly’s statement appears to be incorrect: NSW recorded six new cases of community transmission on Sunday and one on Saturday The former world number one and two-time Australian Open winner  Victoria Azarenka  has released this (very good, in my humble opinion) statement from hotel quarantine in Melbourne. The Belarusian asks her tennis playing colleagues for “cooperation, understanding and empathy” with the Melbourne community, and in turn asks the media “to please have consciousness on the impact and influence you bring to this situation and to the community”. 📝 💭  pic.twitter.com/BWTqubGMR3 The Australian government has added its voice to calls for Russian authorities to release opposition leader  Alexei Navalny , after he was arrested this week on his return to Russia. Overnight a judge in Moscow  ordered that Navalny be held in custody  for 30 days until a parole review that could imprison him for years. Navalny returned to Russia five months after barely surviving a  suspected FSB poisoning attempt  on his life. Australia’s foreign affairs minister,  Marise Payne , posted on Twitter that Australia was concerned by the arrest and stood with its international partners “in calling on Russian authorities to release Mr Navalny immediately”. Australia is concerned by the arrest of Alexei  @Navalny  upon his return to Russia. We stand with partners in calling on Russian authorities to release Mr Navalny immediately.
Morocco detects first case of UK variant – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Morocco ’s health ministry confirmed its first imported case of the more contagious variant of coronavirus first discovered in the UK. The variant was detected in the northern port of Tangier in a Moroccan national returning from Ireland via Marseille, the ministry said in a statement. Morocco has announced plans to launch a free vaccination campaign targeting 25 million people, or 80% of its population. The country ordered 66m vaccine doses from AstraZeneca and China’s Sinopharm. It has not yet received any. On 23 December, Morocco imposed a nationwide four-week curfew from 9pm to 6am to contain the virus. On Monday, the country said it has recorded a total of 460,144 coronavirus infections, including 7,977 deaths and 16,481 active cases. Health experts have raised concerns over new highly-transmissible mutations of the virus first reported in the UK and South  Africa  and now cropping up in several other countries. A third new variant has since been reported in Brazil. Donald Trump, the US president, has rescinded entry bans imposed because of coronavirus on most non- US  citizens arriving from  Brazil  and much of  Europe , including the  UK , effective 26 January, two officials briefed on the matter told Reuters. The restrictions are set to end on the same day that new Covid-19 test requirements take effect for all international visitors. Joe Biden, the president-elect, once in office could opt to reimpose the restrictions.  Rio de Janeiro  has kicked off its coronavirus vaccination campaign with what is likely to prove the most breathtaking immunisation launch ceremony on earth. Two Brazilian women, aged 80 and 59, received their first shot of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine at the feet of Rio’s Christ the Redeemer statue at dusk on Monday. The  spectacular televised event  on Corcovado mountain was attended by Rio’s media-savvy mayor, Eduardo Paes, and state governor Cláudio Castro. Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro – who is from Rio but has repeatedly undermined containment measures and vaccination and has attacked the Chinese vaccine – was a notable absence. Rio is one of the Brazilian states worst-hit by Covid-19, having registered more than 27,000 of Brazil’s 209,000 deaths. If the beachside state capital was a country, it would have one of the worst national Covid death rates. Ahead of the ceremony Paes, who took office early this month, tried to strike a positive note. “The start of vaccination is not the end of the pandemic but it is a light at the end of the tunnel,” he  tweeted , urging residents to continue wearing masks and respecting containment measures. Vaccination began in Brazil on Sunday after the country’s health regulator approved the emergency use of vaccines produced by China’s Sinovac and Oxford/AstraZeneca. More than 37,000 people with a symptomless Covid-19 infection have been detected through rapid lateral flow testing in the  UK , the chief medical adviser for NHS Test and Trace has said. Dr Susan Hopkins said the devices, which can give results in less than 30 minutes, were being rolled out across the country to enable those with no coronavirus symptoms to be tested. Lateral flow tests are regularly used by NHS staff and were the main method of testing during a mass pilot scheme in Liverpool, but some experts have questioned their accuracy. Dr Hopkins was asked at a Downing Street press briefing on Monday about the availability of the devices for teachers and supermarket workers who are yet to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. She said: “We are rolling out lateral flow devices throughout the country through community testing sites and also in workplaces to allow people to get tested where they are asymptomatic to reduce the spread of disease. “We’ve detected more than 37,000 individuals through lateral flow tests over the last number of weeks and we will continue to roll them out rapidly as an additional tool to help get this virus under control.” A new variant of the coronavirus first identified in  South Africa  is more contagious than earlier versions, experts said, but there is no evidence that it is more deadly. The new variant is 50% more contagious, said epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim, co-chair of the health ministry’s scientific committee. “There is no evidence the new Covid variant is more severe than the original variant,” he added. The experts drew their conclusions about the variant – now the dominant strain in South  Africa  – from an analysis of data collected from the main infection clusters across the country. With more than 1.3 million people infected, South Africa has recorded more cases than any other country on the continent and has also suffered more deaths, with 37,105 registered. The second wave of the virus has stretched South Africa’s health system to its limits. Health minister Zweli Mkhize on Monday said there had been a 23% fall in infections, but that the number of hospital admissions was up by 18.3% on the previous week. Dr Waasila Jassat, another member of the expert panel, said that even though admissions were up, the death rate from the virus in hospitals had not changed from the first wave of the virus. Brazil  on Monday reported 23,671 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the new total to 8,511,770, the country’s health ministry said. Deaths rose by 452 to 210,299 in Brazil, which has the world’s highest death toll from the pandemic outside the US.  Mexican  president Andrés Manuel López Obrador said the government aimed to compensate for a reduction in deliveries of Covid-19 vaccine doses from Pfizer Inc with those from other providers. The World Health Organization (WHO) said it was in advanced talks with Pfizer about including its vaccine in the agency’s portfolio of shots to be shared with poorer countries. Mexico had been expecting weekly deliveries of some 400,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine developed with Germany’s BioNTech SE. As a result of the US drugmaker’s WHO agreements, Mexico would for now only be receiving half that, López Obrador told a news conference. It was not clear how long the reduction would last. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is currently the only one being administered in Mexico, which has reported the fourth-highest death toll from the pandemic worldwide. Mexico has also signed deals to acquire vaccines from Britain’s AstraZeneca Plc and China’s CanSino Biologics. The country has approved the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot and expects to have it by March. It is still reviewing the CanSino vaccine. It is due to make the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and foreign minister Marcelo Ebrard said on Twitter that the active ingredient would on Monday be sent to Mexico from Argentina, allowing manufacturers to start the final packaging process. Mexico said it also expects to approve the Sputnik V vaccine for use soon, though it is likely to acquire fewer doses than it had previously suggested. Brazil’s  health minister Eduardo Pazuello said a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in the Amazonian city of Manaus was not tied to a new variant of the virus, and was instead the same coronavirus that caused the first wave of the disease.  Manaus has made headlines in recent days for its high death rate and a shortage of oxygen tanks for patients who develop severe cases of Covid-19. 
China reports strongest growth in two years after Covid-19 recovery:	China’s economy has posted its  strongest growth in two years  after completing a rapid recovery from the slump caused by the Covid-19 pandemic at the start of 2020. Although the 2.3% annual increase in activity for the world’s second biggest economy was its slowest since 1976, by the final three months of last year  China  was expanding at a faster rate than before the crisis. Analysts said China’s success in being the one big economy to avoid a year-on-year fall in output was due to Beijing’s rapid response to the pandemic after cases were first detected in Wuhan, government stimulus and international demand for the country’s manufactured goods. Paul Donovan, the chief economist at UBS Global Wealth Management, said: “China’s growth reflects global patterns. Domestic retail sales underperformed the economy – it is external demand that is supportive. As European and US consumers switch spending from services to goods, manufacturing economies outperform.” Official figures showed the economy continued to pick up pace after contracting for the first time in four decades in the first three months of 2020. After growing at an annual rate of 4.9% in the third quarter, China’s expansion rose to 6.5% in the fourth quarter. Julian Evans-Pritchard, the senior China economist at Capital  Economics , said: “The monthly data suggest that growth dropped back slightly heading into 2021 but it remains strong. We think this strength will persist during the first half of this year, before giving way to a weaker second half.” A breakdown of the GDP figures showed industrial production remained strong in December, growing at an annual rate of 7.3% but retail sales growth slipped back from 5% to 4.6%. Evans-Pritchard said that despite the dip in retail sales growth, there was plenty of potential for households to start spending again as they run down the excess savings they built up last year. He added: “Meanwhile, the tailwinds from last year’s stimulus should keep industry and construction strong for a while longer. Favourable base effects will also help keep growth rates elevated until at least the middle of this year. “Further ahead, however, we think growth will soften. Foreign demand for Chinese goods will drop back as vaccines start to reverse the recent shift in global consumption patterns. And domestic policy support will be partially withdrawn throughout this year.” News of the better-than-expected growth figures came as China reported more than 100 new Covid-19 cases for a sixth day, raising concerns of another national outbreak. Most other big economies have yet to published GDP figures for 2020, but none are expected to record positive growth. Germany said last week it had contracted by 5%, while falls of about 10% have been pencilled in for the UK, France and Italy by the  International Monetary Fund . The US, the world’s biggest economy is expected to contract by a little over 4%.
Majority of Europeans fear Biden unable to fix 'broken' US:	A majority of Europeans believe America’s political system is broken, that  China  will be the world’s leading power within a decade, and that Joe Biden will be unable to halt his country’s decline on the world stage, according to a report. While many welcomed Biden’s victory in November’s US election, more Europeans than not feel that after four years of Donald Trump the US cannot be trusted, according to  the study by the European Council on Foreign Relations . “Europeans like Biden, but they don’t think America will come back as a global leader,” said the thinktank’s director, Mark Leonard. “When George W Bush was president, they were divided about how America should use its power. With Biden entering the White House, they are divided about whether America has power at all.” The survey of 15,000 people in 11 European countries, conducted at the end of last year, found that the shift in European sentiment towards the US in the wake of the Trump presidency had led to a corresponding unwillingness to support Washington in potential international disputes. At least half of respondents in all 11 countries surveyed felt, for example, that their government should remain neutral in any conflict between the US and China, while no more than 40% in any country said they would back Washington against Russia. “It’s clear that the tumultuous Trump presidency has left an indelible imprint on Europe’s attitude towards the US,” said Ivan Krastev, chair of the Centre for Liberal Strategies, an NGO in Sofia, and an ECFR board member. “The majority of Europeans are now sceptical about the capacity of the US to shape the world. It makes many, rightly or wrongly, want to opt for a more independent role for the EU in the world.” In their report, Leonard and Krastev note that while more than 60% of those polled believed the US was “broken”, most evaluated the EU and their own countries’ systems much more positively – an opportunity, they argue, to harness the collective power of the bloc for the benefit and protection of its citizens. The survey found that 51% of those polled did not agree with the statement that under Biden the US was likely to resolve its internal divisions and seek to address international issues such as climate change, peace in the Middle East, relations with China or European security. Amid a widespread sense of growing Chinese superiority, 79% of those polled in Spain, 72% in Portugal, 72% in Italy and 63% in France said they thought China would overtake the US as the world’s leading superpower within the next decade. Just over 32% of all respondents – and a startling 53% of respondents in Germany – felt that after voting for Trump, Americans could not be trusted. Only in Hungary and Poland did significantly more people disagree with that view than agree. Just 10% of those polled saw the US as a “reliable” security partner that would always protect  Europe , while at least 60% in every country polled said they doubted their country could depend on US support in the event of a crisis. The authors say the geopolitical consequences of this shift are significant: two-thirds of those surveyed said it was now important that Europe look after its own defence, including 72% in Portugal, 71% in Sweden, 70% in France and 69% in Poland. At least half of respondents in every country surveyed said they would prefer their government to be neutral in a conflict between the US and China. Across the 11 states surveyed, only 23% of respondents thought their country should take Washington’s side against Russia, with 59% preferring to remain neutral. Between 38% and 48% of respondents in seven countries thought the EU should adopt a tougher international stance on issues such as trade, taxation and regulation, while most countries considered Germany was now a more important country to “have a good relationship” with than the US. The poll also revealed that in nine of the 11 countries – Denmark, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and Sweden – where the same question was asked in previous years, the average share of people saying the EU’s political system worked very or fairly well had risen from 46% to 48%. It found that people who believed their own national political system was working, which was more often the case in northern than in southern Europe, were more likely to say the EU was a success. The report identified four “tribes” that went a long way to grouping respondents’ positions, depending on whether they felt the EU, US or China were rising or declining. The biggest tribe, “In Europe we trust”, comprised 35% of respondents, while only 9% belonged to “In America we trust”.
Hospitals in Japan close to collapse as serious Covid cases soar:	Hospitals in Covid-hit regions of  Japan  are on the brink of collapse, medical experts have warned, as the country battles a third wave of infections that has caused record numbers of people to fall seriously ill. Japan reported more than 4,900  coronavirus  infections on Monday, with serious cases rising to a record high of 973, local media reported. Although Japan has  avoided  the huge caseloads and death tolls seen in some other countries, infections have doubled over the past six weeks to about 338,000, according to the public broadcaster  NHK , with 4,623 deaths. The increase, coupled with the discovery of the first recorded community transmissions of a fast-spreading  strain of Covid-19  initially identified in Britain, is adding to pressure on the prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, to move quickly to protect stretched medical services. “What is important is to provide necessary services to people in need. We will exhaust all measures to safeguard the medical system,” Suga said in a policy speech this week, adding that the government was ready to deploy military medical teams to regions struggling to cope with an influx of Covid patients. Suga, whose handling of the pandemic has caused his approval rating to plummet, declared a month-long  state of emergency  in the greater Tokyo area on 7 January that was quickly expanded to cover half the country’s 126 million people. But his own advisers have warned the measures, which include asking bars and restaurants to close early and people to avoid non-essential outings, are unlikely to have much effect. Shigeru Omi, the head of the government’s subcommittee on the pandemic, said they would need to be in place for longer than a month, while the president of the  Japan  Medical Association, Toshio Nakagawa, said Suga should consider bringing the entire country under a state of emergency. Nakagawa was also dismissive of government plans to offer subsidies to hospitals that free up more beds for Covid patients. “There aren’t enough doctors or nurses,” he said. “Even if hospitals are told to increase the number of beds, what can’t be done, can’t be done. If the number of infection cases keeps rising, the healthcare system could be wiped out.” The rise in the number of seriously ill patients is forcing doctors to make tough decisions on who to prioritise for treatment. With the number of deaths projected to exceed 5,000 by the end of the month, some hospitals are reporting a shortage of ventilators and other equipment used to treat patients with severe symptoms. “They are waiting for the end of their lives without ventilators after available drugs failed to turn around their condition,” Hideaki Oka, a professor of infectious disease at the Saitama Medical Centre near Tokyo, told the  Asahi Shimbun  newspaper. “As far as seriously ill Covid-19 patients are concerned, hospitals have already lost the ability to treat them all,” he said. “Fatalities could rise sharply in the days ahead.” Daisuke Kurai, an associate professor of infectious diseases at Kyorin University hospital in Tokyo, said the Covid surge was making it increasingly difficult to attend to patients with other serious illnesses. “The medical care system is already in a state of collapse,” he told the Kyodo news agency. More than 30,000 people with no or mild Covid symptoms have been asked to recuperate at home as more hospitals near capacity. As of last weekend, 14,806 people were being treated in hospital, while a further 7,781 were staying at specially designated hotels and other accommodations, Kyodo said. Hospital bed occupancy in 19 of Japan’s 47 prefectures has reached stage 4 – the most critical level – with the highest numbers concentrated in Tokyo and other urban centres. Three people, all from Shizuoka prefecture south-east of Tokyo, found to have been infected with the more transmissible mutation of Covid-19 had no recent history of travel to the UK or contact with travellers from abroad, media reports said. With six months to go until the  Olympics  are due to open in Tokyo, Japan has detected 45 cases of new Covid variants first identified in Britain, South Africa and Brazil. “We are currently investigating whether the infection is spreading in the region,” said Takaji Wakita, the head of the National Institute of Infectious Diseases.
Coroner's Covid findings stoke calls for inquiry into pandemic policy:	The failures and concerns highlighted by a senior coroner, Alison Mutch, following the deaths of two men, Anthony Slack and Leslie Harris, from Covid-19, have reinforced bereaved families’ calls for a government inquiry into the handling of the pandemic, and for more inquests. Very few inquests have been held into deaths of people from coronavirus, following the then chief coroner’s  guidance  in March that Covid-19 is “a naturally occurring disease” and inquests are not normally necessary unless a person died due to additional factors,  for example  neglect. Boris Johnson’s refusal to hold a rapid public inquiry after the first wave, combined with the lack of inquests, has prompted many bereaved families to complain that lessons were not learned in time to prevent thousands more people dying in a second wave. A Guardian analysis of all coroners’  “prevention of future deaths” reports , which call on authorities to take action on concerns identified during inquests, found just two that followed deaths of people from Covid-19. Four more reports mentioned the pandemic as a contributing circumstance, including the strain put on mental health services and other health provision. Another report produced by Mutch followed an inquest into the death of a baby caused by her sleeping position. The coroner raised the concern that nationwide, many health visitors who support parents and young children had been redeployed into other services. Jo Goodman, co-founder of the  Covid-19 Bereaved Families for Justice  group, whose father  Stuart, 72,  died from the virus on 2 April, said these isolated coroner’s reports vindicated the group’s argument that a rapid public inquiry and more regular inquests should have been held. “All the families in our group, which now has 2,252 members, believe something went terribly wrong in the overall response to the pandemic or the particular circumstances of their own loved ones dying. We believe the broader lessons – about the delayed lockdown, PPE shortages, infections in care homes and hospitals, for example – should be learned in a rapid review public inquiry. Individual circumstances should be investigated at inquests. “It is hugely traumatic for our families that lessons weren’t learned, and now we are seeing so many more families suffer the same grief and heartbreak.” Johnson refused the group’s  request in the summer to hold an inquiry . The government has told the families that if they challenge that decision legally, the government may hold them liable for its legal costs. A Downing Street spokesperson said: “The prime minister is acutely aware of the grief, heartbreak and loss suffered by families across the country as a result of the virus and has fully committed to looking back and reflecting on all aspects of the pandemic. “And as he has said, there will be an opportunity to reflect on all aspects of the pandemic in the fullness of time but for now we need to remain focused on reducing the spread of the virus, and to protect those most vulnerable in society.” The families’ group argues that the government has a duty to hold an inquiry under  article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which protects the right to life. Since the summer they have raised money, and Goodman said they are still considering mounting a judicial review challenge. Additional reporting: Sam Cutler
Biden inauguration: Donald Trump's last full day as US president - live updates:	A quick Covid snap from Reuters here, that  grocery retailer Aldi has said today it would give US employees up to four hours of pay if they get a Covid-19 vaccination , nearly a week after retailer Dollar General provided a similar incentive. The German supermarket chain, which has more than 2,000 stores in 37 states, said it would cover costs associated with vaccine administration and implement on-site vaccination clinics at its warehouse and office locations. Dollar General Corp said last week it would offer frontline employees four hours worth of pay after they get the vaccine. Walmart has agreements with states to administer the vaccine to its employees should they choose to receive it once they are eligible. Coronavirus deaths are rising in nearly two-thirds of American states as a winter surge pushes the overall death toll toward 400,000 amid warnings that a new, highly contagious variant is taking hold. David Crary writes for Associated Press that as Americans observed Martin Luther King Jr. Day on Monday, New York Gov.  Andrew Cuomo  pleaded with federal authorities to curtail travel from countries where new variants are spreading. Referring to new versions detected in Britain, South Africa and Brazil, Cuomo said: “Stop those people from coming here.... Why are you allowing people to fly into this country and then it’s too late?” The new variant seen in Britain is already spreading in the US, and the Centers for Disease Control and Protection has warned that it will probably become the dominant version in the country by March. The CDC said the variant is about 50% more contagious than the virus that is causing the bulk of cases in the US. While the variant does not cause more severe illness, it can cause more hospitalizations and deaths simply because it spreads more easily. As things stand, many US states are already under tremendous strain. The seven-day rolling average of daily deaths is rising in 30 states and the District of Columbia, and this morning the US death toll reached 398,686 according to data collected by Johns Hopkins university. It is by far the highest recorded death toll of any country in the world. The US has now seen over 24 million cases. Ellie Murray , an assistant professor of epidemiology at the Boston University School of Public Health, said cases have proliferated in part because of gatherings for Christmas and New Year and compounded previous surges from Thanksgiving and the return of students to schools and universities in the fall. One of the states hardest hit during the recent surge is Arizona, where the rolling average has risen over the past two weeks from about 90 deaths per day to about 160 per day on 17 January. “It’s kind of hard to imagine it getting a lot faster than it is right now, because it is transmitting really fast right now,”  Dr. Joshua LaBaer , director of the Biodesign Institute research center at Arizona State University told Associated Press. “But there is some evidence that Thanksgiving didn’t help things.” In other areas of the country, officials are working to ensure that people take the vaccine once they’re offered it amid concerns that many people are hesitant. Maryland  Gov. Larry Hogan , in a livestreamed event on Martin Luther King Jr. Day, received a shot, and urged other Marylanders to do likewise. “We’re all looking forward to the day we can take off and throw away our masks,” Hogan said. “The only way we are going to return to a sense of normalcy is by these Covid-19 vaccines.” Arwa Mahdawi writes for us this morning about  the legacy of the other Trump woman in the White House – Ivanka : Ivanka Trump has wound up her time in the White House in the most fitting way possible: with a  scandal  about a $3,000-a-month toilet. Members of the Secret Service, it was recently reported, were  banned from using any of the bathrooms  in Jared Kushner and Ivanka’s Washington DC mansion and, instead, had to rent an apartment to relieve themselves in (although Jared and Ivanka have denied this). Talk about flushing taxpayers’ money down the drain. One imagines Ivanka did not plan to spend her final days in DC dealing with the fallout from a violent insurrection and battling embarrassing leaks about her loos. When she appointed herself special adviser to the president, Ivanka was a handbag and shoe saleswoman bursting with ambition. She was going to empower women everywhere! Little girls around the world would read about Saint Ivanka for decades to come. She would be a role mogul: her branded bags would fly off the shelves. Four years later, Ivanka’s  clothing line has shut down  and her personal brand has been damaged enough for a university  to cancel her as a speaker . It seems she is  persona non grata in New York  and her dad has been  banned from parts of the internet  for inciting violence. By rights, Ivanka should be sobbing into her sheets wondering how everything has gone so wrong. But Ivanka is a Trump: narcissism and self-delusion are in her DNA. As DC  braces for pre-inauguration chaos  Ivanka has been  blithely tweeting  her “achievements” and retweeting praise in an attempt to convince us she has left an important legacy. According to her Twitter feed, one thing Americans should all be thanking Ivanka for is paid family leave, which has been one of her marquee issues. And, to be fair, if Ivanka is to be praised for anything,  it’s for pushing Donald Trump  to pass a bill giving federal employees 12 weeks of paid parental time off. Would that have happened without Ivanka? I don’t know. But she facilitated it. Does it make up for the many odious things Ivanka also facilitated? No. Another of Ivanka’s big projects was the  Women’s Global Development and Prosperity (W-GDP) initiative , which aims to reach 50 million women in the developing world by 2025 and … well, I’m not sure exactly what’s supposed to happen then.  The initiative is so buzzword-laden  that it’s somewhat hard to understand. You get the impression Ivanka launched it via vague instructions to “empower women in powerful ways via strategic pillars of empowerment”. Read more of Arwa Mahdawi’s column here:  What is Ivanka Trump’s legacy? Enabling her father’s odious actions The US first lady said farewell to her role yesterday as she thanked Americans for the ‘greatest honour of my life’ in a recorded video she posted on Twitter. Melania Trump  said: “The past four years have been unforgettable, as Donald and I conclude our time in the White House. I think of all of the people I have taken home in my heart and their incredible stories of love, patriotism and determination.” Melania Trump was criticised for a statement she released in the wake of the Capitol riots which complained about treatment of her before condemning violence. It also mentioned the name of the police officer killed by the pro-Trump mob in the same sentence as the protestors who had been killed while trying to storm the seat of the US government. Domenico Monanaro reports for NPR this morning that  most Americans think Trump will be remembered as a subpar president . And the comparison with former president Barack Obama is liable to sting: Most Americans say  Donald Trump  will go down as either below average or one of the worst presidents in US history, according to an NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist survey. Almost half think Trump will be remembered as one of the worst presidents in history. Only about a quarter think he was an above-average president or one of the best. By comparison, when President Barack Obama left office, more Americans thought he would be remembered as above average or one of the best presidents, as opposed to a subpar one. Americans also think Trump has changed the country for the worse, by a 46%-to-38% margin. Usual partisan divides appear here, however, as 8 in 10 Democrats said he changed it for the worse, while 8 in 10 Republicans said he changed it for the better. The poll also found Americans are the most pessimistic they have been in decades about the direction of the country. But they have more positive views of President-elect  Joe Biden , how he’s handled the transition and whether he will do more to unite than divide the country. Read more here:  NPR – Most Americans think Trump will be remembered as a subpar president Joe Biden is set for a flurry of action to combat the climate crisis on his first day as US president by immediately rejoining the  Paris climate agreement  and blocking the Keystone XL pipeline, although experts have warned lengthier, and harder, environmental battles lie ahead in his presidency. In a series of plans drawn up by Biden’s incoming administration for his first day in office, the new president will take the resonant step of bringing the US back into the Paris climate accords, an international agreement to curb dangerous global heating that  Donald Trump  exited. The Democrat, who will be sworn in on Wednesday, is also set to revoke a permit for the  Keystone XL pipeline , a controversial cross-border project that would bring 830,000 barrels of crude oil each day from Alberta, Canada, to a pipeline that runs to oil refineries on the US’ Gulf of Mexico coast. The president-elect is also expected to reverse Trump’s undoing of rules that limited the emission of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, from oil and gas drilling operations. “Day one, Biden will rejoin Paris, regulate methane emissions and continue taking many other aggressive executive climate actions in the opening days and weeks of his presidency,” said Paul Bledsoe, who was a climate advisor to Bill Clinton’s White House, now with the Progressive Policy Institute. Bledsoe said Biden’s nominees to tackle the climate crisis, spearheaded by the former secretary of state John Kerry, who will act as a climate “envoy” to the world, is “by far the most experienced, high-level climate team US history. They intend to hit the ground running.” The aggressive opening salvo to help address the climate crisis, which Biden has called “the existential threat of our time”, is set to include various executive orders to resurrect a host of pollution rules either knocked down or weakened by the Trump administration. The US will convene an international climate summit in Biden’s first few months in the White House and is set to join a global effort to phase out the use of hydrofluorocarbons, or HFCs, which are used in refrigeration and air conditioning and contribute to the heating of the planet. Read more of Oliver Milman’s report here:  Biden to ‘hit ground running’ as he rejoins Paris climate accords Donald Trump is widely expected to mark his final full day in office as US president by issuing around 100 pardons.  The recipients of the presidential pardon are expected to include high profile names like that of rapper  Lil Wayne .  However, sources familiar with the matter who spoke to Reuters have suggested that neither the president himself, nor Trump’s personal lawyer  Rudy Giuliani  or ex-aide  Steve Bannon  will be on the list. Neither will members of Trump’s family get pre-emptive pardons. While the constitutional legality of a presidential self-pardon remains untested, aides have cautioned Trump that pardoning himself and members of his family may imply guilt that becomes a liability in future state or civil lawsuits against the Trump family and businesses. It has also been suggested that a self-pardon could antagonise some Republican Senators who will be voting during the second Trump impeachment trial, expected later this month. Lil Wayne pleaded guilty last month to possessing a loaded, gold-plated handgun when his chartered jet landed in Miami in December 2019. He faces a sentence of up to 10 years in prison at a 28 January hearing in Miami. The rap star appeared to support Trump during last year’s presidential campaign when he tweeted a photo of himself with the president and said he backed Trump’s criminal justice reform program and economic plan for African Americans. The New York Times  reports  that the list of pardons and commutations is expected to include former New York Assembly speaker  Sheldon Silver , 76, who was convicted of corruption charges in 2015. After a lengthy legal process, Silver was sentenced in July 2020 to 6-and-a-half years in prison and a $1 million fine. He is currently held in the federal prison at Otisville, New York. Also said to be under consideration for a pardon is  Sholam Weiss . Weiss was sentenced to 835 years in prison in 2000 for crimes including racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering. It is frequently described as the longest ever sentence imposed in the US for a “white collar” crime. Steve Bannon, 66, who has pleaded not guilty to charges that he defrauded donors to “We Build the Wall,” an online fundraising campaign that raised $25 million, is not expected to be on the list. Neither is Rudy Giuliani. It is reported that Giuliani has fallen out with the president over  unpaid legal fees , and the lawyer has already recused himself from defending Donald Trump in his upcoming Senate impeachment trial, since Giuliani was also involved in the rally on 6 January that preceded a pro-Trump mob ransacking the US Capitol. Julian Assange , the Wikileaks founder, another name frequently mentioned in connection to a possible Trump pardon, was also not expected to be on the list. The list of pardons has been prepared over the weekend in a series of meetings involving White House counsel, Pat A. Cipollone, Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner. It is traditional for US presidents to issue pardons and clemency at the end of their term in office.  Barack Obama commuted the sentence of Chelsea Manning  in 2017, George W. Bush  commuted  the sentence former staffer Lewis “Scooter” Libby who had been found guilty of perjury, and Bill Clinton controversially pardoned Marc Rich in a move widely criticised as being corrupt  after Rich’s ex-wife had made substantial donations to Clinton-related causes . Amid the heightened security, though, there will still be plenty of traditional show. Here are some of the pictures to come out of yesterday’s rehearsal for Joe Biden’s inauguration. There’s one very obvious and immediate legacy of Trump’s presidency and the 6 January storming of the US Capitol that it inspired.  Joe Biden’s inauguration tomorrow will take place amid the tightest security measures in Washington in recent memory . 25,000 National Guard soldiers from across the east coast are stationed in the city. The streets around the Capitol remain eerily empty as all but the most determined protesters have stayed away. The FBI has even been forced to vet all troops who are guarding the event because of  fears of an insider attack on the president-elect .  In a cold, sombre, damp Washington four years ago this Wednesday, Donald Trump took the oath of office as the 45th president of the United States and delivered  an inaugural address  now remembered for two words: American carnage. He delivered, but not as he promised. Trump pledged to end the carnage of inner-city poverty, rusting factories, broken schools and the scourge of criminal gangs and drugs. Instead his presidency visited upon the nation the carnage of about 400,000 coronavirus deaths, the worst year for jobs since the second world war and the biggest stress test for American democracy since the civil war. “It’s not just physical carnage,” said  Moe Vela,  a former White House official. “There’s also mental carnage and there’s spiritual carnage and there’s emotional carnage. He has left a very wide swath of American carnage and that is the last way I would want to be remembered by history, but that is how he will be remembered.” Trump campaigned for president as a change agent but millions came to regard him as an agent of chaos. His line-crossing, envelope-pushing, wrecking-ball reign at the White House crashed in a fireball of lies about his election defeat and  deadly insurrection at the US Capitol.  Future generations of schoolchildren will read about him in textbooks as a twice-impeached one-term president. It all began in earnest in June 2015 when the property tycoon trundled down an escalator at Trump Tower in New York and announced a presidential run based on “America first” nationalism and building a border wall. Exploiting white grievance, economic dislocation and celebrity culture, he clinched the Republican nomination and promised:  “I alone can fix it.”  He lost the national popular vote to Hillary Clinton but lucked his way to victory in the electoral college. The first person elected to the White House with no previous political or military experience, he represented a shock to the system and rebuke to the establishment. Read more of David Smith’s analysis of Donald Trump’s reign:  Lights go out on Trump’s reality TV presidency but dark legacy remains Welcome to our live coverage of US politics on the day before  Joe Biden  becomes president.
Space out and cover up: how to make travelling by car more Covid-safe:	While the UK is under lockdown, travel for work and other exemptions is still allowed. We take a look at how to stay safer when cooped up together, whether in a taxi or a private car: Avoiding close contact is a key way to prevent infection. As a result, there are rules in place around catching a ride. “Car sharing is not permitted with someone from outside your household or your support bubble unless your journey is undertaken for an exempt reason,” government guidelines note. The same goes for sharing a taxi. If you do have to share a ride, for example as part of your work, the guidelines recommend that you stick to the same travel companion each time and keep the group as small as possible. Remember that yourself or others in the car could be infectious without knowing it. It is a legal requirement to wear a face covering in taxis and private hire vehicles, but it is worth donning one whenever you share a ride. Speaking in a personal capacity, Prof Catherine Noakes,   a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) and an expert in airborne infections, said wearing face coverings was an important measure. “It reduces the amount of virus you shed into the air, and of course for the other person it provides some protection against what they might inhale,” she told the Guardian. “Travelling in cars particularly is a challenging one, because it is a very small space; it is one of the smallest spaces that we occupy,” said Noakes. But, she added, there are ways to reduce the risk of transmission: “If you sit in the back, diagonally opposite the driver, so you are at the further distance from them, that is probably going to reduce those risks to some extent.” In a closed space, the concentration of carbon dioxide and other components of exhaled breath – including viral particles – build up over time. That means a good flow of fresh air is crucial. Air conditioning is useful, said Noakes, but it must be put on the correct setting. “It is absolutely critical that you put it on fresh air mode,” she said, adding that a number of studies measuring levels of carbon dioxide showed that recirculation mode brought almost no fresh air into the vehicle.  While opening all four windows is likely to increase ventilation the most, even opening just two can bring benefits. “It is better to have two windows slightly open than just one, because you get a better airflow through and it also stops that horrible banging noise on your ears,” said Noakes. It might seem intuitive that the driver and passenger windows should be open, but a recent set of simulations published in  Science Advances  suggests it is better to open the other two – at least when it comes to protecting the passenger. According to the research, the driver and passenger can reduce airflow when seated by open windows, and the recirculating air current can carry particles from the driver to the passenger. When the other two windows are open instead, air is channelled across the back seat and out of the front window, glancing across the passenger in the process – a flow the researchers say might also act as an “air curtain” between driver and passenger.  “I’m not sure that would really be present in reality, but having said that, opening those diagonal windows is probably going to give you the best ventilation through the car,” said Noakes. Washing or sanitising your hands before and after your journey is a must, with government guidelines adding that it is advisable to pay for your taxi ride by contactless payment, or in advance. The guidelines also recommend cleaning your car between journeys. However, it might be best to wait if the car is not needed straight away. “If you can leave it a couple of days, then any infectious virus is very likely to die off, and then by the time you do clean it, you are at much lower risk,” said Noakes. But, Noakes added, it is important to regularly clean “high-touch” surfaces. “The buttons you touch a lot, the steering wheel and things like that,” she said. 
The WA cops rounding up Indigenous kids: a 'toxic and racist environment':	One of the worst moments of Jim Taylor’s eight-year career as a Western Australian police officer was the day he strip-searched a 10-year-old Aboriginal boy. Taylor, now 44, was working in Perth in the Juvenile Aid Group, or “Jag”. He says he was driving around the city’s central business district with his senior sergeant and two other officers when they came across a group of four young Aboriginal kids. They rounded them up and took them back to the station. “They weren’t committing any offence or anything like that ... we were actually exceeding our power by doing that,” Taylor says. At the station, he says, the kids were strip-searched. Taylor says he was instructed to strip-search the youngest. “I’m supposed to make him sit down and cough and things like that,” he says. “I didn’t make him do that. I just made him take his clothes off and put [them] back on quickly … it made me uncomfortable.” The use of strip-searches for children is supposed to be reserved for extreme or exceptional circumstances, according to Taylor. But he says kids were strip-searched “pretty much all the time”, even when they hadn’t committed an offence. He left the WA police force in 2012, appalled by what he describes as a “toxic and racist environment” in which Aboriginal people, including children, were routinely targeted and harassed. When he first joined in 2004, his view was very different. He had migrated from Turkey and was determined to contribute to his new country. But he was shocked to see officers approach Indigenous people on the street and provoke them with racist language to “arc them up”. He claims this was a deliberate tactic. “The easiest way to inflate the arrest numbers was to target the Aboriginal people, especially those homeless ones who are living in the streets, because they’re extremely easy targets,” Taylor says. “That’s the [WA] police’s bread and butter...targeting Indigenous people and making it look like they are doing a lot of work.” Police were often legally required to give cautions to young people, rather than charge them, but Taylor says that didn’t stop them picking up Indigenous kids who had committed no offence, just to “get them off the street”.  He says kids as young as 13 were regularly handcuffed in the process. “Handcuffing is actually the last solution ... [but] handcuffing was used as a form of punishment.” Don’t try and fix the community, fix the force and invest in the community. We’re sick of being led by a white man in uniform A spokesperson for the West Australian police told Guardian Australia that handcuffs and other restraints are used when police suspect there is a risk of bodily injury to any person, escape from arrest or detention, or damage to property. Specific questions about the strip-searching of children were not answered, but they said the force had “undertaken significant steps to enhance the relationship between police officers and the Indigenous community” including  an apology  from the commissioner to Aboriginal people for past injustices. They also said the force had continued to “build upon its long-standing Aboriginal Cultural Awareness education” including a new, mandatory online training course for members of the WA police force, that complements place-based training and inductions. On average in WA, three-quarters of young people in detention are Indigenous. Taylor believes police have a lot to answer for when it comes to this overrepresentation. “The way police are approaching this issue is exacerbating the situation and making that perpetual cycle even stronger,” he says. “It’s making things worse. And it’s making the emotional trauma worse and worse.” This punitive approach to policing young Indigenous kids is something Jarin Baigent, a Wiradjuri woman, spent her career fighting against. After a decade working for the NSW police force, where she specialised in youth affairs, in 2016 Baigent was sent to work for the royal commission into the detention and protection of children in the Northern Territory. She spent months travelling around the NT, meeting police officers. A frequent topic of discussion was how police could tackle the overrepresentation of Indigenous kids in youth detention. Her message to the officers was simple: “You can’t arrest your way out of this.”  She laid out an alternate approach, which involved diverting kids away from the justice system and engaging with the Indigenous community.  “Talking about other options and working with the community that they’re actually policing in, it was almost like a whole different concept,” she says. “It’s almost like you’re talking about aliens.” Baigent spent most of her career as a youth liaison officer in Redfern in inner Sydney, her home community. Her role often involved intervening after an arrest. She spent each day meeting young people and police, reviewing every offence involving a young person, and ensuring that kids were given the least punitive option appropriate: a warning, a caution, a youth justice conference – where the young person meets with the police and their victim – or, as a last option, court. She says these were mostly young people who were “vulnerable” and caught “in a cycle of committing offences” but their first contact with the justice system was usually for minor matters. One young person was fined twice on the same day for not wearing a helmet while riding a pushbike. Another child had racked up about $20,000 in debts. While Baigent felt she had some success diverting kids away from the justice system, she says the most effective approach started well before an arrest. She would regularly rise before dawn, along with Indigenous kids, community members and other police officers, to box it out in the heart of Redfern. The boxing program, run by the Aboriginal-owned Tribal Warrior Association, was called Clean Slate Without Prejudice, linking kids up with mentors and gluing disparate parts of this community together. For the police, the goal of the program was to improve relationships with the Indigenous community and reduce petty crime. On all fronts, it worked. The Redfern police superintendent at the time said the program had led to an 80% drop in juvenile robberies in its first year.   Clean Slate has now been running for more than a decade. Baigent resigned from the police force in 2019 but she still drops her kids off to box in the morning. She believes its success lies in the fact that it “wasn’t led by police, it was led by Aboriginal community”. “Don’t try and fix the community, fix the force and invest in the community,” she says. “We’re sick of being led by a white man in uniform. We never needed [that].” Since they left the police, Baigent and Taylor’s lives have changed dramatically. Last year they both took to the streets, Baigent in Sydney and Taylor in Perth, to march in Black Lives Matter protests. In the wake of BLM, Taylor began speaking out about his experiences in the force. After his social media posts alleging systemic racism inside WA police were shared widely, he says he’s received death threats, but also a flood of support including from former and current police officers. “I received so many messages from current coppers saying everything is the same [in the WA police force],” he says. Looking back at his time in the force, he feels regret, especially when thinks about that 10-year-old, naked and alone at the station. “It makes me feel sick … I’ve got children now, similar age, to that age,” he says. “A 10-year-old is a child, [a] 10-year-old shouldn’t have criminal responsibility at all.”
Sri Lankan holy man’s ‘miracle’ potion for Covid turns sour:	A self-styled Sri Lankan holy man’s supposed miracle potion to prevent Covid-19 has turned sour after a minister who publicly drank it was taken to hospital with the virus. Thousands defied public gathering restrictions to swamp a village in central  Sri Lanka  last month to get the syrup made by Dhammika Bandara. The women and child development minister, Piyal Nishantha de Silva, was among several politicians who consumed the concoction, but parliamentary officials said he had since tested positive for coronavirus and was taken to a treatment centre. Family members of another politician from Bandara’s village had also been infected despite taking the syrup. Pro-government media gave widespread publicity to the holy man, who claimed the formula was revealed to him by Kali, the Hindu goddess of death and destruction of evil. The only ingredients he acknowledged were honey and nutmeg. The government has scrambled to distance itself from Bandara, whose preparation was approved as a food supplement by the official indigenous medicine unit. “Although some parliamentarians took it, the government does not endorse it,” said Keheliya Rambukwella, the minister of mass media. Sri Lanka is in the grip of a coronavirus surge, with the number of cases rising from 3,300 in early October to 53,750 daily infections now.
One in eight people had Covid antibodies in England in December:	About one in eight people in the community in  England  would have been expected to test positive for coronavirus antibodies in December, data suggests, revealing the majority of the population are still at risk from Covid-19. According to  antibody data  collected by the Office for National Statistics as part of its coronavirus infection survey, an estimated 12.1% of people in England aged 16 or over – about 5.4 million people – would have tested positive for antibodies in December. By contrast, the figure was 8.9% in November and 7% in October, suggesting a rise in people who have been infected – a situation mirrored by other data including the number of people testing positive during those months. “The estimates suggest there has been an increase in antibody positivity in the most recent month,” the team write. The ONS data also reveals large variations around the country: 16.8% of the population aged 16 or over in Yorkshire and the Humber would have tested positive for antibodies in December, overtaking London at 16.4%. However, the figure is estimated to be just 4.9% for people in south-west England. The uptick in the percentage of people testing positive for antibodies was also seen in other UK countries. The ONS estimated that in December, 8.9% of people in Scotland, 7.8% in Northern Ireland and 9.8% in Wales would have Covid antibodies, up from 6.5%, 3.5% and 5.4% respectively the month before. However, the researchers cautioned that fewer people in the survey tested positive for antibodies in those nations compared with England, so there is more uncertainty in the figures. They stressed the data only referred to the situation in the community: hospitals, care homes and other institutional settings were not included in the survey. While the survey suggests the proportion of people who have had an infection has risen over the past few months, the data has limitations. As the researchers note, it takes about two to three weeks for the body to churn out enough antibodies to fight the infection. That means the data only sheds light on past infections. In addition, while having antibodies can offer protection against reinfection, it is not yet known what levels are needed to reduce the chance of getting Covid again. Antibody levels also decline over time. “We measure the presence of antibodies to understand who has had coronavirus in the past, although the length of time antibodies remain at detectable levels in the blood is not fully known,” the researchers noted. Prof Danny Altmann, an immunologist at Imperial College London, who was not involved in the survey, said the data provided a snapshot in time. “This is a dynamic picture: many who were infected during the March-April peak may no longer appear positive on this test,” he said, adding that testing positive for antibodies does not necessarily mean an individual is protected from reinfection. And while the percentage of people expected to test positive for antibodies to the coronavirus has risen slightly, Altmann said it was not rising quickly, meaning natural herd immunity had not developed and that vaccines remained crucial to tackling the disease. He added that other questions remained, including how a past infection might influence an individual’s response to a Covid vaccine : “[The] jury is still out on whether these immune people will make an enhanced response to the vaccine,” he said.
‘It’s being built on our blood’: the true cost of Saudi Arabia’s $500bn megacity:	“The future has a new home,” proclaims the website. “It’s a virgin area that has a lot of beauty,” says the voice over a string section soundtrack as the  promotional video  tracks colour-tinted panoramic shots of picturesque desert expanses, and deep azure lagoons. “Better humans, better society,” it boasts extravagantly. The brainchild of Crown Prince  Mohammed bin Salman , the new city state of Neom, named from a combination of the Greek word for “new” and the Arabic term for “future”, is intended to cover an area the size of Belgium at the far north of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea coastline. There has been no shortage of outlandish promises for the $500bn (£400bn) city-state. According to  strategy documents leaked last year , the project may include a huge artificial moon, glow-in-the-dark beaches, flying drone-powered taxis, robotic butlers to clean the homes of residents and a Jurassic Park-style attraction featuring animatronic lizards. Advertising materials stressed Neom will be built on “virgin” land, ready to be conquered with futuristic technology. “In 10 years from now we will be looking back and we will say we were the first ones to come here,” declares a Neom staff member featured in the video. Yet part of the site is the home of the Huwaitat tribe, who have spanned  Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Sinai peninsula for generations, tracing their lineage back before the founding of the Saudi state. At least 20,000 members of the tribe now face eviction due to the project, with no information about where they will live in the future. “For the Huwaitat tribe, Neom is being built on our blood, on our bones,” says Alia Hayel Aboutiyah al-Huwaiti, an outspoken activist and member of the tribe living in London. “It’s definitely not for the people already living there! It’s for tourists, people with money. But not for the original people living there.” For some Saudis, the Huwaiti tribe among them, Neom, with its parallel legal system reporting directly to the king, represents an elite version of Saudi society, one designed simply to shut them out. Residents and visitors to the site will probably be allowed to drink alcohol and enjoy fine dining in a futuristic version of paradise that is also set to include a vast  data-gathering network , including drone and facial-recognition technology covering the entire city-state. The  death  of Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti on 13 April highlighted the tension between the tribe and the kingdom’s development plans. A resident of the town of Khuraibat, he had become the face of the tribes’ criticism of their forced eviction, voicing complaints in videos posted to social media, and appearing in others’ videos.  One  piece of footage showed him confronting a Saudi official who visited the town to speak with residents. Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti made one of his last  videos  in mid-April. “They have begun the process of removing people, beginning with surveying homes with the intent of removing people and deporting them from their land,” he said, referring to the security forces in his town. “They arrested anyone who said they’re against deportation, they don’t want to leave, they want to remain [in] their homes, that they don’t want money. “I would not be surprised if they come to kill me in my house now, and place a weapon next to me,” he added. Later the same day, he shot a video from his rooftop of the police down below. “See them? The police have come to get me,” he  said . Others from Khuraibat recorded  videos  of gunfire from outside his house. Later, they recorded  footage  inside his house, pockmarked with bullet holes. In a statement, the Saudi authorities  claimed  he’d been killed in a shootout with regional security forces, stating that Abdul Rahim injured two after he shot back. His supporters have described the shooting as “an extrajudicial killing”. So too have rights groups. “They killed him to set an example – anyone opening their mouth gets the same treatment,” says Alia al-Huwaiti. According to the Saudi rights group Al Qst, the authorities have  since  worked to cover up Abdul Rahim’s killing and placate the tribe. “They are hoping to pull off a major publicity stunt by getting prominent figures among the Huwaitat to publicly disown Abdul Rahim and ‘renew their allegiance’ to the king,” said the group. This was accompanied by the arrest of eight members of the tribe. For Alia al-Huwaiti, the killing of Abdul Rahim and the forced displacement of the Huwaitat people highlights the kingdom’s lack of care towards tribal communities long dominated and suppressed by the state. “MBS [Mohammad Bin Salman] began by telling the tribes: ‘We will develop your area, you will make money.’ They believed him at first. By 2019, they said ‘We will empty three villages, and force people to move,’” she says. “There is nothing called a tribe for Mohammed bin Salman,” she adds. “He doesn’t care about the tribes.” Alia said she has received death threats for posting about the plight of Abdul Rahim and the tribe on social media, including threats she has reported to the British police. The public relations team for Neom, as well as executives from the management consulting firm Teneo, hired by Saudi authorities  for  more than $2m  last year to represent the project, did not return requests for comment. The Saudi Arabian embassy in Washington DC did not respond to a request for comment. But Ali Shihabi,  a member of the Neom advisory board , told the Guardian that the displaced members of the tribe would be compensated. “Practice in Saudi has been that people have to accept it, and have usually done so because the government has a tradition of compensating generously.” He said he did not know how much members of the tribe would be compensated, or when. “We anticipated there might be problems, especially with as large of a land grab as Neom. It’s inevitable that there would be some kind of forced displacement happening,” says James Suzano, of the European-Saudi Organisation for Human Rights. “When the state has done this before, it was accompanied by human rights violations.” The destruction of communities on the Neom site follows decades of tensions between the House of Saud and the tribes it has ruled over since the creation of the Saudi state in 1932. Exerting control over the land through construction projects or destruction of some heritage sites have marked this rule. In 2017, the UN  condemned  the kingdom’s forced demolition of the walled city of Awamia, in the eastern Qatif region, as violating human rights. Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur for cultural rights, said that “historic buildings have been irremediably burned down and damaged by the use of various weapons by the military, forcing residents out of their homes and of the neighbourhood, fleeing for their lives”. A $10bn King Abdullah financial district in Riyadh,  intended  as a “special zone,” has sputtered since its inception in 2006, weathering construction delays and confusion over its purpose, even after government attempts at a relaunch in 2016. Critics of Neom say the project risks the same fate. Construction is ploughing ahead despite the challenges of the pandemic and the  historic drop  in the price of oil, Saudi’s primary export. The project is part of the crown prince’s flagship Vision 2030 project, intended to diversify the economy away from oil, which has sustained the kingdom since the early 20th century. Yet the funds required to see Neom realised will inevitably require oil wealth. “It’s quite revealing that [Neom] is more of a vanity project targeting the domestic elite and an international audience in terms of a new Saudi, one that’s open and economically or socially liberal,” says Josh Cooper, of Al Qst. “But at the same time, not allowing the involvement of local actors or interests in these decision-making processes.” For Cooper, Neom is less a shining vision of the future than a grim symbol of Saudi human rights violations, underscored by the treatment of the Huwaitat tribe. “It shows the lack of platforms people have to express their opinions, even on less contentious matters than civil or political rights,” he says.
Journeys of hope: what will migration routes into Europe look like in 2021?:	I n 2020, tens of thousands of migrants crossed desert and sea, climbed mountains and walked through forests to reach what has become an increasingly inhospitable Europe. Many of them died, overwhelmed by the waves, or tortured in the  detention centres of Libya . More were displaced after the  flames of Moria refugee camp  in Greece burned everything they had. As a new year begins, so do the journeys of tens of thousands more people seeking a new life overseas. The Guardian has spoken to experts, charity workers and NGOs about the challenges and risks they face on the main migration routes into  Europe . Migrants walk in protest to the Serbian-Hungarian border near Kelebija, Serbia, in February 2020. They seek a passage to the EU. Photograph: Bernadett Szabo/Reuters In July last year, seven north African men climbed into a shipping container in a railway yard in Serbia, hoping to emerge a few days later in Milan. Three months later, on 23 October,  authorities in Paraguay found their badly decomposed bodies  inside a shipment of fertiliser.  Violence from security forces in the Balkan states  has pushed people to take even greater risks to reach Europe. After the Serbian border with EU countries became virtually impassable in 2018, refugees began trying to reach Croatia via Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) instead. The path usually begins in Turkey, from which migrants attempt to reach Bulgaria or Greece, then North Macedonia or Serbia, then Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia, from where they can finally reach Italy or Austria. The final leg of the Balkan route, which crosses mountains and snow-covered forests and lacks facilities for migrants, is one of the most perilous and gruelling, made worse by the  brutal pushbacks  carried out by squadrons of Croatian police who patrol the EU’s longest external border. Between January and November 2020, the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) recorded 15,672 pushbacks from Croatia to BiH.  More than 60% of cases reportedly involved violence . The humanitarian situation for those entering Bosnia and Herzegovina remains unacceptable and undignified “The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 has decreased migration flows along the western Balkan route,” says Nicola Bay, DRC country director for Bosnia. Last year, 15,053 people arrived in BiH, compared with 29,196 in 2019. “But in the absence of real solutions the humanitarian situation for those entering BiH remains unacceptable and undignified.” In December, a fire destroyed a migrant camp in Bosnia, which had been built to contain the spread of Covid-19 among the migrant population. The same day the International Organization for  Migration  declared the effective closure of the facility. The destruction of the camp, which was strongly criticised by rights groups as inadequate due to its lack of basic resources, has left thousands of asylum seekers stranded in snow-covered forests and subzero temperatures. When countries in the region begin to ease Covid-19 restrictions this year, Bay says it is highly likely there will be a surge of arrivals to BiH, which remains the main transit point for those wanting to reach Europe – a scenario for which the EU and the region remain unprepared. Carrying children and their few possessions, migrants flee in Moria camp on the island of Lesbos, Greece. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images On the night of 8 September, the Moria refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos, the biggest of its kind in Europe,  burst into flames . The government announced a four-month state of emergency on the island, as thousands of vulnerable asylum seekers were displaced. “This was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece,” says Stephan Oberreit, head of mission for Médecins Sans Frontières in Greece. “The combination of violence, Covid pandemic and the continued harmful policies of containment on the islands have led to several breaking points and eventually to the fires that have destroyed Moria.” 2020 was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece After the blaze,  the EU said there would be no more Morias . But more than 15,000 men, women and children are still trapped in miserable conditions on the Greek islands and the policy of containment continues. People using this route generally come by dinghy from the Turkish town of Ayvalik, aiming to reach Lesbos. Oberreit says that while arrivals have decreased this year, reports of illegal pushbacks have increased “in a concerning way”. “But let’s be realistic, people will continue to try to cross and risk their lives in the absence of other safer and legal options.” Oberreit says the pandemic “has been used by Greek authorities to accelerate their agenda to create closed centres on the Greek islands and to increase the border controls”. It’s hard to predict what will happen this year, “but the signs we have today give us little hope that the situation for the people who manage to arrive on the Greek islands will improve. Or that the EU will abandon its approach based on deterrence and containment,” he says. Migrants are rescued by members of the Spanish NGO Proactiva Open Arms after leaving Libya on an overcrowded dinghy in November. Photograph: Sergi Camara/AP In mid-November, four shipwrecks in the space of three days  claimed the lives of more than 110 people  in the Mediterranean, including at least 70 people whose bodies washed up on the beach of al-Khums, in western  Libya . Taking advantage of good autumn weather, people smugglers sent hundreds of migrants to sea. Many of the journeys ended in tragedy. Last year, at least 575 people died taking the central Mediterranean route. The  International Organization for Migration  (IOM) says the real number is considerably higher. People using this route usually depart from Tripoli or Zuwara in Libya, or from Sfax in Tunisia, and make for the Sicilian island of Lampedusa or Malta in small boats. At the start of the pandemic, Italy and Malta declared their ports closed. Rome established “quarantine boats” – ferries on which migrants are placed under quarantine for 14 days, which have been  criticised by human rights groups . There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries ... human rights are practically revoked “There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries that these people badly need and not even legal assistance,” says Oscar Camps, founder of Proactiva Open Arms. “In such a situation, human rights are practically revoked.” Open Arms is now the only NGO rescue boat operating along the central Mediterranean route. Many other rescue boats are blocked in Italian ports because officials refuse to  authorise their departure . Camps says he would like to see a planned civil or military rescue operation along the route this year, similar to  Operation Mare Nostrum , which Italy ran in 2013–2014. “It should be an operation aimed at dismantling Libyan armed groups, falsely called coastguards, financed by the EU, whose only mission is to intercept boats and bring them back to a country at war,” says Camps. “However, considering the way things are going, we would settle for them stopping the criminalisation of rescue operations carried out by humanitarian ships.” A migrant climbs into the back of a lorry bound for Britain at the entrance to the Channel tunnel in Calais, November 2020. Photograph: Denis Charlet/AFP/Getty Images Several thousand people attempted to cross the Channel to reach Britain last year. London has repeatedly pressed Paris to do more to prevent people leaving  France . In November, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, said they wanted to make the route unviable and signed a new agreement aimed at curbing the number of  migrants crossing the Channel  in small boats. More than  8,000 people  made the crossing in small boats last year, up from almost 1,900 in 2019. “The difficulties faced by women, men and children will in many ways remain the same as before,” says Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty’s refugee and migrant rights programme director. “Clearly, there is no will among the two governments – particularly not the UK – to directly address the needs and circumstances of these people to ensure they have access to asylum.” Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France on family reunification is uncertain According to experts, the future of the Channel migration route is linked to the continuing pandemic lockdowns and whether the UK participates in EU migration policies, specifically the EU family reunification programme. “Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France in relation to this particular matter is uncertain,” says Valdez-Symonds. “All that can be said, as things stand, is that almost the sole formally sanctioned option for at least unaccompanied children with family in the UK to seek asylum here is  about to close .” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Coronavirus live news: China builds quarantine centre for 4,000 people; Germany may extend lockdown again:	Spain  will sell 30,000 doses of the BioNTech/Pfizer coronavirus vaccine to microstate Andorra, as part of its plan to redistribute excess vaccines, the country’s health ministry has announced. With less than 80,000 inhabitants, Andorra, a small country wedged between France and Spain, has reported 9,145 infections and 92 deaths since the COVID-19 pandemic started, official data shows. As part of EU purchase agreements, Spain will receive 140 million of doses of the different vaccines that were developed, enough to immunise more people than its population of 47 million, Reuters reports. Some EU countries were made responsible for getting medicines to the states of Andorra, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City, which depend on bigger neighbours for access. “This is an exercise in responsibility and solidarity, as small countries are unable to sign contracts with pharmaceutical companies,” Spain’s health minister Salvador Illa tweeted. Spanish authorities said they will sell the vaccines at the same price they paid. The price has not been disclosed. Bharat Biotech, the  Indian  company which has developed a coronavirus vaccine which is being rolled out across the South Asian country, has warned people with weak immunity and other medical conditions including allergies, fever or a bleeding disorder to consult a doctor before getting the shot — and if possible avoid the vaccine. The company said those receiving vaccinations should disclose their medical condition, medicines they are taking and any history of allergies. It said severe allergic reactions among vaccine recipients may include difficulty breathing, swelling of the face and throat, rapid heartbeat, body rashes, dizziness and weakness. The vaccine ran into controversy after the Indian government allowed its use without concrete data showing its effectiveness in preventing Covid, the Associated Press reports. Tens of thousands of people have been given the shot in the past three days after India started inoculating health care workers last weekend in what is likely the world’s largest coronavirus vaccination campaign. India vaccinated 148,266 people on Monday, taking its total to 381,305, the health ministry said. Indian authorities hope to give vaccines to 300 million people. The recipients are to include 30 million doctors, nurses and other front-line workers, to be followed by 270 million people who either are over 50 or have illnesses that make them vulnerable to the virus. The AstraZeneca vaccine is also being used. Almost a quarter of  Lesotho ’s population will require food aid between January and March as a result of Covid-19 restrictions, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has warned. More than 580,000 people out of a population of 2.2 million are estimated to be food insecure, despite predictions of normal to above average rains this year and the potential for above average cereal production. The FAO said Covid-19 had reduced household incomes, harming people’s ability to buy fertiliser or to hire workers, which was “likely to limit the potential increases in yields”. The situation in Lesotho has been exacerbated by extended lockdowns in neighbouring South Africa to curb the spread of the virus, which the agency said would prolong high levels of unemployment and loss of income. The number of people requiring food assistance this year is about 35% higher than the number between October 2019 and March 2020, said the FAO. Hospitals in Covid-hit regions of  Japan  are on the brink of collapse, medical experts have warned, as the country battles a third wave of infections that has caused record numbers of people to fall seriously ill. Japan reported more than 4,900 coronavirus infections on Monday, with serious cases rising to a record high of 973, local media reported. Although Japan has avoided the huge caseloads and death tolls seen in some other countries, infections have doubled over the past six weeks to about 338,000, according to the public broadcaster NHK, with 4,623 deaths. The increase, coupled with the discovery of the first recorded community transmissions of a fast-spreading strain of Covid-19 initially identified in Britain, is adding to pressure on the prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, to move quickly to protect stretched medical services. Good morning, good afternoon and good evening everyone. I’m taking over the blog from Amelia Hill now. You can contact  me on Twitter  or via email on mattha.busby.freelance@guardian.co.uk with any thoughts and tips. And that’s goodbye from me. My colleague Mattha Busby will take you through the latest coronavirus news for the next few hours.  Daily case counts of Covid have nearly tripled in  Dubai  in the past month but in the face of a growing economic crisis, the city won’t lock down, Reuters is reporting. “Dubai’s economy is a house of cards,” said Matthew Page, a non-resident scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. “Its competitive advantage is being a place where rules don’t apply.” While most countries banned tourists from the UK over fears of the fast-spreading virus variant found there, Dubai – home to some 240,000 British expats – kept its doors open: Emirates flew five daily flights to London’s Heathrow airport during the Christmas holidays and within days, the new virus strain had arrived in the emirates.  “People have had enough of this pandemic already,” said Iris Sabellano from Dubai’s Al Arabi Travel Agency. “With vaccines coming out, they feel it’s not the end of the world, they’re not going to die.” But there are signs that the stampede is slowing.  Israeli  tourists have vanished due to new quarantine rules.  Britain  slammed shut its travel corridor with Dubai last week. The UAE does not make public information about disease clusters or hospitalisations but the country has reported more than 256,000 cases and 751 deaths. Analysts speculate the UAE’s unique demographics – 90% expatriate, comprising mostly healthy, young labourers – have prevented well-staffed hospitals from becoming overwhelmed and kept the death rate low, at 0.3%. But that hasn’t assuaged  Abu Dhabi , Dubai’s more conservative neighbour and the country’s capital. Without explanation, Abu Dhabi has kept its border with Dubai shut, despite promises to reopen by Christmas. Anyone crossing into Abu Dhabi must present a negative coronavirus test. Europe has been inoculating its people since December – but  African health authorities  say it could still be months, until they get their first vaccines, Reuters is reporting. African states have accused richer regions of cornering most of the supplies. The head of the World Health Organization – Ethiopia’s Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus – said last week the world was on the brink of “catastrophic moral failure” when it came to sharing out shots. Daily tallies of confirmed cases hit record levels across Africa this month, and the second wave is infecting twice as many people per day as the height of last year’s first, according to the African Union’s Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Nigeria has reported 110,387 confirmed cases, and 1,435 deaths, though African officials have warned that low testing could mask more cases. Privately, some doctors say they worry that when vaccines arrive in Nigeria, they will go first to the rich and powerful. Dr Ndaeyo Iwot, acting executive secretary of primary health care in Abuja, said the government would track doses to clamp down on any corruption. “It will go through the system,” he said. The quarantine  controversy over tennis’s  Australian  Open  has raised questions about whether large-scale international sporting events can take place in the middle of a pandemic and could offer a preview of the difficulties facing this summer’s Tokyo Olympics,  CNN is reporting . Players arriving in the  Australian state of Victoria  have been placed into a  14-day quarantine ahead  with most allotted five hours each day to go out and train in strict bio-secure bubbles. But 72 players have been unable to leave their hotel rooms and cannot practice after passengers on their flights tested positive for Covid-19. Some players have expressed anger and frustration at being kept cooped up ahead of the first grand slam of the tennis season. They include record eight-time Australian Open men’s singles winner Novak Djokovic,  who put forward a list of proposals  that would loosen the restrictions on the quarantining stars, including moving players to houses with courts, better food, and reducing the number of days in isolation. In response,  Victoria State Premier Daniel Andrews  said: “People area free to provide lists of demands, but the answer is no.” North Korea ’s trade with  China  plunged more than 80% last year, Chinese customs data has shown, as the isolated country’s strict coronavirus lockdown encumbers an economy already burdened by international sanctions. China is North Korea’s top ally and accounts for some 90% of its trade volumes. Two-way trade plummeted nearly 80.7% to $539m last year from 2019, Chinese customs data released on Monday showed, according to Reuters. North Korea’s exports to China totalled $48m, down about 77.7%, while its imports fell 80.9% to $491m. No reason for the lower trade was given but the new data underscored the extent that North Korea has become isolated since it sealed its border last January to ward off the coronavirus that had been detected in neighbouring China just a few weeks earlier. North Korea has not confirmed any cases of Covid-19 but all points of entry have been closed, public transport and inter-state movement rigidly restricted and gatherings of more than five people banned, the World Health Organisation (WHO) said recently. Rwanda  has reintroduced tough lockdown measures in its capital,  Kigali,  after a surge in coronavirus cases. The government has also banned movement into and out of the city, except for essential services and for tourists, it said, citing a jump in the number of cases found in a given sample of tests, known as the positivity rate. “All employees, public and private, shall work from home, except for those providing essential services,” the government said in a statement. Rwanda, which has 11,259 cases of the disease caused by the coronavirus and 146 deaths, said the number of tests returning positive results for Covid-19 has tripled to 7.7% from 2.6% at the start of this month. African nations are grappling with a second wave of coronavirus, infections rising to at least 3.3 million and 79,500 deaths so far, a Reuters tally showed. Of every 100 infections reported around the world, about five are from African nations, up from 3.4 in October, the data showed. Businesses in Kigali will shut down, the government said, except for those dealing with essential services like food, medicine and fuel. “Citizens are urged to significantly reduce social interactions and limit movements,” it said.
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
My life has been a constant struggle. Now things are going according to plan:	Name:  Emmanuel Asante Age:  24 Dreams of:  Being an art teacher I got a message on Facebook after one of my last diaries. A co-founder of the Western Sydney Ad School offered me a scholarship to one of their short courses. I told my mentor, Abdul Abdullah. He said that if he were me, he would take up the scholarship and do Tafe as well. I said OK, if that’s what you’d do, that’s what I’ll do too. I’m excited. I’m really hopeful. The course will start in mid-February. I’ve signed up with the enrolment and everything. I’m now just waiting to hear back. I remember when I decided to become an artist I told my teacher: “People are saying that being an artist is hard. There’s no money. There’s no career.” And my teacher told me to go after it, that you never know where it might lead. And here I am. Being a professional artist is something I never thought I would be. But look how it has turned out. It feels so surreal when I think about how tough things have been. I thought I would be an art teacher. I still want to be one. If you want to become an art teacher you have to be very, very good. I don’t feel more insecure about that long-term goal. I always knew it was going to be hard. But I am a little insecure in terms of exhibitions for this year. I don’t know if it will be like 2020, where almost every show I was in got cancelled. I don’t know if, when we get the vaccine, whether things will go back to normal, or if there’ll be restrictions all throughout this year. Recently I was supposed to have an exhibition that got postponed because of Covid. I was due to get some money for art supplies – usually when you do a big commission for museums, galleries and so on you get given money for art supplies. So because the exhibition has been postponed, the money hasn’t come through for the supplies and I haven’t been able to buy any yet to get to work. But I’m promised it will come soon. The new restrictions in Sydney have most affected my friends who are creatives. My friends who were doing art exhibitions and so on had their work postponed. But my friends who work in retail and customer service didn’t get affected. They were just told they need to wear face masks and it’ll be cool. One friend of mine, who I used to go to high school with, has basically given up. He is a good artist, but because of what is going on it’s made him not want to do art. He wants to do something that will get easier money, something that he will be able to make a living from. With Covid circulating around, my social artistic world has been limited. Most of my art and ideas are based on my personal experiences, and I take inspiration from movies. Drawing has become part of me. If I don’t draw or paint, I feel a bit empty inside. When I wake up in the morning, the first thing I do is paint and draw. But my experiences outside my home have been limited. Whether the restrictions have been eased or not, I tend to say, ‘Oh, there’s no need for me to go out into the city or see a show at all. I’ll wait for the virus to die down.’ It’s limiting. Even going to the cinema. Being on public transport is a little bit worrisome. I prefer not to go in that way. Tomorrow, though, I will go into my local Tafe campus for its open day and enrol. I’m still quite hopeful I’ll be able to become an art teacher. Being an artist, I think there’s a 50-50 chance. I’m excited. I’m hopeful. I never dreamt it would come this soon. I expected the struggle for my art to be seen and for my career to start to take shape would be a very, very long one. My life has been a constant struggle. This time, things are going according to plan for the first time.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
