Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
‘This is Africa’s generational cause,’ says Uganda’s election challenger:	Millions of voters in  Uganda  will cast their votes this week in an election pitting a 76-year-old president seeking his sixth term against a former popular musician half his age. The contest between  Bobi Wine , 38, and  Yoweri Museveni , who has been in power since 1986, is being keenly watched across the continent, where veteran leaders are coming under pressure to give way to politicians more representative of Africa’s increasingly youthful, urban and educated population. Wine has explicitly linked his campaign to efforts elsewhere across  Africa  to oust veteran leaders, and told the  Observer  that his was “a generational cause”. “The oppressed people can’t stay oppressed for ever. History has taught us that even the most brutal and famous dictators have come down, crumbling to the power of the people,” Wine said. “My warning to Museveni is to learn from history. It’s important that you respect the voices of the people of Uganda because, if you do not, then you will also end up in the dustbin of history like your friends [Muammar] Gaddafi, [Robert] Mugabe and [Omar al-] Bashir. The campaign has already been marked by the worst political violence in Uganda for decades,  with more than 50 people shot dead by security forces  over two days of protests following the arrest of Wine in November. On 1 December, police fired shots into Wine’s car, prompting him to briefly suspend his campaign. Since then, a bodyguard has been killed when run over by a police truck, and Wine was arrested for a second time. Opposition supporters have been routinely dispersed by security forces using teargas and rubber bullets. Journalists have been harassed, and human rights activists and high-profile critics of the government have been detained. International watchdogs such as Amnesty International say measures implemented ostensibly to fight Covid-19 are being applied selectively to prevent the opposition campaigning effectively. Wine said: “The campaign is crazy. Every day we are met with heavily armed military officers. I am afraid and concerned every day. I fear for my life and lives of my comrades in the struggle. “The regime is after our lives. Every day we live is as if it’s the last one.” On 7 January,  police confronted Wine during an online press conference  where he announced a petition to the international criminal court to investigate rights abuses in Uganda. Known to supporters as “the ghetto president”, the former singer broke into formal politics in 2017 when he won a seat in Uganda’s national assembly. He has since been badly assaulted and detained many times. Wine, whose real name is Robert Kyagulanyi, grew up in poverty in Kampala before his successful musical career. As a politician, he has attracted enthusiastic support from among Uganda’s young and urban population who want change. The median age in the country is less than 16. Flavia Namukasa, 23, was among hundreds of jubilant supporters who attended Wine’s campaign rally in the central town of Rakai, 200km from the capital Kampala, in late December. “We have come out in big numbers to support Bobi Wine. He is our only hope. He will be able to address our misery, daily suffering and high unemployment rates,” she said. But Wine faces an experienced opponent who can count on loyalty from individuals and institutions that have benefited from his rule over decades. Museveni is seeking a sixth term after MPs removed constitutional age limits on the presidency, and has the support of the security forces and much of the bureaucracy. Some voters have been rattled by the violence associated with recent protests, which they blame on the opposition. More importantly, decades of economic growth and subsidies have won Museveni a mass following in rural areas. “My next president still remains Museveni. Although they call him Mzee [old man], he is not weak. He is still strong and able to lead this country,” said Richard Kiboneka, a 62-year-old local leader in Mbalwa in the central district of Wakiso. Though few deny Museveni’s early achievements – from 1992 to 2013 the proportion of Ugandan households living in poverty was halved – serious economic problems were increasingly evident, even before the hammer blow of the pandemic. While some 700,000 young people reach working age every year in Uganda, only enough jobs for one in 10 are created,  according to the World Bank.  Poor basic services, corruption, expensive healthcare and overcrowded classrooms have also fuelled discontent in urban areas in particular. Museveni has not responded to criticism of his record,  instead accusing Wine and other opposition leaders of being “traitors”  who planned “insurrection … with their foreign backers”. At one rally, the president said that the protesters were “ being used by outsiders … homosexuals and others who don’t like the stability  and independence of Uganda”. Judith Nabakooba, Uganda’s minister for information, communications technology and national guidance, said that Museveni had guaranteed peace and stability “for so many years”. “He is a respectable leader. He has a full and wider view of Uganda, east Africa, Africa and internationally. He is tested. He knows where we have come from … and knows where to take us. To secure our future, we really need to support President Museveni,” she said. Though Museveni is expected to win the contest, the former rebel leader is likely to emerge weakened, and the poll may usher in a period of instability in Uganda. The former British colony has never had a peaceful transition of power, and previous elections have been marred by allegations of vote buying,  rigging  and  fraud . Wine said that “when people turn up in huge numbers and vote, there will be no way the regime can try to alter the voice and the will of the people”. Analysts have expressed concerns about democracy across eastern and southern Africa in recent years, although they say the picture is as varied within these regions as it is across the continent. The recent election in Tanzania was  marred by widespread repression,  while crackdowns in Zimbabwe have led to journalists and political activists being jailed for months without being found guilty of any offence. In Malawi, however,  Lazarus Chakwera  won power in a fresh poll after the judges overturned a 2019 election amid allegations of fraud. Patience Akumu , a Ugandan journalist and analyst, said officials’ claim that only Museveni could guarantee security was unfounded. “I think it tells us how flimsy the existing security is, if it relies on one man. The strongmen of the continent are falling one by one, and Museveni will go eventually,” Akumu told the  Observer . “Uganda, Africa, must face this fact.”
China tightens curbs as cases surge; Denmark restricts all travel – as it happened:	A quick recap of what has happened in the past few hours: We will be closing off this blog soon. You can find our ongoing live coverage  here  and our new blog  here . Viral fragments of Covid-19 have been detected at a sewerage plant in south-east  Queensland . Fragments were  detected at the Redcliffe wastewater treatment plant yesterday,  in a sample taken from the plant earlier in the week. Queensland’s chief health officer,  Dr Jeanette Young , said: This does not mean we have new cases of Covid-19 in these communities, but we are treating this detection with absolute caution.  A positive sewage result means that someone who has been infected was shedding the virus. Infected people can shed viral fragments and that shedding can happen for several weeks after the person is no longer infectious. She added: Given the recent case of community transmission in Brisbane and the regular detection of cases in other states, I am urging anyone who feels unwell in the communities of  Clontarf, Deception Bay, Kippa-Ring, Margate, Newport, Redcliffe, Rothwell, Scarborough and Woody Point  to get tested and isolate ... If there is a case we are not yet aware of, it is critical we detect it through our testing mechanisms as quickly as possible to contain any potential spread. Australia ’s federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , says he will be discharged from hospital in Sydney this afternoon. He spent the night in the Royal Prince Alfred hospital after a car accident in Marrickville yesterday. Will be discharged from Royal Prince Alfred Hospital this afternoon and continue treatment as an outpatient- thank you for all the good wishes and a huge thanks to the paramedics, police, doctors, nurses, orderlies, radiographers and other hospital staff - you are the best Back in  Australia , Labor’s Indigenous affairs spokeswoman,  Linda Burney , senator  Patrick Dodson  and  Warren Snowden  have said  a consultation report on creating an Indigenous voice to government  “fails” because the models it proposes would not be able to provide full and frank advice, and be protected against abolition. In a joint statement, they said:  Labor thanks members of the advisory groups who worked on this interim report under difficult circumstances. Many will be disappointed with the government’s refusal to consider a constitutionally enshrined voice to the parliament. Three and a half years ago, First Nations leaders clearly expressed our desire for a First Nations voice to the parliament enshrined in the constitution – through the Uluru Statement – while the government banned its advisory group from even considering this. It is also difficult to see any progress being made before the next election. It is critical to real and lasting progress for First Nations people that we have a say in the policies and laws that affect us. A voice must be able to provide full and frank advice. It must be secure and it should not be subject to the whims of the government of the day. This report fails in that context. Labor remains committed to all three elements of the Uluru Statement: a constitutionally enshrined First Nations voice to the parliament; a Makarrata Committee to oversee a process for agreement and treaty-making; as well as a process for Truth-telling. Mainland  China  reported 33 new cases of Covid-19  on Friday, down from 53 on Thursday.  Most of the cases were in Hebei province, where a coronavirus cluster has grown by more than 130 cases in the past week.  From Reuters: T he National Health Commission said in a statement that  14 of the 17 locally transmitted infections were in Hebei , the province surrounding Beijing which entered a “wartime mode” this week as it battles a new cluster of coronavirus infections. Shijiazhuang, Hebei’s capital, announced on Saturday it would suspend service on its subway . Earlier this week, authorities banned people from leaving the city in an effort to curb the spread of the disease. Shijiazhuang is launching mass testing across its population of 11 million. On 8 January, municipal authorities told residents they must stay home for at least seven days even after they complete a nucleic acid test. The commission also reported  38 new asymptomatic cases, down from 57 a day earlier .   China does not classify these patients, who have been infected by the Sars-CoV-2 virus that causes the disease but are not yet showing any Covid-19 symptoms, as confirmed cases.  Speaking of cases of the UK variant in  Australia , New South Wales authorities have released a statement saying a woman who was carrying that strain, and was released from hotel quarantine on 5 January after completing an isolation period and going 72 hours without any symptoms, was  not infectious when she returned to the community . They said: The person had been medically assessed the day before, met all exit criteria in place at the time, and on the basis of those criteria were considered clear of Covid-19. On the 7 January, genome sequencing found the person had been infected with the new UK variant of Covid-19. As a precaution, the person was immediately contacted by NSW Health and asked to isolate for retesting.  The person returned a positive test with a high CT value, which indicates low levels of infection, and returned to the Special Health Accommodation . This person attended several venues in Burwood in Sydney’s inner west on 6 and 7 January, which, as a precaution, were included in a public health alert released by NSW Health on Friday night. The person has one household contact who has tested negative to date. The full list of NSW exposure sites is  here . The  UK variant of Covid-19 has been detected in a case at the Howard Springs quarantine facility in the Northern Territory  in Australia. It’s the first time the variant has been detected in the NT. It has also been detected in Queensland, New South Wales, South Australia and Victoria.  Genomic sequencing revelled that a 26-year-old woman, who arrived at Howard Springs on an Australian government repatriation flight on 30 December and tested positive to Covid-19 on 31 December, was carrying the variant. The NT government said the woman remains under the care of health officials and under isolation.  Passengers and air crew on the same flight have been tested twice already with no positive cases resulting, and will be retested today.  China has announced fresh lockdowns in Hebei province, which borders Beijing, in a bid to stamp out a resurgence in infections before Lunar New Year. From AFP: Two Chinese cities south of Beijing further tightened virus restrictions Saturday  as authorities race to stamp out a resurgence in infections. China has largely brought its domestic outbreak under control after the coronavirus first emerged in Wuhan in late 2019 – but a spike in Hebei province, bordering Beijing, has sparked fresh lockdowns ahead of the Lunar New Year next month. Hebei has reported over 130 confirmed Covid-19 cases in the past week, with more than 200 more asymptomatic infections. Most of the cases were in Shijiazhuang city, which along with its surrounding areas is home to 11 million people. Several other infections were reported in neighbouring Xingtai city, home to 7 million. Shijiazhuang suspended subway operations from Saturday morning to aid “prevention and control of the outbreak”, authorities said. Major highways leading into the city, around 300km (200 miles) south of Beijing, have already been closed and inter-city passenger travel halted. Overnight, Xingtai announced a week-long stay-at-home order to residents in order to curb its outbreak. The curbs come ahead of the Lunar New Year, when hundreds of millions criss-cross China to visit family and friends, with National Health Commission vice-minister Zeng Yixin warning Saturday the festival “will further boost the risk of transmission”. Authorities are racing to roll out vaccines, with more than 9m doses given so far, Zeng added. Health authorities recently gave conditional approval to a vaccine candidate by Chinese pharma giant Sinopharm, with emergency use jabs already administered in the later part of 2020. Health authorities in  Victoria, Australia , have added one new potential exposure site in Melbourne. Anyone who attended  Block 7 Dumplings in Ringwood on 29 December from 8.10pm to 8.45pm  has been advised to monitor themselves for symptoms and get tested and isolate should they appear. You can read the full list of Victorian exposure sites  here . T hree people in Queensland have been fined for not wearing a face mask , after face masks became mandatory in greater Brisbane at 6pm last night.  Police handed out “hundreds” of free masks in greater Brisbane on Friday night, the Queensland police deputy commissioner,  Steve Gollschewski ,   told reporters today. On three occasions those persons were actually offered the masks, refused to wear them, offered again and were given directions to go home because they shouldn’t have been out. Police were left with no alternative but to take enforcement action, which they did. A fourth person was fined for being in an unauthorised area, and all were hit with a $1,334 fine for failing to comply with the chief health officer’s directions. Future fines for failing to wear a mask will be $200, but Gollschewski said infringement notices were not yet ready to be issued. Police are handing out masks rather than fines – our officers have 40,000 masks that they can hand out, so I think they’ve got plenty. But we need the community to listen to the messaging and if the police officer engages with you and says, ‘You need to put this mask on’, you need to put the mask on, so it is a pretty good deal. Australia ’s chief nursing and midwifery officer,  Alison McMillan , has just given a coronavirus update in Melbourne.  She spoke about the new guidelines from the Communicable Diseases Network Australia, which I’ve mentioned a few times today, on getting rapid genomic testing for positive cases in hotel quarantine, extending the required isolation period to 14 days, and getting an exit test. The  United States has  set a new daily record for new coronavirus cases , with 290,000 cases reported in 24 hours, according to the Johns Hopkins global tally. Some 3,676 people in the US died with the virus in the same period.  There have been 21.8m cases and 368,685 deaths in the US since the pandemic began. Mexico has reported 14,362 new confirmed cases of coronavirus and 1,038 deaths .  It is one of the highest daily case increases and brings the total number of cases in Mexico since the pandemic began to 1,507,931, with 132,069 deaths. The real number of infected people and deaths is likely significantly higher than the official count, the health ministry has said.  Coronavirus  border restrictions are  also causing problems at the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe . Zimbabwe has reintroduced movement restrictions following a surge in Covid-19 infections, which have doubled to 18,000 cases since the start of November. South Africa is the worst-affected nation in  Africa , with more than 1.17m infections and 31,800 fatalities since the pandemic began and unprecedented daily figures of more than 20,000 cases reported several times this week. More on this from AFP: Zimbabwean truck driver  Wallace Muzondiwa  queued four days in his vehicle to enter neighbouring South Africa after thousands of people rushed to the border to escape new Zimbabwean movement restrictions this week. The surge overwhelmed immigration authorities at the Beitbridge border post, South Africa’s second-busiest entry port, where angry crowds were stranded by the backlog. “The situation is very, very, very hectic,” said Muzondiwa, desperate to get back on the road after officials finally approved his coronavirus test and additional pandemic-related paperwork. “The line is going very, very slowly and the sun is very hot,” he complained. Flustered travellers hurried past with their luggage, hopping into minivan taxis parked alongside sizzling barbecue stands selling chicken wings on the go. Coronavirus has complicated cumbersome land border crossings in southern Africa, where trucks can sometimes wait days to get through sluggish customs. “What causes the delays at the borders are the documents,” explained South African driver Sinki Tshangise, 44, who has criss-crossed between Botswana, Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe for almost a decade. Negative Covid-19 certificates often expire before arrival, he added, forcing drivers to pay for more testing on the road. “I don’t think I can afford to pay at each and every border,” said Tshangise. “It’s a real struggle.”
Nigeria cattle crisis: how drought and urbanisation led to deadly land grabs:	In February last year, Sunday Ikenna’s fields were green and lush. Then, one evening, a herd of cattle led into the farm by roving pastoralists crushed, ate, and uprooted the crops. “I lost everything. The situation was sorrowful, watching another human being destroy your farm,” says Ikenna, a father of 10 who farms in Ukpabi-Nimbo in Enugu state, southern  Nigeria . “I farmed a smaller portion this year because I am still scared of another invasion.” Ikenna’s experience is not an isolated event. In the past few years there have been a growing number of skirmishes between farmers and cattle herders searching for pasture and water. For many years the clashes were problematic, but the two groups usually managed to reach a mutual accommodation. But in the past two decades, the climate crisis has contributed to altering that old order, and what used to be a friendly arrangement has become a crisis marked by looting, raids, cattle rustling and premeditated killings. In 2016, Ukpabi-Nimbo, Ikenna’s community, was attacked, allegedly by cattle herders, resulting in the death of 46 people, according to one local media report. “Nimbo will never be the same after that morning,” Ikenna says of the attack. At the root of the crisis, according to experts, is Nigeria’s teeming cattle population, which has more than doubled from an  estimated  9.2 million in 1981 to  around 20 million , making it one of the world’s largest. Nigeria’s human population has grown too, to about 200 million, the highest in  Africa  by far. This has led to cities sprawling ever larger and wider, in some cases into formerly designated cattle routes and reserves. Routes that dated back to the 1950s, in line with colonial arrangements, have either been overrun or dominated by new human settlements – pushing herders further into contested territories. Grazing space that should accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more In rural communities, smallholder farmers are claiming large swathes of grazing land. “It means that grazing space, for example, that should originally accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more,” says Ifeanyi Ubah, a cattle rancher based in eastern Nigeria. Nigeria is, moreover, a crossroads for cattle from other countries: transhumance migrants from Cameroon, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad routinely pass through in search of better climate, pasture and more plentiful water. Though there are fewer than 100 official border crossings into the country, Abba Moro, an ex-government official who headed the ministry of interior, was quoted as saying that there  were more than 1,499 illegal entry routes  into the country as of 2013. Terrorist groups have become involved in the situation. Boko Haram has been accused of using money obtained from the sale of rustled cattle to fund its deadly operations. On one occasion, Boko Haram militants killed 19 herders as they attempted to steal their cattle. A rising number of attacks has led to the  reported loss  of two million cattle and the death of 600 herders, many of whom have been forced to vacate the fertile Lake Chad basin in search of new lands. But the climate crisis is the biggest factor driving tensions. Most parts of northern Nigeria have suffered severe desertification and drought. Mean annual rainfall in this region has  dropped below  600mm, compared with 3,500mm in the south coast area.  This change threatens the livelihoods of around 40 million people,  especially livestock and smallholder  farmers. Large numbers of cattle herders are being forced to move from traditional grazing areas to central and southern Nigeria when dry periods start – a situation that heightens competition and heralds more clashes. “While growing up, I saw trees, forest, rivers and streams in most parts of northern Nigeria. The grasses grew and it was more than enough for the cattle,” says Bala Ardo, one of the leaders of cattle herders in south-east Nigeria. “But it’s no more. The situation has forced the average herder to seek pasture and water in places they never would have visited in the past, as he struggles to find drinkable water for himself and family and then his animals.” The government, meanwhile, has only taken piecemeal action. In 2018, the federal government proposed  colonies for cattle  and funded grazing camps across various states in the country. But local leaders were resistant, and fears grew in the south in particular that ethnic groups such as the Muslim Fulani would use the scheme to  grab land . Some researchers  estimate  that the members of the Fulani ethnic group own 90% of Nigeria’s livestock.  As the climate crisis continues, the government has set up the National Livestock Transformation Plan, which aims to modernise the livestock sector through a series of phased interventions from 2018 to 2027. Ranches for breeding and processing will be created, and several pilot projects have already been established. But this plan, too, is encountering difficulties. According to Khalid Salisu, a journalist in one of the pilot project regions, “It doesn’t serve the needs of cattle herders adequately. The herders in the ranches are struggling to find enough water and pastures to keep their herds alive during the dry season.” In the absence of effective solutions from the central government, states and communities are proposing various remedies. In Benue state, southern Nigeria, for example, legislation in 2017 banned open cattle grazing. The law required herders to rent or buy lands to host their ranches. The heart of the problem is the need to persuade herders to give up treating land and water as a free resource. It will be difficult to persuade them to move to capital-intensive ranching, said Ubah. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved Abubakar Sambo, the leader of the northern community in Enugu state, says the herders must be consulted before fresh initiatives are launched. “The policies received by cattle herders largely on radio and television cannot work. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved.” He believes younger herders need to be educated and sent to study model ranching systems in other countries. “What the herders have achieved [cattle population growth] despite all the challenges is remarkable. It shows the huge potential of the livestock sector,” says Ardo. “Imagine what the result could be if the government put the right structure and policies in place.” Sign up for the  Animals farmed monthly update  to get a roundup of the best farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at  animalsfarmed@theguardian.com
Schwarzenegger used to exemplify politico-showbiz ridiculousness. Now he's our true moral governator:	H ow amazing. Until a few years ago – 2016, in fact – if you asked people for the most absurd example of the politico-showbusiness complex in the 21st-century United States, they would have said  Arnold Schwarzenegger ’s recall election as governor of California in 2003, his candidacy being announced on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno. He was re-elected in 2006, and just about maintained a cheerfully Reaganesque public image of a moderate Republican – uneventfully standing down in 2011 to resume his movie career. We all took the mickey out of the governator. But, right now, he is America’s moral governator with real moral authority. It was the governator who uploaded a video  telling Americans to stay home during the Covid crisis . And now it is the governator who has issued a clarion call for decency on YouTube with his admittedly cheesy but genuinely stirring, heartfelt and relevant rebuke to the Trumpians and their desecration of the Capitol – a desecration that even now many Republicans and many sophisticates on the right cannot bring themselves to condemn fully. In his mature Reaganesque style, Schwarzenegger addressed the nation from a presidential-style desk, with the stars and stripes and Californian flag in the background, and a photo of himself in his bodybuilding pomp. With Hollywood-style music on the audio track, he denounced the complicit enablers of Trump’s fascism – culminating in a hilarious flourish of Conan the Barbarian’s sword. That should have been ridiculous. It should have been silly. But, compared with the seedy rightwingers and Fox News alternative-fact merchants and the giggling cynics who said Trump didn’t matter, Schwarzenegger’s sword was rather glorious. I found myself thinking of Evelyn Waugh’s Sword of Honour trilogy – and, yes, however preposterous, there was something honourable about Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Conan sword. Schwarzenegger called the vandalising of the Capitol (and the killing of Capitol police officer Brian Sicknick) America’s “Kristallnacht”. Like many others, I have seen it as America’s beer hall putsch (and who knows if that may not turn out to be the closer analogy?). But, for the time being, Schwarzenegger is absolutely right. And from personal experience, Schwarzenegger was able to address the openly  Nazi  stylings of the Capitol attackers, with the “Camp Auschwitz” T-shirts, because he grew up in an Austria that, in contrast to Germany, went into fierce denial about its role in the second world war. Schwarzenegger spoke about his angry, depressed and abusive father who beat his children. (Schwarzenegger did not speak in detail, but throughout his governorship much press research went into Gustav Schwarzenegger, the Austrian police chief and Stalingrad military veteran who applied for Nazi party membership in 1938 before the Anschluss, but was not found to have been responsible for war crimes or abuse.) Schwarzenegger’s video today, however schmaltzy and hokey in style, was a real reminder to the fatuous callow right that Nazis and nazism are not just death-metal icons or gamer fantasies. They really did exist, with America-first cheerleaders such as Joseph Kennedy and Charles Lindbergh encouraging their fellow citizens to look the other way. And he also showed us that the immigrant experience can bring wisdom. Arnold’s video is exactly what we all needed.
Rooftop rallies, frisbee golf and alpacas: alternative clips of the year:	You want hard work? We’ll give you hard work.  The Dutch headwind cycling championships  in February. Frisbee golf: who knew? A magnificent  hole in one  by Kevin Jones from September. In May the Brazilian skateboarder Gui Khury became the first person to land a 1080-degree turn on a vertical ramp.  Not bad for an 11-year-old . On the other side of the world,  Isamu Yamamoto in Japan is more than worth watching too . And Katie Ledecky swam a length  with a glass of milk on her head  in August. Perhaps the rugby pass of the year as Teddy Iribaren of Racing 92  puts Teddy Thomas in  to score against Munster in January. Ronnie O’Sullivan clip of the year . There were plenty to choose from, as ever. Some amazing bowls as  Nick Brett finds the gap and puts it on a sixpence ; in the IPL, Nicholas Pooran produced some  stunning fielding  at the IPL and Sarah Fuller  made college football history . And some golfing spectaculars: here’s one-armed amateur golfer Laurent Hurtubise’s  hole in one  at the PGA American Express in January, Jon Rahm’s astonishing  skim across the water before the Masters  (they always go in in practice), and then there’s 84-year-old Mary Wakefield  sinking a putt across the length of a basketball court . A  canine goalline clearance  spares a keeper’s blushes in Argentina in January. But that was eclipsed by the  Carlton v Ilkley alpaca  pitch invasion.  A parrot decided to perch on Brazil defender Bruna Benties’ head  in a training session in September, too. A player uses a spare ball to  dispossess an opponent in North Macedonia  in February as a match between Makedonija Gjorce Petrov and Akademija Pandev descends into farce. And for dive of the year, take a bow (and tumble)  AFC Totton’s Stéphane Zubar . Footballers kept themselves busy. We had Trent Alexander-Arnold  chipping into a garden ornament , Angel Gomes  finding the top bin  and  Ben Chilwell’s tea break . And with getting hold of toilet rolls becoming a preoccupation,  some players inevitably showed off their keepy-uppy skills with them . Hats off to Elisha Nochomovitz for  running a marathon on his balcony , while this  rally across the rooftops  between 11-year-old Carola Pessina and Vittoria Oliveri, 13, in Italy caught the eye in April. On a similar theme badminton stars Lauren Smith and Marcus Ellis  kept themselves, and us, entertained , in June. With nothing else going on outside, how about the  thrills and spills of Marbula E ? And for a defining image of our time, here’s the US’s chief medical adviser Dr Anthony Fauci  throwing the first pitch  at MLB’s opening day. Robot fans at a Japanese baseball game  in July. Be afraid. Go-karter Luca Corberi , and a dangerous one at that, in October. A shattering moment for Branislav Ivanovic as he  drops the trophy after Zenit St Petersburg’s Russian Cup final win over FC Khimki  – he ended the year at West Brom. A frightening MotoGP moment for Valentino Rossi as Franco Morbidelli’s bike  bounces over him at the Austrian GP . Thankfully and remarkably, no one was hurt. And here’s an in-car view of the  rallying escape of the year  for Ott Tänak and Martin Järveoja. An Atlanta school basketball  team manager makes the most of his big shot . And here’s the Harlem Globetrotters’  military family reunion surprise . 1) RIP dressage wonderhorse Totilas.  Here he is in his prime  with the Dutch rider Edward Gal. 2) More Maradona magic,  setting up a World Cup final winner . 3) The astonishing final three laps of the  1982 Monaco Grand Prix . 4) Gérard Houllier’s first title,  with PSG in 1986 . Spotters badges:  vsbain67, ronbarwick, whobroughtoranges, bf_silvertown Do subscribe, if you fancy. Do subscribe, if you fancy. •   Thanks for all your posts BTL throughout the year. We’ll be back on 7 January
What's the furthest from goal a player has seen red for a professional foul?:	“What is the furthest away from goal someone has been sent off for a professional foul?”  muses Robert Davies. Our thoughts immediately settled on Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s gloriously cynical  scything down of Newcastle’s Rob Lee  at Old Trafford in 1998 but by the time the Norwegian actually made contact with Lee’s shins, he was only around 30 yards from goal. How about  this shocking decision  from the 1991 League Cup quarter-finals then, when Southampton’s Jimmy Case was sent for an early bath after hauling down Bryan Robson – hardly known for his blistering pace – a good 40 yards from goal with two covering defenders for company? At the beginning of the season referees had been instructed to tighten up punishment for fouls that denied a clear goalscoring opportunity and, on this evidence, they had a loose understanding of what that meant. Another example from September 2018, in which Aberdeen’s Michael Devlin was given his marching orders  for a foul around 45 yards from goal , suggested officials were still struggling many years later. Aberdeen fail to overturn Michael Devlin's red card against Kilmarnock. Your thoughts? ➡️  https://t.co/Bsp8HyvWfS   pic.twitter.com/EeyiaKm9Gs Simon Kaplan has a potential winner. “I’d suggest Gary Cahill playing for Bolton against Tottenham in December 2011,” he writes. “He got a red card (rescinded on appeal) for denying Scott Parker a ‘clear goalscoring opportunity’ by taking him out about five yards inside the Bolton half.” Owen Coyle measured it for us in his post-match rant: If you understand the terminology it has to be a clear goalscoring opportunity. Now, Scott Parker is a fantastic player but he took a touch with his left foot, went out to the wing, 50 yards from goal. We had Zat Knight in the middle and other defenders coming back. However, if  this video evidence  is anything to go by, we reckon Mikel Arteta can match those 50 yards after bundling over Marouane Chamakh at Crystal Palace in 2013. “He was far from goal, it was an accidental foul, he was not the last man,” protested Arsène Wenger. Arsenal didn’t appeal, so the red card stood. “Has any club scored as many goals in the Champions League group stages as Manchester United this year (15) and not qualified for the knockouts? ” wonders Tim Leehan. While we’ve been polishing off the last few Quality Street, Yorben Geerinckx has done the hard yards for us. “If I’m correct, this only happened twice,” he suggests. “The first time was in 2012-13 when Chelsea scored 16 and amassed 10 points, as many as Shakhtar Donetsk. The Ukrainian side went through because they scored more away goals in the games between the two, with later-to-be-Chelsea player Willian scoring twice at Stamford Bridge in a 3-2 loss, which would prove sufficient to progress after a 2-1 home win. Juventus topped that group and Chelsea would go on to win the Europa League. “The second time was last season. RB Salzburg introduced Erling Braut Haaland to the world and also scored 16. Liverpool won that group and Salzburg finished five points behind runners-up Napoli, progressing to the Europa League, where they were eliminated by Eintracht Frankfurt in last 32.” Paul Moran unearthed the same examples and came up with some new ones. “In poring over 27 years of Champions League group stages, I found that Group D of the 2005-06 competition surprisingly only featured 12 goals across the 12 games. Two 2-1 results were the highest-scoring fixtures and, incredibly, Lille managed to secure six points and third place (transferring to the Uefa Cup) despite only scoring once – they were helped by an impressive defence which conceded just two goals.” Perhaps Jorge Valdano was right about  that particular era of European football . Anyway, back to Paul. “Has any other group stage in a competition (or even a whole competition) featured a goals-per-game figure of less than one? Or has any team in a group stage/competition had a lower figure of goals-per-game (scored + conceded) than Lille’s 0.5?” Send your answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU . “Portsmouth won 2-0 at Hull with only one shot on target and it didn’t come from Pompey (there were two own goals),”  writes Eddy Reynolds. “ Is this a record?” Nope. Burnley have gone one (none? – Knowledge Ed) better. “I watched Fulham lose 2-1 at Burnley in January 2019,” writes Jon Gundry. “That Fulham lost was not a surprise. We haven’t won at Turf Moor since 1951. Even in a desperately poor season ending in relegation from the Premier League, it was a surprise to lose when Burnley  did not have a shot on target . Fulham conceded two own goals by Joe Bryan and Denis Odoi. André Schürrle scored a cracker at the right end.” Worthy of note is this from Mike Dunford, who recalls Southampton’s  6-0 smash-and-grab win at Wolves  in 2007. “Memory serves that we had five shots on target. Mick McCarthy’s team were so unfortunate – and I speak as a Saints fan who saw it – that the home supporters  applauded  their team off. Has that ever happened in a bigger home defeat? And has anyone ever won by more goals in which every shot on target went in?” Patrick Brennan has one, at least. “ Luton beat Blackburn 3-2  on the last day of the 2019-20 season with one shot on target (a penalty) and two own goals,” he tweets. “If they hadn’t won they’d have gone down.” “Arsenal have been beaten home and away by Manchester United and Chelsea,”  noted Paul Brazier in March 2010.  “Has any side become champions of England despite losing all four games against the teams in second and third place?” In short, no. There have been a few examples of the champions losing three and drawing one, the most recent being Aston Villa in the 1980-81 season. They drew 1-1 at home to third-placed Arsenal, losing 2-0 at Highbury (the day they clinched the title), and lost both fixtures to second-placed Ipswich: 2-1 at Villa Park in mid-April and 1-0 at Portman Road. “Wikipedia reliably informs me there are five clubs that Sam Allardyce has played for and managed: Limerick, Preston, Bolton, Sunderland and West Brom. Can any manager beat that?” asks David Skinner. Has any other manager recovered from a huge loss (yes the 9-0!) and some as well as Hasenhuttl has? Or simply not been sacked. It’s an astonishing turnaround. @blzzrd   @OptaJoe   @guardian_sport  might know #SaintsFC   #Hasenhuttl “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,” reports Alex Crane. “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” @TheKnowledge_GU  Do you know the long and short of this question?  https://t.co/wLRqy70wXf “After an FA Cup tie on 1 February 1913, Burnley, then riding high in the Second Division, beat Midland League Gainsborough Trinity 4-1,” begins John Spooner. Trinity led until the last half hour, largely due to the efforts of goalkeeper Ronnie Sewell and his full-backs Cliff Jones and Sam Gunton. At full-time, Burnley made a bid to buy the trio  en bloc . The deal was sealed by 6.20pm that evening. Has a similar instance of players being signed by the opposition at the final whistle happened since?” Or similar bulk buys? @TheKnowledge_GU  Excluding one off huge wins, what's the highest goals-per-game ratio in a cup run?  For example, Newport County's 1988-89 Conference Cup involved 27 goals over three matches, ending in a 6-5 AET defeat. Barking.  pic.twitter.com/dSRdHmwzFP •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Manchester United 'excited and hungry' for summit meeting with Liverpool:	Ole Gunnar Solskjær said his  Manchester United  players are “ready, excited and hungry” before Sunday’s Premier League summit meeting at Liverpool. Following  Tuesday night’s 1-0 win at Burnley , United travel to Anfield top of the table, three points ahead of Jürgen Klopp’s side. “We’re getting better and better,” said Solskjær. “We’re in a good position. But no one will remember the league table on the 12th of January; Sunday is a test of character and quality. We’re looking forward to it; it will be a great test of where we’re at against the deserved champions and the best team by a mile in this country for quite a long time. We’re ready, excited and hungry.” Paul Pogba’s deflected volley clinched victory on a night punctuated by VAR controversy but which ended with United top at this stage of a season for the first time since Sir Alex Ferguson’s final year in charge in United’s last title-winning season of 2012-13. “We’re seeing the best of Paul at the moment,” said Solskjær, who could be without Anthony Martial at Anfield after the forward limped off late on. “Paul’s had injuries and Covid [earlier in the season] so it was natural for him to need time to get back to full fitness. I’ve always said Paul is a big player for us. He’s a good character in the dressing room.” Pogba was suitably delighted. “We knew if we won we’d be top when we played  Liverpool  on Sunday,” said the match-winner. “We have to keep calm. Now is the big moment. Sunday will be a beautiful game for everybody.” While Burnley’s manager, Sean Dyche, described United as “a top side”, Solskjær acknowledged that his team’s ninth victory in 11 games was not straightforward. “We should have scored more, but we always do it the hard way,” said United’s manager who saw Harry Maguire have a goal disallowed contentiously. “Patience and calmness was the key.” Solskjær admitted it is extremely difficult to prevent footballers celebrating goals amid the pandemic. “It’s an emotional game,” he said. “You have to understand footballers and you also have to understand the ­concern. It’s difficult. Football brings the best and the worst out in you. We all do our best to stay within the ­guidelines. We all want football to carry on – and safely.”
Megan Rapinoe on Capitol attack: 'This is America. We showed our true colors':	Megan Rapinoe has decried  the “devastating” attack on the US Capitol , putting forth the uncomfortable claim that America “showed very much our true colors” when a mob of pro-Trump supporters descended on Washington DC. “This was about white supremacy and holding up white supremacy,” Rapinoe said. The 35-year old forward, who is back in the US women’s national team fold for the first time since the 2020 SheBelieves Cup nearly a year ago, opened a media teleconference on Tuesday with a six-minute exposition on the fractious state of the country in the wake of last week’s siege. “Hopefully [it’s] the final straw for so many people to really understand the reason that we’re here is because we never have actually had a reckoning with what our country really is,” Rapinoe said. “This is America. Make no mistake about it. I think we showed very much our true colors. This is not the first time we’ve seen a murderous mob like that. Unleashing a white supremacy mob is  nothing new to America  as people of color, black and brown, know very well.” She added: “It’s just striking how horrible it was, and just how insane it was, from the climate in the country being such that we have our political leaders, our chief political leader, inciting an actual real-life murderous and deadly insurrection against his own government, against his own people, against his own party.” Protesters swarmed the Capitol last Wednesday, putting it on lockdown, as Mike Pence rebuffed Donald Trump’s demand to overturn his loss to Joe Biden and the Senate’s Republican leader denounced a bid in Congress to undo the election outcome. Trump supporters overturned barriers and clashed with police on the Capitol grounds and streamed inside the building. Five people  died in the attempted insurrection , including a police officer. Rapinoe urged lawmakers to press for a thorough investigation of what led to the invasion, warning that rushed proceedings could encourage future attacks. “All the calls for unity and moving forward obviously cannot come without justice. If we do not punish this and investigate this to the fullest extent, it only encourages more of this to happen,” she said. “We should not underestimate what could have happened. I think we are very lucky that that officer led that mob away from the Senate. We saw people with weapons and people with zip ties and they put a gallows up outside the Capitol building where they were chanting to hang the vice-president of the United States. “So anybody thinking, ‘Oh well, they really wouldn’t have done that much and I think we should give them sort of a pass’. Maybe we haven’t seen this in our lifetimes, but I think that we should make no mistake about what the intent was. It was a murderous moment. Five people are dead and we can’t bring them back. “Hopefully this is the last layer that we needed to rip off, although it’s been abundantly clear for a number of hundred years what the real issue is. This was about white supremacy, and holding up white supremacy, and I hope that we can see this and move forward with justice. I think that’s the only way that we can actually move forward. I think it’s all out in the open, it’s all stripped bare, and so hopefully the lawmakers will have the courage to do what needs to be done and every day citizens as well.” During the question-and-answer session, Rapinoe was asked about the widely circulated photo of a Trump supporter returning from Washington wearing a USWNT sweatshirt. “I feel like I can probably speak on behalf of a lot of my teammates,” Rapinoe said. “That is not the kind of fan that we will welcome. The US crest is not to be confused with anything that has to do with white supremacy, anything that has to do with the Trump administration, anything that has to do with that divisive culture that we saw on the Capitol.” She continued: “We want to create, and continue to create, a place that is inclusive and safe and diverse for our fans and for our players to play in front of and for people to watch on TV and for the media to cover. “So don’t bring that bullshit here.” The 2019 Ballon d’Or winner said the unanticipated break due to Covid-19 was a blessing in disguise, leaving her as physically and mentally refreshed as she has felt since the start of her international career.
Vaccine scepticism in France reflects 'dissatisfaction with political class’:	I n  France , every child is now obliged to have 11 vaccinations. If parents want their children to attend school, or take part in many extracurricular activities, they must accept. There is no opt-out or concessions made to vaccine doubters. On Monday France’s government and health authorities are speeding up the country’s Covid-19 vaccine drive – a process complicated by widespread scepticism about the inoculation that has encompassed the usual global conspiracy theories. For weeks, polls have suggested up to 60% of French citizens do not wish to be vaccinated. As the government’s vaccine operation enters its third week,  official figures  show that as of Saturday at least 93,000 people had been given the jab – a much lower number than elsewhere in Europe, including the UK, Germany and Italy.  Laurent-Henri Vignaud, a science historian whose 2019 book  Antivax,  co-written with immunology specialist Françoise Salvadori, examines vaccine scepticism in the west since the 18th century, says we should not heed polls suggesting the French will refuse the vaccine. “There’s a very big difference between what the French say and what they do,” he told the Guardian. “And polls whose methodology and questions can seem abstract do not reflect what happens when people know where they will have the vaccine, what it does, the how, when and why.” Vaccine doubters have existed as long as vaccines , but for years polls have suggested France has more than most of its European neighbours – an odd reputation given that immunology pioneer Louis Pasteur was French and is a figure of fierce national pride. Prof Jocelyn Raude, an expert on health behaviour at the École des Hautes Études en Santé Publique who has studied the anti-vaccine movement, says that as recently as 2005 polls showed 90% support for vaccines, “which seems incredible today”. However, by the turn of the 21st century the seeds of doubt had already been sown. In the 1990s, a mass campaign to vaccinate French children against hepatitis B coincided with a jump in multiple sclerosis cases, though studies never found a convincing link between the two.  In 1991, there was a medical scandal not linked to vaccines specifically when it was discovered that health authorities had knowingly distributed blood products contaminated with HIV to haemophiliacs in the 1980s. Several ministers were later charged with manslaughter. However, Raude said it was the 2009 H1N1 scandal, in which the government massively overordered 94m vaccine doses at a cost of €869m (£780m), that fuelled today’s vaccine scepticism. The health ministry later cancelled more than half the order but the damage was done. Opposition parties criticised the waste of public money and accused officials of being in league with big pharma. In the end, 323 people in France died of H1N1, only 6m people were vaccinated and 19m vaccine doses were destroyed. An official estimate put the cost of the debacle at €382m. Raude says the scepticism was amplified when some high-profile French celebrities began expressing vaccine doubts, relayed by newly emerging social media networks. Then came the  Mediator scandal . The diabetic drug, widely but wrongly prescribed to those seeking to lose weight, was linked to between 500 and 1,200 deaths over more than three decades. Mediator’s manufacturer, Servier, was accused of charges including manslaughter, and 12 people ended up in the dock in a criminal trial last year, including officials who were also paid as consultants of pharmaceutical companies. The company and the individuals charged deny wrongdoing. Judgment is expected in March. “It was a tipping point. The Mediator scandal validated in people’s minds the idea of corruption between officials and pharmaceutical companies in France; that it was about business not health safety,” Raude says. Another cause, he says, is the lack of confidence in doctors and scientists. “It’s not new for the French to lack confidence in political leaders, but there is a low level of confidence in the medical authorities in France. The effect of this is if you don’t trust the experts, you don’t follow their advice.” Vignaud says vaccine scepticism is less against the vaccine itself than those promoting it, reflecting  a distrust of “politicians , high-profile doctors and experts and journalists”. “France doesn’t have any more hard and fast anti-vaxxers than anywhere else, what it does have is … a certain dissatisfaction with the political class,” he says. “There is a strong expectation of the state, but we are permanently disappointed: we see this with the vaccine programme: some say it’s too slow, others it’s too fast. Everyone is disappointed.” The  film Hold-Up , a much lampooned and debunked epic claiming Covid-19 is a global conspiracy, has compounded the mistrust and been been shared by influential figures. Among those trying to combat the disinformation with facts and humour is the Facebook site  Les Vaxxeuses . “Vaccines are the biggest medical advance … don’t let lies make you doubt the benefits,” the website says. Over the weekend anti-vaccination proponents were dealt a blow when the far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed course and said she would agree to receive a Covid jab, having previously voiced her opposition. Ministers are confident France’s vaccine programme will catch up in the coming weeks, insisting it is “a marathon, not a sprint”. “Once access to the vaccine becomes a reality people will have the vaccine. They have had enough,” Vignaud says. Raude agrees the government’s “slow steps” strategy appears to be working. “The  government has been slow and careful  so as not to frighten people … when French people see the benefits, they will do it.”
Why are ocean warming records being broken year after year?:	As if 2020 could get any worse, the latest research showed that oceans hit their highest recorded temperatures, a record that keeps getting broken year after year. Why are the oceans so important? It is quite simple: almost all of the extra heat we gain because of greenhouse gases ultimately ends up in the oceans. In fact, the oceans absorb more than 90% of the excess heat. Consequently, if you want to understand global warming, you have to measure ocean warming. I am part of a team of 20 climate scientists who just published new research in  Advances in Atmospheric Sciences . We collected temperature measurements spread out across the world’s oceans – measurements that in some cases, went back to the 1950s and even earlier. These data paint an unambiguous picture of a warming planet – warming that is a direct consequence of human emission of greenhouse gases. Ocean warming has been continuing apace for as long as we have made measurements. Scientists acknowledge year-to-year records, but the long-terms trends are what matter most. Any single year that is warm or cold cannot prove or disprove global warming. The more important issue is, what happens year after year after year? Is there a trend? The unambiguous answer is yes. Since the oceans are huge, they absorb unbelievable amounts of energy. The most common everyday unit of energy is the joule. But for the oceans, we think about energy in terms of zettajoules. A zettajoule is equal to 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 joules. How much is this? Well, in the past year, according to our data, the Earth has absorbed about 20 zettajoules of heat, equivalent to the heat given off by 630bn common household hairdryers blowing all day and night, 360 days a year. To check our findings, we compared our results with other institutions. We found that the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration data also ranked 2020 as the hottest year ever for the oceans. Their data showed a much smaller warming last year compared with the preceding year, but over the long term, the data from the two groups agrees quite well. When different groups using different techniques reach similar conclusions, its adds confidence to the results. “But people don’t live on the oceans, so why should we care?” That is a question I get all the time and the answer is clear. The oceans actually control the Earth’s weather. Approximately 70% of the planet is covered by ocean waters; when those waters heat, they in turn warm the atmosphere. Also, water evaporates from oceans into the atmosphere and the evaporation increases dramatically as temperatures rise. Think about how humid a warm day can be compared to a cold day. By these mechanisms, oceans control both the temperature and the humidity level in the atmosphere. Consequently, oceans control the weather. All of this affects humans. Warming oceans are creating more powerful storms, like cyclone Yasa, which recently hit the South Pacific. Some areas are becoming wetter, with heavier rainfall and flooding. Simultaneously, other areas are becoming more dry, with more intense heatwaves, droughts, and wildfires. We have seen these effects manifest with wildfires in Australia, the western US, and other locations. We can expect studies like ours to become routine as global warming continues. We expect to see heat records continue to be broken and weather to become more and more strange. And of course, there will be costs – in human lives and infrastructure. But there is still time to turn this ship around. We can still do things that make the future better for us and our children. With the change in leadership in the US, we can hope things will get better. President-elect Joe Biden must rejoin the rest of the world in working to create the planet we want and that our children deserve. John Abraham is a professor of thermal sciences at the University of St Thomas in Minnesota
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
The violence at the Capitol was an attempted coup. Call it that:	O n Wednesday, a coup attempt was led by the president of the United States. A rightwing mob attempted the coup in the form of  a violent riot that stormed the Capitol building . They disrupted the proceedings that would have completed the recognition of the election of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. Those proceedings had been disrupted earlier by elected officials bringing forth bad-faith claims that the election was not legitimate and should instead produce a continuation of Trump’s presidency. This too was a coup attempt, an effort to violate the constitution and override the will of the voters in this election. Inside and outside were two faces of the same thing, and both were fomented by the leaders of the Republican party and by the US president. The mob outside would not exist without the politicians inside. Those insiders will make noises of horror and repudiation, but they own this. Had Mitch McConnell and other Republican leaders recognized the legitimate winner of the election in early November, had there been no challenge to a legitimate election from inside the government, there would have been no mob. Having failed to suppress enough votes to guarantee a Republican presidential victory, the Republican party and the Trump administration decided to try to suppress them retroactively. Trump invited the mob and whipped it up for months and set it off today, as surely as if he’d lit a bomb’s fuse. I call it a coup attempt because, though I assume it will not prevent the Biden presidency, it certainly intended to, and is part of a campaign to delegitimize and thereby weaken the incoming administration. It was a long time coming, building up for years with white rage, especially white male rage fuelled by everyone from Trump himself to the National Rifle Association, Fox News and the various rightwing pundits, the Republican party, the various faces of white supremacy, and far-right groups such as the Proud Boys. It is a rage against the fact that other people might be equal under the law, that women and people of color might also govern as power begins to be distributed more equally, the same rage that attempted to delegitimize a black president with birtherism and obstruction. It is a rage against equality. Democracy is a set of agreements to make decisions together and respect the outcome whether you like them or not. The kind of violence we saw on Capitol Hill is authoritarian, a way to try to force other people to submit to the will of the perpetrators. This violence comes from the white men who were long the only people with power in this country imagining themselves as marginalized and oppressed outsiders because others might also have power and a voice. We saw these kind of men last summer, when they invaded the Michigan capital while carrying semiautomatic rifles and saw them again when a handful of them were arrested for a plot to kidnap Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer. We saw them in racist shootings from the Texas border to a Pennsylvania synagogue. This coup attempt was built by the more and more uninhibited ideology of violence we have seen again and again, in the mass shootings that became a norm in 21st-century America, the fetishization of guns and gun rights that made the killing machines and the death they inflict far more common, so that death by gun recently overtook death by car as a leading American way to die. As I write, I hear a Republican leader on TV say “Remember we are the party of law and order,” and, of course, the riot going on in the Capitol is technically lawless, but “law and order” as a rightwing slogan means that they are the law and they impose their version of order. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I change them at will and punish those who don’t obey, or, if I feel like it, those who do because I can. Political scientist Frank Wilhoit once said: “Conservatism consists of exactly one proposition … There must be in-groups whom the law protects but does not bind, alongside out-groups whom the law binds but does not protect.” They are demonstrating that nothing binds them and that they expect to have whatever they want. Entitlement is too demure a word for this. Authoritarianism is always an ideology of inequality: I make the rules, you follow them, I punish those who don’t obey What is at stake in America today is the outcome of an election. But it’s also the rule of law and the rights of voters. And in the end it’s also about the authority of facts and evidence and history and science, that no one has the right to override those things for personal gain. Trump’s position all along has been that he in particular has that right. Today it came to a head and became a crisis as a mob sabotaged a constitutionally mandated procedure for the peaceful transition of power. This was always going to happen because Trump’s power was always going to be finite in reach and duration under the law, and because he wants that power to be infinite, he was always at war with the law, and he always had a volunteer army willing to help him take it. Today they acted like an army, a hostile occupying force in the nation’s capital. This is what he wanted and this is what he orchestrated and this is what we got. Trump was the most prolific public liar America has ever seen, and his lies were an essential part of his authoritarianism, a refusal to be bound by facts, even the facts of what he said or did the day before. He demanded a parallel narrative in which he won the election and laid the groundwork long before to claim, if he lost, that it was illegitimate, as he did in 2016. In a recorded video on Wednesday, Trump said to the crowd “We love you” as he told them to go home but also reasserted that the election was stolen, which is why they’re there in the first place. Ivanka Trump apparently deleted a tweet in which she called them “American patriots”. The Trumps and their loyalists in office will disavow the worst of what happened and pretend to be surprised by it and continue feeding it. Conversation about what’s been happening over the past several months has often bought into the false binary that either we have a successful coup, in which they steal the election, or we have a failed coup, but there is something insidious in-between: the delegitimization of the democratic process and the incoming administration. In this in-between state, Trump supporters continue to regard their leader and themselves as above the law and entitled to enforce it however they see fit, on the basis of whatever facts they most enjoy having. They are building a separate reality and appear to wish for a shadow government to beleaguer and undermine the legitimate one. Today, we’ve seen it in action. Rebecca Solnit is a Guardian US columnist
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
UK report reveals 'disgraceful' gender inequality in the arts:	Gender  inequality across the theatre industry is of rising concern and likely to grow in the aftermath of the Covid-19 pandemic if it is not urgently addressed, warns a report published on Wednesday. The Women in Theatre Forum Report collates research from multiple organisations to reveal sustained levels of inequality for women. It warns that underrepresentation needs to “be taken seriously” and urges the government’s  Cultural Renewal Taskforce  and  Arts Council England (ACE)  to rethink their strategies on tackling gender disparity. The report flags up the underrepresentation of women on the Cultural Renewal Taskforce, which is responsible for supporting the culture sector in the pandemic. “Zero leadership positions are occupied by women, with only three women on the taskforce as a whole,” it states. To address this imbalance, seven prominent figures including actor  Maureen Beattie, president of Equity ; the artistic directors  Sue Parrish  and  Brigid Larmour ; and  Julia Pascal , the first woman to direct a play at the National Theatre, wrote to the culture secretary, Oliver Dowden, last June but say they received no reply. Two months later, they approached  Neil Mendoza, the government’s Commissioner for Cultural Recovery and Renewal , through a third party, to discuss their findings about gender inequalities in the arts. Mendoza, who had engaged with previous reports from the group, responded by saying he did not have time. The report is a wide-ranging collaboration between  Sphinx Theatre ,  University Women in the Arts  and December Group in partnership with trade unions  Equity  and  Writers’ Guild of Great Britain , alongside  Black Womxn in Theatre ,  Stage Directors UK ,  Era 50:50  and  Parents and Carers in Performing Arts  (Pipa). Parrish, the artistic director of Sphinx, called the taskforce’s gender imbalance “disgraceful”. “They could be seizing the opportunity for new pathways to be set and to represent all of culture and society,” she said, “but they have failed. It’s astonishing a government taskforce could be so behind the curve and we will certainly be pursuing them.” A DCMS spokesperson said: “We are completely committed to ensuring a diverse and inclusive cultural sector and have been speaking with women from a broad range of cultural organisations throughout the pandemic to help understand the impact on the industry.” The report’s findings range from the unfair burden of care falling on female performers – eight out of 10 women are forced to turn down work due to parenting or caring responsibilities – to the lack of female leadership in theatre and imbalances in film, where 16% of working film-makers are female, and 14% of prime-time TV is written by women. In some instances, research shows that little had improved for women in the creative arts over the past decade. Equity found that 72% of female performers felt pressured to “look a particular way” in order to get work in comparison with 28% of male performers, while Stage Directors UK reported cases of inappropriate physical intimacy and the intimidation of female members of a company as well as bullying of female directors and “ghosting” of women returning to work from raising children. There were complaints from trans women of being undermined in the rehearsal room, about female directors being paid less for the same work than men, university students being sent on placements with known predatory males and told not to wear anything too revealing by their lecturers, and female directors needing counselling after abuse in work situations. “I started at Equity in 1971 and I’m fighting the same battles now as I faced then,” said Beattie. “It is endemic that women are under more scrutiny and are seen as not quite as good. It’s the same sexism. It has improved but it hasn’t gone away.” She felt that the report brought together powerful evidence that action had to be taken. “If people ignore this now then I don’t know what we are going to do next. We are subjected to lots of nodding and smiling but it leads to nothing. We need action.” Parrish said that while there had been some improvements over the years, particularly in the representation of female playwrights, their work was often confined to studio spaces rather than given the main stage. She also cited the lack of female artistic directors at the helm of the nation’s biggest venues. “These people are the gatekeepers who choose the programmes that define culture.” The report’s author, Jennifer Tuckett, who conducted research for Sphinx  Theatre  and University Women in the Arts at Cambridge University, also highlighted the omission of women as an underrepresented group in the Arts Council’s 10-year strategy, published in 2020, which pledged to meet the needs of those from lower socio-economic backgrounds, D/deaf or disabled people, and black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) communities. “Our research has found zero references to women and gender inequality in the body of the Arts Council’s next 10-year strategy,” writes Tuckett, adding that there are only fleeting mentions of women at the beginning and end of the plan. “This suggests gender inequality is not being considered equally alongside other areas of underrepresentation.” Parrish said that in a meeting with ACE last year, she got the impression that the arts body felt that “the woman problem had been done”, while Beattie added: “We have issued a public challenge to ACE. We are putting them and the industry on notice.” But Nicholas Serota, ACE’s chair, said the strategy  did  take sex into account and added that its “delivery plan”, launching this March, would acknowledge it explicitly. “Judge us on what we say in our delivery plan which sets out our targets for the next 12 months … I am absolutely certain we want to make a reference to women, for the avoidance of any doubt,” he said. He welcomed the report and said its findings on the pressures of childcare, the effects of career breaks and the lack of parity in leadership and on boards drew attention to continuing gender inequalities. “I think the work they have done helps to draw attention to these issues.” While gains had been made for women in the arts, he added, “there is absolutely no complacency about that progress and we need to go further.” The report states that women have been hit particularly hard by the pandemic, contending with greater childcare responsibilities and caring roles than their male counterparts.  April De Angelis , a playwright whose recent adaptation, My Brilliant Friend, was staged at the National Theatre, said “What’s clear [from the report] is that women are not seen as ‘safe box office’ and it makes me think: are they going to be more excluded after the pandemic? “I keep hearing how things have improved for women in theatre, and that it’s not a problem but the reality is that only 35% of new playwrights are women and 20% of adaptations are given to women. We get lulled into thinking that it’s much better, but this report reminds us that we should not be satisfied with these [unequal] figures. It’s ridiculous.” The full report is available from  Sphinx Theatre  and  University Women in the Arts .
Netflix's staggering slate of new films escalates the streaming wars:	I n the latest skirmish of the streaming wars,  Netflix  has come out fighting. In a star-studded promotional video, the studio announced a staggering slate of original releases in 2021, with a promise to release a new film every week this year. The studio’s level of productivity blows its competitors clean out of the water. In pre-Covid times, Warner Bros released 21 films in 2019, with Disney posting 19. True, the streamer doesn’t always have to contend with the additional costs associated with a theatrical release – or indeed the headache of cinemas not being open at all – but beneath the beaming smiles of its actors was a clear statement of intent. The past year has highlighted the fragility of a cinematic ecosystem which relies on blockbusters regularly making more than $400m to strike a profit and keep cinemas afloat. Netflix can’t yet claim to be the saviour of the cinematic experience, but it is undeniably giving the industry a major shot in the arm – and something approaching stability in profoundly unstable times – through a commitment to producing original content of all sizes. This year’s slate has its fair share of tent-pole releases. We will see the big-budget Red Notice, featuring Dwayne Johnson, Ryan Reynolds and Gal Gadot, released alongside the Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence-fuelled Don’t Look Up. But these are joined by films that lean much more into the company’s desire to increase the size of its awards cabinet. An adaptation of Booker prize winner  The White Tiger  stands out, while there is also the lockdown-inspired Malcolm and Marie. As ever with Netflix, the note of caution is whether this generous model is as inherently fragile as the distribution pattern it is disrupting. A house of glass to rival the House of Mouse. Clearly, it depends on huge growth, but up to now, the studio has consistently provided it. In the third quarter of 2020, the studio recorded $6.44bn in revenue, with the number of worldwide subscribers growing rapidly, yet this is all offset by a content bill which has been reported to be as high as $17.3bn in 2020. Combine this with the difficulty in ascertaining what each new release is worth in terms of attracting new subscribers and engaging others, and it may mean that  Hollywood accounting  has a new meaning. Netflix is evidently throwing a huge amount of money at original content creation, much like its rivals at Disney. Yet the streaming giant’s move in many ways runs counter to that of its competitor, which used  its recent Investor Day  to expand existing properties. Yes,  Disney+ ’s slate for 2021 is full of new series and films, but they often exist within established cinematic universes. From The Book of Boba Fett and Star Wars through to Wandavision and Marvel, the studio is using its platform to appeal to a loyal and devoted fanbase. This is unsurprising given the two streamers are coming from opposite starting points. Disney was a film-making colossus long before it switched to streaming, while Netflix traditionally hinged on a competitive curation of others’ productions. As the two slide closer together, it makes logical sense that they are cleaving to their traditional strengths, with Netflix enlisting outside creatives and Disney bolstering existing IP (not to mention making the most of its big-money purchases). That said, the concluding chapters of  To All the Boys …  and  The Kissing Booth  nod towards Netflix’s increasing ability to string together film franchises, with sequels also mooted for the bigger-budget properties Extraction and The Old Guard. While the paths ahead for both Disney and Netflix are taking shape, the direction of competitors such as Warner Bros’ HBO Max is still buffering. The studio’s decision to move its 2021 slate on to their own streaming platform – alongside limited theatre runs – caused ire among creatives including Christopher Nolan and Patty Jenkins. Wracked by the fear of another year of closed cinemas, the kneejerk reaction has seemingly also jeopardised the future of  Denis Villeneuve’s Dune   as a franchise. Away from this turmoil, those who collaborate with Netflix know exactly what to expect, even if it isn’t the fanfare of a theatrical run. There will no doubt be concern that Netflix’s crowded slate will only reinforce TV and film’s saturated landscape. Gasping for publicity, films such as Mank, The Trial of the Chicago Seven and Da Five Bloods came and went on the platform. What’s more, Netflix’s increasing willingness to release some titles for short theatrical runs won’t be enough to single-handedly save cinema chains. But after a desperate year, their gargantuan support for the sector shouldn’t be undervalued.
Negative Covid test required to enter England from Friday:	International travellers will need to present a negative Covid-19 test to enter England from 4am on Friday. The government confirmed the start date on Tuesday morning after  announcing the plans last week . Passengers will be required to take a test in the 72 hours before departure by plane, train or ferry, and provide evidence of a negative result or be refused permission to board. The move comes  in response to the worsening incidence  of transmission around the world and particularly the emergence of new coronavirus variants, ministers said. Arrivals will still need to isolate for 10 days in the UK, or opt into the test-to-release programme, which potentially allows people to leave quarantine from the fifth day with a fresh negative test. The transport minister Robert Courts said: “Both globally and domestically we are seeing significant increases in levels of coronavirus, including the emergence of worrying new strains. “It is therefore imperative that we ensure we are doing all we can to protect travel, reduce the risk of imported infections, including from new variants, and protect our NHS while national lockdown and vaccinations take effect.” The test standards are yet to be set out but will be mainly PCR tests and limited lateral flow tests. Courts said the UK government website would provide information on the kind of tests and documentation needed. The rules will also apply to British nationals, who would need to stay abroad and follow local rules on self-isolation if testing positive. The onus will be on airlines or other transport operators to check for a negative test and deny boarding without documentation, or face being fined. Passengers found at the border to be non-compliant will also be fined at least £500. Children under the age of 11 will be exempt, as will hauliers and transport operators’ crew. The measures are likely to be in place until the end of the lockdown, but will be reviewed before that, Courts said. Pre-departure testing will apply to Scotland and Wales equally but the start date has not been confirmed by the devolved governments. Airlines said they accepted the necessity for pre-departure testing but urged ministers to ensure it was lifted as soon as possible. Tim Alderslade, the chief executive of industry body Airlines UK, said: “This is a national health emergency and ministers need to act to keep the country safe. It is true that much of the sector has been lobbying for pre-departure testing – but this was always predicated on the government removing or reducing the quarantine period at the same time. Now we have both.” He said the policy must be a “time-limited, emergency measure only”, adding: “We cannot afford for this to be baked in over the whole summer.”
Save, impulse buy, repeat: are our lockdown money habits here to stay?:	As the clamour for post-Christmas bargains showed us, the UK is a nation of spontaneous spendthrifts who can’t help succumbing to  wanton acts of buying . Want an inflatable rhino half the size of your living room? Sure. A Tom Jones-themed jigsaw? Naturally. A handcrafted Negroni “exploration kit”? Add it to the cart! Although spur-of-the-moment sprees aren’t unusual for the Christmas shopping period, the impulse buy has also been one of the defining financial behaviours of 2020. Ever since the UK entered its first national lockdown in March last year,  pandemic puppies , entertainment subscriptions and  even goldfish  have entered our lives as people seek reassuring pick-me-ups amid the hardships of the pandemic. And we’ve gone on a  chocolate binge  apparently, spending millions more than usual. According to Aviva, 36% of us have become  bigger spenders  during lockdown. Source: Aviva “Spending on trivial expenditures such as buying coffee, snacks or even quirkier items definitely adds up,” says Alistair McQueen, head of savings and retirement at Aviva. “Of course, it’s important to have fun and buy a coffee if you want one. But it’s worth spending with your eyes open, and realising it could make a massive difference to your long-term future if you cut back and saved the money instead.” If we’re spending more impulsively, it’s because we also have more disposable income to play with. The things we’d usually splurge on BC (before Covid) – think mini-breaks to Bratislava, £9-a-day lunches or pound-hoovering commutes – have been unavailable because everything’s been shut or cancelled. As such, nearly two-thirds of us (64%)  have squirreled away  a larger nest-egg than normal, with Aviva finding that the typical UK household spent  29% less in lockdown  than we did before the pandemic (an average saving of £171 a week). Source: The Kennel Club It’s a phenomenon that McQueen calls “enforced savings”, noting that “the shops, pubs and travel that previously made up disposable expenditure have been shut, forcing people into a saving situation”. It isn’t just our new cooped-up lifestyles that are prompting us to curb our spending; people are also saving to help buffer their finances against any future recessions or other shocks. “We’re surrounded by headlines of economic hard times ahead, which has resulted in precautionary saving and people instinctively battening down hatches,” says McQueen. “They’re adopting a prudent nature as the world faces uncertainty.” A little prudence now can make a big difference to our future financial health. In 2015, Aviva calculated that the average individual  spent £948 a year  on “invisible” buys, such as coffees, lunches and treats. If a 20-year-old started investing this amount annually today in, say, a pension pot, that could generate something like £159,000 for their retirement. Source: Kantar Some might argue that impulse buys are an act of comfort-buying: an emotional fix to help soften the gloom and anxiety many of us are experiencing right now. They also deliver dopamine – the brain’s feelgood chemical. This is what makes us constantly refresh our Instagram feeds or feel the urge to “add-to-basket” on online retail sites. “The act of going to our phones and impulse buying are similar: they’re short-term, immediate hits,” says McQueen. “The internet is a powerful means of impulsive shopping. It’s right in front of us, so you suddenly find yourself buying something you never knew existed five minutes earlier.” For all the instant thrill they provide, our off-the-cuff buys don’t necessarily bring happiness: over the summer, Barclaycard Payments research found people had been buying items as  random as a cardboard cutout of Mr Bean , a piece of the moon, a horse-hair T-shirt and an inflatable pub. Unfortunately, not everybody has managed to save during this period. Furloughing, redundancies, a loss in income or salary, plus an increase in household expenses due to more family members staying at home ( 16% say  their adult children have become more financially dependent on them as a result of coronavirus) have all contributed to mental health issues. Recent Aviva research has found that almost one-third of 45-54-year-olds said they are concerned that the financial strain of the pandemic is negatively impacting their  mental health , while 38% are having trouble sleeping because of financial woes. The growth in online shopping may have exacerbated this: the  Money and Mental Health Policy Institute  recently found that shopping online is pushing some with mental health problems into debt because of the personalisation, algorithmic nudges and “buy now, pay later” options of e-commerce sites. “It’s easy to slip into a situation that’s out of control and have debt build up,” says McQueen. “The first step is to recognise there’s a problem, before seeking some support. The good news is that today there’s more help than ever, with organisations such as  Money Advice Service  offering free advice on savings, budgeting and debt. “Also, don’t think that it’s only you who doesn’t understand financial issues. Try to take some comfort from the fact most people in the UK feel exactly the same.” Source: Barclaycard Although smartphones might be responsible for some of our more reckless spending, they could also help combat the UK’s notoriously poor financial literacy (our understanding of monetary tasks is among the lowest in the developing world, according to a  UCL/University of Cambridge study ). As it happens, Aviva has seen more people managing their pensions or investments online during lockdown; and households repaid £7.4bn of consumer credit during the first national lockdown, according to the  Bank of England . “One of the reasons we’ve got such low levels of financial literacy is that we haven’t encouraged people to take control of their money – in the past either employers or the state did it for you,” says McQueen. “Lockdown has accelerated people’s adoption of digital technology, and forced companies to up their game. It’s now much easier for people to do it themselves.” Source: Aviva “Our spending habits and incomes changed radically last year,” he adds. “But if you get a spare moment to sit down and revise your budgets, such as working out how much money is coming in and whether you are spending on compulsive purchases, you’ll be in a much better place to ride any waves that come up in 2021.” Find out how to harness your money superpower with tips, tricks, and information on managing money in today’s ever-changing world.  Read more here The views expressed in this article do not constitute financial advice. The value of investments may go down as well as up and you may not get back the amount you invested.
Modern life is rubbish! The people whose homes are portals to the past:	W ill future generations look at the interior design of the early 21st century in appreciation? Possibly not. We do not appear to have crafted many design classics, unless slab-like corner sofas in mud-grey velvet are Eames chairs in the making. Our feature walls are gaudy;  our furniture cheaply made . Scarcely anything seems to be built to last, which is just as well, as the next Instagram-led interior design trend will be along soon enough. But there are those who retreat from modern trends into the interiors of the past, drawn by the allure of original designs. We speak to five people whose homes are portals into the past. Whiteside has assiduously converted his suburban semi into a prewar home. Photographs: Richard Saker My mum says that I was always into the 30s, ever since she can remember. I’d go around to my aunt and uncle’s house and play old dance band records. At weekends, I’d rummage in Patrick’s Saleroom, a sort of junk shop that’s still around today. I’d go there every weekend from the age of seven or eight and buy all sorts of weird things: gramophones, gas mantles, electric toasters, Bakelite hairdryers. I have an obsession with 30s vacuums. They’re the best! They really get all the crap out of the carpet. I shut the door and I'm in 1936 The music, the fashion and the style were magical. Even the food was great – everything was homegrown back then. I would go back in time now if I could, although I’d take my family with me. It probably wouldn’t live up to my expectations unless I was rich and able to do fun things such as go to the Savoy theatre and go out dancing. I grew up over the road from the house I live in. It used to belong to an old lady. She was well over 100 when I was a child. She was a real character: a former schoolteacher, very strict. Us kids used to call it the witch’s house, because if a ball hit her window you’d see an eye poke out from behind her venetian blinds. She’d come outside with a carving knife and cut the ball open. But she was a lovely lady, really. It must have been annoying for her, all these kids knocking balls into her windows. After she died, the house lay unused for nine years, until I bought it. I found her old ration book and letters from her sweetheart, who died in the first world war, under the floorboards. The letters were quite upsetting to read, knowing how he died young. Most of my furniture comes from Patrick’s Saleroom, unless it’s something rare and hard to find, in which case I use eBay. Everything is vintage, apart from my Alexa – but that’s hidden in an old speaker. I have a laptop for work and watching Netflix. But that’s it. I restored a 1951 Bush television, so I can watch old movies on it. I know it’s not from the 30s, but TVs weren’t popular back then. There’s a lot I don’t like about modern life. I find society quite greedy. Everyone’s a bit more selfish. If I live by any 30s values in my life, I suppose it’s trying to have good manners: be polite, and nice to folk, and help them as much as you can. When I come home from work, I like to shut the door and pretend I’m back in 1936. Not to the extent it’s freaky, though. I do go to work and see my friends and have a normal life. But my house is my little time capsule. The 30s stay here; when I leave the house, I’m back in the real world. I forget I have a 30s house. If I don’t warn people before they come over for the first time, they walk in, stop speaking, then ask me if it’s my grandparents’ house. I had a postman come to the house once and ask me if my mum and dad were in. I get it. It looks like an old lady’s house. Kelty  at home in South Uist. Photographs courtesy of Julie Kelty Everything in my house is 40s-style – or if it isn’t, it’s hidden away. I have three children, so there’s no way in the world I could get away without having modern things such as a TV and a washing machine. But the washing machine is covered with a curtain and the toaster is in a cupboard under the worktop. I have a real 40s toaster on the counter: I daren’t turn it on, even though it does have a plug fitted. My kids are always complaining about the toaster. They go: “Mum, why is the toaster in the cupboard?” I say: “Because that’s the way I like it!” But they don’t mind, really, because they know it makes me happy. I love the simplicity of the era I’m most proud of my living room. It’s so relaxing. I love the rocking chair and the old clock on the mantelpiece. If you don’t look at the TV, you can imagine you are in a 40s lounge. I love to sit there and read old magazines from the 40s. Sometimes, they have people’s addresses on the label. I think about them: what were they like? What lives did they lead? I get all my furniture on the island.  There’s a brilliant place called ReStore  that restores old furniture that people have donated: almost everything in my house is from there. There are two charity shops on the island that are also really good – I can always pick up beautiful things there and they aren’t expensive. The charity shops on the mainland know about vintage now; they put up the price. I dress in 40s clothes, too. I love the style – it’s very feminine. The ladies always got dressed up to go out back then. They took care, you know? No leggings and long T-shirts! I always wear a skirt, no matter what I’m doing. You have to wear thick tights in winter, though. I love the simplicity of the era. It’s not over the top, like it is now. There’s too much  stuff  now. It’s all about what car you have, or what clothes you wear. Even modern cars are stressful. There’s so much that can go wrong with them. Back then, things were simple and modest. It felt like everyone was in it together. People were different – they did things for each other. I love that sense of neighbourliness and community. If I had the chance to go back to the 40s, I’d love to go. Not to stay there – I imagine it was pretty terrifying to live through the war. But maybe after the war, when it was all over, to visit a world without cars and people everywhere. That’s one of the reasons my husband and I moved to Uist – to get away from technology and crowds and to live a simpler life. There are plenty of places on the island where you can look around and it’s exactly as it would have been in the 40s. Although, sadly, technology has followed us to the island – we got 4G last year. I’m constantly looking at my phone now. Adverts pop up and I think: “Ooh, I’d love to buy that.” I wish I wasn’t looking at my phone all the time. Preston at home in Bolton. Photographs courtesy of Emma Preston I’d say my style is mid-century American ranch style, with a tiki influence. I’ve always loved vintage style, ever since I was a teenager. In the 80s, I was into the mod scene. I remember walking into a friend’s house when I was about 19 and everything was styled like the 50s: there was a cocktail bar and 50s magazines. I thought it was so stylish. After that, I never looked back: I’ve decorated all of my houses in a vintage way. I feel wowed by it – every day When I started collecting in the 80s, you could pick up stuff in charity shops and flea markets for next to nothing. I still have a 50s pale-green and pink bedroom suite I got at a Manchester flea market in the early 90s. Nowadays, I get most of my things through specialist dealers, although you can also get good pieces from eBay and Etsy if you look hard enough. I’d love some Heywood-Wakefield or Paul Frankl rattan furniture and I’m desperate for an Alfred Meakin cactus teapot – I have almost the full set, but I’m missing the teapot. I have two cocktail bars. They are pretty special. One is a mid-century bar with a glitter vinyl front. My tiki bamboo bar I got from a friend who was selling it. I’ve owned several bamboo bars over the years. At one point, I had about four bars in my house at the same time. I had to get rid of them, though – you can’t keep them all. I do have modern bits in the house. My kitchen isn’t original. It’s styled on a Youngstown kitchen from the US; it would be difficult and expensive to ship one over, so I created the look using chevron cupboard pulls and aluminium trim on a modern kitchen. I had really positive comments on  my Instagram account  from people in the US, which was nice. The only thing in my house that I really hate is the TV, because it doesn’t fit with the decor. We have a modern TV – my husband, Nigel, insisted. It is nice to watch old movies on a decent screen, though. William Morris said that you should have nothing in your house that you don’t know to be useful or believe to be beautiful. Everything in my house is beautiful to me, apart from my telly – which is useful! I don’t wish I lived in the 50s. I love vintage style, not vintage values. When I’m reading magazines from that period, some of the adverts are so archaic. It’s all about buying the woman in your life a vacuum cleaner for Christmas. But I couldn’t live in modern surroundings, either. This trend for grey at the moment – I can’t bear it. Everything is grey. People are even painting the exterior of their houses grey! I need colour in my life. I’ve felt so fortunate to have this beautiful home during Covid. I get so much pleasure from every item in my home. It’s so lovely to sit at my bar and have a mai tai while I put some lounge music on. I feel so grateful to live here, look at everything and feel wowed by it – which I still do, every day. Grant  at his bar in Dunblane. Photographs: Nick Grant I didn’t have a fantastic childhood. My mum died when I was six, of a brain tumour. TV was my escape. Every Saturday evening, I lost myself in classic American shows like The Dukes of Hazzard, The A Team, Knight Rider. Those 80s shows often visually referenced the 60s and Americana. There’s definitely a bit of nostalgia there. I love that culture of hot rodding and classic cars My interest in the 60s started with cars. I’ve always driven classic cars. I have a ’57 Chevy – it’s black with a red roof. I love that culture of hot rodding and classic cars. It’s linked together, my love of cars and interiors. Living in Scotland, you need a bit of colour, especially at this time of the year. I looked at Chevrolet paint charts from the 60s. The dining room is painted in a turquoise colour that came from those charts. The dining chairs are Panton and the side tables are Bauhaus. I wouldn’t want to live in the 60s. I’ve always believed that things tend to get better, although the last few years have stretched that for me. I guess I’m a traditional person in that I like to work hard and live quietly. But, beyond that, I don’t really relate to 60s values. My wife and I, we’re equals. I like to combine modern conveniences with 60s styling. I’ve incorporated automation into the house, so all our lighting themes come on automatically at different times of the day. We have sound systems in every room. I love gadgets. But I make sure they’re all invisible. I don’t want them to change the look of the house, just make it easier to live in. I love things with a history. We put in double doors that I got from a salvage yard between the dining room and the kitchen. They were from a cruise liner built in 1959. They add layers of history to the house. When you touch them, it feels like there’s a story behind them. Being able to keep things going and give them a new life, instead of throwing them in landfill, feels right to me. Bilson  at home in Manchester. Photographs courtesy of Estelle Bilson My dad was an antiques dealer and cabinet maker, so I grew up with mahogany furniture – lots of Edwardian pieces and William Morris. I used to go to auctions with my dad from the age of three or four. I’ve always hunted for stuff – when I was a student, I’d go around picking furniture out of skips. I’m such a Womble! Back then, people would toss out G Plan – no one wanted it. I refuse to pay £300 for something I can find for £20 Everyone says to me: why the 70s? And I say: why not ?  It’s the colour, the shapes, the style. There’s some nostalgia there, too, because I’m just about old enough to remember the 70s. My grandparents kept all their 70s furniture well into the 80s. Back then, people bought quality and kept it for a long time, whereas now it feels as if everyone decorates their home at lightning speed to keep up with the latest Instagram trend. People treat their houses like fast fashion, whereas, 30 or 40 years ago, people had a style and stuck with it for 50 years. I have a Decca TV from the 70s that I found on Facebook Marketplace, three miles down the road. It’s ridiculous. The same model is on display in the Science Museum. It does turn on, but unfortunately the analogue signal was switched off in 2012, so I’m sending it to someone who specialises in making old appliances work on new systems. He’s going to make it compatible with Netflix and digital TV. I’m really tight. Everything is from Facebook Marketplace, car boot sales or eBay. I could go to specialist dealers, but I refuse to pay £300 for something I can find for £20 if I magpie about and keep looking. Sometimes, I’ll spend years looking for a specific piece. If I told you my search terms, I’d have to kill you. What I will say is that, if you want bargains, search broad. Type “coffee table” or “lamp”. It will take hours, but you’ll find gold for cheap. We have modern mattresses – I draw the line on that. And we have a modern TV. Oh, and a Dyson. Old vacuum cleaners are awful. My prized possession is a Marcel Breuer long chair. My dad had one when I was a kid, but he had to sell it in the 80s because he was short on money. Mine came up on eBay and the starting bid was £500. I had only £500 in my bank account, so I sat there shaking, waiting for the auction to run down. Then, with three seconds to go, I bid and won it. I felt sick. I cried and then called my dad. I wear 70s clothes, but not all the time. I’m a mum and I can’t swan around in a Jean Varon maxidress if there’s a four-year-old trying to smear yoghurt on me. Do I have vintage values? Absolutely not. I don’t sit about waiting for my partner to come home. I think a lot of things about the 70s were really bad. Thatcherism was shit, especially if you lived up north. If you watch Love Thy Neighbour, it’s so racist. If I had a time machine, I wouldn’t go back to the 70s. Actually – that’s a lie. I’d go back, stockpile a load of furniture and bring it back. But that’s about it. What I like the most about the 70s is the mindset. The roots of sustainable living started in the 70s. The quality of build and design is that much better. Nothing looks like it will fall apart in the next 10 minutes. There’s years of use left in this furniture. I’m so glad to be able to save it from landfill. •  This article’s main image was changed on 12 January 2021 for editorial reasons.
I hear people say that people who receive Centrelink are lazy. Hello, I want to work!:	Name:  Madeleine Rose Age:  22 Dreams of:  Being a teacher After a festive, blissful few weeks celebrating Christmas and New Years, I am able to finally relax and reflect. I was able to spend so much time with my family, who I barely got to see last year. I’m just so thankful that Victoria managed to get our second wave under control and that I was able to have some time completely unafraid to catch Covid. Though with that being said, tribulations are still very much present in my life. I’m still without a job, despite applying for what seems like hundreds of roles. That is an exaggeration; I must admit the real number is about 70. I need a job which can work with my schooling. This means I have applied for a lot of retail and hospitality jobs, but nowhere is hiring. Even the cafe I used to work at isn’t hiring because they don’t have the demand. Applying for these casual jobs is not an easy process anymore. Each job application requires a cover letter, then they either have questionnaires or a 20-minute long test. Plus it’s incredibly hard to find organisations or employers willing to hire someone without two years’ experience in that field. I only have a few months of being a barista on my resume – but how am I meant to get experience? Am I supposed to volunteer for two years without getting money to live? I don’t know what to do. I don’t have anyone to “help” give me a foot in the door, or whatever the saying is. I have not received one email back, not one text or call stating if I have been rejected or been accepted to go for an interview. I feel like I’m constantly getting discouraged and whatever I do, I’m failing. It is so tempting just to quit trying to get a job. It would also be a lot less stressful. However I think of what the alternative, of not having a job, would mean and that thought is terrifying. I hear people say constantly that people who receive Centrelink are lazy and want to bludge off the system and don’t want to work. Hello, I want to work! I want to get a job and contribute to society again, but what am I meant to do if nowhere will hire me? Pre-Covid, I had a job and was studying at uni. Though it was tough and oftentimes exhausting, it felt great to know that I was being proactive. But now, I have nothing. Uni doesn’t start for another two months. How else am I able to chase my dreams? During all this I have noticed something truly bizarre. My eyesight is extremely poor and I can barely see how I used it to. I think this is one of the side effects of lockdown no one predicted. I mean, staring at a TV screen, iPad screen and phone screen for nine months straight has made my eyesight so poor that I definitely need glasses. Which is another expense I cannot afford at the minute. I haven’t seen an optometrist to get tested, partly due to being afraid to see the damage done to my eyes, and also stupidly, I’m worried about the expensive bill that I will get from it. So now I have to deal with my constant headaches and watch as things become more blurred in the background. I have also rapidly put on weight during lockdown. It is my own fault really. You would think that being at home 24/7 for nine months would give one time to work on their health, but that has not been the case for me. Not at all. I have ordered so much takeaway combined with not doing any exercise at all. This has definitely made me feel more incapable of doing the things that I used to before, like I’m struggling to walk to the bus stop or enjoying playing in the sand at the beach. Now more than ever before, I have to start prioritising my health, even if it inconveniences me. So now my new year resolution for 2021 is to get a job and be healthier. Hopefully 2021 is the year I can stick to my goals.
Alert issued after travellers who quarantined at hotel returned home:	With that, we’ll be closing the blog for today. Here is everything that happened: Google  has admitted to a trial removing some Australian news results from searches, in a move interpreted by the media industry as a show of force in bargaining with the Australian government. The Australian government is  attempting to impose a new code on internet giants including Google and Facebook  that would force them to negotiate a fair payment with news organisations for using their content. The move, a world first, has been strenuously resisted  in messages to the search engine’s users  and a  warning from Facebook it will block Australians from sharing news  if the plan proceeds. On Wednesday  the Australian Financial Review first reported  that Google had tweaked its search and news algorithm to bury links from commercial Australian media outlets for some users. Anecdotal evidence from readers of Guardian Australia appears to confirm the trial. A Google spokesperson said: Every year we conduct tens of thousands of experiments in Google Search. We’re currently running a few experiments that will each reach about 1% of Google Search users in Australia to measure the impacts of news businesses and Google Search on each other. In 2018, the value we provided to publishers through referral traffic alone was estimated at $218 million dollars. These experiments will conclude by early February. As we said  last week , we remain committed to getting to a workable Code and look forward to working with the Senate Committee, policymakers, and publishers to achieve an outcome that’s fair for everyone, in the interests of all Australians.”  New South Wales  health authorities have issued an alert for anyone who has been at  Brisbane’s  Hotel Grand Chancellor t o immediately get test and isolate for 14 days. The alert comes was issued because the  Queensland  government notified NSW Health “there were NSW people staying at the hotel who have since returned to NSW”. A NSW  Health  statement said: NSW Health is tonight calling on anyone who has been at the Hotel Grand Chancellor in Brisbane since 30 December, either as a returned traveler or as a staff member, to immediately get tested and isolate for 14 days after they were last at the hotel regardless of their test result. Six cases of the Covid-19 variant of concern have now been linked to the hotel. This variant is known to spread more easily from person to person than other strains of the Covid-19 virus. The hotel is believed to have been used for returned travellers only. NSW Health is working with Queensland Health to identify these people so our contact tracers can provide public health advice and updated information as it becomes available.” South Australia  recorded no new locally-acquired Covid-19 cases in the most recent reporting day. However two returned international travellers tested positive to Covid-19 while in hotel quarantine.  Western Australia  also recorded no new locally-acquired cases in the same period. The state recorded one new case in a returned overseas traveller who tested positive while in hotel quarantine.  The  Australasian Society for Infectious Diseases  (ASID), the  Australasian College for Infection Prevention and Control  (ACIPC), and the  Public  Health  Association of Australia  (PHAA) have criticised the concerns raised about Australia’s reliance on the AstraZeneca vaccine in its vaccination strategy. The organisations said concerns about the ability of any vaccines to create herd immunity were not justified at this stage of the process. ASID immediate past president  Prof Josh Davis , ACIPC president  Assoc Prof Philip Russo , and PHAA president  Prof Tarun Weeramanthri  released a statement that said “the current debate over the efficacy of the AstraZeneca vaccine could undermine public trust in the country’s vaccination plan”. Supplies of Covid-19 vaccines are limited due to the worldwide demand and the logistics of vaccinating the entire adult population is huge, therefore priority populations will be vaccinated first.  It is important to get as many people vaccinated as possible in the shortest possible time and it would not be appropriate to withhold the AstraZeneca vaccine while waiting for supplies of a more efficacious one. The government has access to expert advice and the final strategy is likely to involve the use of multiple vaccines, which will be the approach most countries will take.  The public should have confidence in the approach the government is taking to providing Covid-19 vaccines in Australia.” The challenge is to make sure that the community knows where to get good health information and knows how to recognise crackpot ideas and separate them from good health advice from reputable sources.  https://t.co/3BMEKYaJxE   @amapresident Labor has told the Guardian it will seek “commonsense” changes to the migration act to end a requirement that some visa applicants leave Australia temporarily before they can receive final approval.  Currently, the migration act requires that applicants for some permanent visa categories be outside Australia when their case is decided. For those who are already in the country, this forces them to fly abroad for a short period, obtain the final visa approval, and then return. That is causing understandable concern during the middle of a pandemic and the existing strain on quarantine places. Late last year, the then immigration minister, Alan Tudge, bowed to pressure and announced he would absolve those applying for partner visas from having to be offshore to have them granted. But other visa types – such as parental visas, for example – will not have such a concession.  The numbers of people placed in this situation are small. But Labor says it is “madness” to continue to require applicants go offshore to receive their visas.  Labor MP  Julian Hill  plans to move a private member’s bill granting the minister the temporary power to issue any visa onshore during the pandemic. “Forcing people to fly overseas and back again just so their visa can be granted is madness in the middle of a global pandemic,” Hill said. South Australia is lifting its hard border closure to regional  New South Wales . The change will come into effect from 12:01am on Thursday.  The announcement was made on Wednesday afternoon, as South Australia recorded no new locally-acquired cases in the previous reporting day.  The operator of Sydney’s  Luna Park  has been fined $5,000 after a police investigation found a New Year’s Eve event breached legal gathering limits.  Officers launched an investigation into the New Year’s Eve party “after receiving mobile phone footage of a large crowd gathered at the Milsons Point venue”. A  New South Wales  police statement said that “following inquiries with the venue and a review of further footage, the company secretary of the amusement park was issued a $5,000” penalty infringement notice for failing to comply with the public health order. NSW police are urging the community to contact Crime Stoppers to report suspected breaches of the gathering limits and public health orders related to coronavirus.  The chief medical officer,  Paul Kelly , has rejected unfounded claims about Covid-19 treatments made by Liberal MP  Craig Kelly . Asked about Kelly’s interest in anti-parasitic drug  ivermectin , the CMO said it is useful for treating river blindness but there “is no evidence at the moment that it has any benefit or use in the prevention or treatment of Covid-19”. Asked if he is frustrated by other claims (including likening masks to child abuse), the CMO said: First, [Craig Kelly is] no relation I can absolutely guarantee that. He needs to decide what is the appropriate thing for a member of parliament to comment on.  I won’t talk further about it – it gives prominence to views that I just don’t agree with and are not scientifically based.” Chief medical officer  Paul Kelly  has said he can’t explain why Australia hasn’t been able to secure more  Pfizer  vaccines while other countries have been ordering extra doses.  Kelly said: I don’t have an answer to that.  We’re in virtually constant discussion with Pfizer. If there were more doses available to us then we would look into whether that was a feasible option for us to get more. So far that’s not the case.” The press conference has ended. 
Growing up, I heard about Australia's fictitious fair go. Now I know it's not the case:	Name : Tristan Williams Age:  24 Dreams of:  Being a social media account manager For me, 2021 is a year of starting again. Starting from the ground and building myself up. Towards the end of last year, I saw the ugly side of life. I saw society’s overindulgence, I learned the importance of keeping the important people close, and I started, like most people do at the closing of a year, asking myself the important rhetorical question of “Who am I?” In my last diary,  I relayed an experience I was having  where Centrelink cut my income completely in the lead-up to Christmas. I am excited to say this is a problem that no longer plagues me. On December 24, I had my payment reinstated. I was ecstatic. Actually, ecstatic is too small a word for what I was feeling. After being roughly three weeks without any source of income, this news was the best Christmas gift of all. I was thankful to be an Australian – and then it hit me. I had been very hard done by. I was wrongly cut from my payments, with no concession, no backup, no notice, and with zero reason that I can think of. Yes, I was happy at the prospect of getting my money back, but I was not thankful. I was angry. Should I be thankful? Is my anger justified? Many people in my immediate life who read my second diary said that Centrelink benefits are a privilege, not a right, and that got me thinking. And then I was even more angry. These people made it sound like it was somehow my fault for leaving myself so financially vulnerable, even though I lost work this year because of Covid. Some people made me feel guilty, and quite wrongly so, for actually needing the help of our government to survive the day-to-day.  Those who have never graced the halls of a Centrelink service centre cast aspersions in the direction of anyone seeking the government dollar to simply make ends meet. Even during the life and times of Rona, you heard of people feeling ashamed, distraught, “lower-class”, for needing the support of the government when they were made redundant or couldn’t find the hours to make ends meet. This mentality needs to change now if we as a nation are going to push through and survive. This mentality rubs off. When I first accessed Centrelink I thought “I can’t support myself”, “I can’t do what I need to do”, “I am a burden on society.” Many times I was made to feel like a lower-class citizen for my lack of contribution. But now, I’m content to say: to hell with that. Any functioning government which cares about its citizenship should offer a standardised safety net of support without judgment, without stigmatisation and without condemnation. The constant victimisation of the vulnerable members of our society has led Australia into a class system where a massive wealth divide is quite clear. It’s a scary notion and it’s happening all around us. Growing up, you hear all about this fictitious “fair go” and the social wealth hierarchy. That anyone, with enough hard work, can attain their comfortable life. However, I know first hand this is very much not the case. Social mobility is a term romanticised by the wealthy and the government to force the less fortunate and working class into the endless cycle of overworking to just make ends meet and essentially make someone else richer. I believed in this notion growing up. That my good grades, hard work and exceptional achievements would somehow lead me to a comfortable life. This is all fake. The rich are getting exemptions and concessions while the poor are being vilified and overworked. This needs to change now. Now this diary, yes. It has taken a bit more of a political tone than the last. There is a reason for this. Over the last few days, I have had a few great moments of personal reflection as to what the coming year means for me. Over my life I have been fortunate to wear many hats, undertake many roles and experience many opportunities. But with that, I haven’t learned who I am underneath all of that. When I strip away the layers, who is the real Tristan underneath? And that is what this year is going to be about for me. Political advocacy is something I have done before and will do again. Social justice is a great passion of mine, being an openly proud gay man. I am unapologetically me. I think the whole Centrelink debacle not only got my blood boiling, but in some ways, it reactivated a political energy that I have always felt there. Something that comes out every now and then in debates of passion, but never towards something as personal as standardised wealth and conditions of living. I am starting this year rebuilding who I am. Graduating from my masters. Creating a research manifesto. Becoming financially stable through the establishment of a more thorough freelancing venture. And hopefully, proving to all of the doubters that I can do it; nay, that young people can do it. There are times when society likes to count us young folk out, but I believe that 2021 is our year. The year where we can start to really see the world and life for what it is; a story in which we didn’t even know we were the authors – until now.
Iran bans importation of Covid vaccines from the US and UK:	Vaccines produced by the US and UK will be banned from entering  Iran , its supreme leader has said, even though his country has suffered the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East. “Imports of US and British vaccines into the country are forbidden ... They’re completely untrustworthy,” Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said in a live televised speech. “It’s not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations. “Given our experience with France’s HIV-tainted blood supplies, French vaccines aren’t trustworthy either,” he added, referring to France’s contaminated blood scandal of the 1980s and 1990s. Khamenei’s comments reflected the tense relations between Iran and the west, which have not abated in the waning days of Donald Trump’s presidency. In his speech, Khamenei mocked American democracy and human rights in the wake of  the riot at Capitol Hill in Washington , and said Iran was in no hurry to negotiate with the incoming Biden administration. But he said if the US lifted sanctions, Iran would respond. He said the issue of compensation for sanctions could be pursued at a later date. His remarks came as Iran prepared to discuss a plan to purchase medical supplies by unlocking as much as $1bn (£735m) of $7bn in frozen assets held in two South Korean banks. The plan will be discussed when the South Korean vice-foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, travels to Tehran in an effort to secure the release of a   South Korean vessel  seized by the Iranian navy earlier this week . Some of the South Korean delegation reached Tehran on Friday. Iran’s central bank governor said Iranian oil revenues had fallen to $20bn, a drop of more than half, as a result of US sanctions. The Iranian foreign ministry claimed the diplomat’s visit was totally focused on the unlocking of Iranian assets, insisting it had been arranged before the ship seizure, although the official Iranian press has been reporting the US block on Iranian assets in Korea ever since the ship was stopped for allegedly polluting the marine environment. Tehran has been in lengthy negotiations with  South Korea  on how to access the assets held in South Korean banks without falling foul of US extraterritorial sanctions, something that is likely to happen if dollar transactions are involved. In the past Iran has exported oil and natural gas to South Korea using settlement accounts based on Korean currency. Owing to the imposition of US sanctions, Tehran has been unable to access its money, even though it insists the money could be transferred in South Korea currency and used exclusively for the purchase of sanction-exempt food and medicines. Seoul claims it has not received the necessary US Treasury assurances that the payments would not lead to fines. More recently, Iran has suggested the money would be used to buy vaccines using the UN-approved  Covax facility . Any payment via a dollar transaction might give the US Treasury leverage to fine the banks involved, and Seoul has said there is no safe way to transfer the money. In relation to the coronavirus, Iranian officials have previously said that importing the Pfizer vaccine, which must be shipped and stored at -70C (-94F), poses major logistical challenges for Iran. The country has struggled to stem the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East, which has infected nearly 1.3 million people and killed nearly 56,000. Iran launched human trials of its first domestic Covid vaccine candidate late last month.
Indian court suspends new agriculture laws after mass protests:	India’s supreme court has suspended a series of controversial new agriculture laws that had prompted hundreds of thousands of farmers to stage a months-long protest in Delhi over fears their livelihoods were at stake. Since November,  upwards of half a million farmers had marched to the peripheries of Delhi  and occupied roads and highways going into the capital, setting up a 24-hour protest camp and refusing to move until the new laws were repealed. Farmers, mainly from the states of Punjab and Haryana, had argued that the new laws were passed by the government without consultation, had exposed them to the mercy of large corporations for crop prices and put them at greater risk of poverty and losing their land. The farmers’ protests have proved to be  one of the greatest political challenges to face prime minister, Narendra Modi , since he came to power in 2014. It was one of the first times the government had been forced to the negotiating table following mass agitation and, despite eight rounds of talks, had remained in deadlock. After two days of deliberation, the supreme court ruled on Tuesday to suspend the laws. Judges ordered the creation of a four-man committee to look into farmers’ grievances over the laws, saying they were “extremely disappointed” with how negotiations had gone so far. The judges also expressed concern at the lack of consultation with farmers when passing the law. “These are matters of life and death. We are concerned with laws. We are concerned with lives and property of people affected by the agitation. We are trying to solve the problem in the best way. One of the powers we have is to suspend the legislation,” SA Bobde, the chief justice, told the court. While many politicians who had expressed anger at the farm laws celebrated the ruling, it was met with derision by farmers’ leaders who said “now is not the time for a committee”. Farming  unions reiterated that they would not participate in any court-ordered committee process and would not call off their protest until the new legislation was repealed. “The members of the supreme court-appointed committee are not dependable as they have been writing on how agri laws are pro-farmer. We will continue our agitation,” said farmer leader Balbeer Singh Rajewal at a press conference. The farmers said they still intended to go ahead with a planned protest tractor rally through Delhi on India’s Republic Day on 26 January. So far 60 farmers have died while taking part in the protests, which have involved camping out in make-shift tents in icy winter temperatures. Some described the ruling as a setback for Modi, who can usually rely on the backing of the supreme court, which is widely seen as favourable to the ruling government. However, other observers noted that the court’s decision to suspend the farm laws gave the government a way out of the negotiation deadlock without appearing to have bowed to the demands of the farmers.
Second shots of Covid vaccine could be delayed further in England:	Second shots of coronavirus vaccine could be delayed even further amid growing evidence that spacing out the doses improves their effectiveness. The NHS vaccination programme aims to immunise about 14 million people at greatest risk of Covid by mid-February, with second doses to be given up to 12 weeks later. But Public  Health  England’s head of immunisation, Mary Ramsay, told MPs on Wednesday that if infection data showed vulnerable groups, such as the over-80s, were well protected by their first shot, then second doses could be delayed to get a first jab to younger people as well. The NHS originally planned to offer second shots of the Pfizer vaccine three weeks after the first, in line with the procedure in the trials, but the soaring infection rate forced  a rethink in late December  with the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) recommending first shots for as many people as possible in the highest-risk groups. “Like we changed the schedule very quickly before Christmas, this is a very fast-moving field, and if more data emerges it may well be that the balance of those first doses, getting more first doses to people is a priority,” Ramsay told the Commons science committee. “If we’re seeing very high levels of protection, for example in the vulnerable groups, it may be more important to get more younger people vaccinated.” Ramsay said Public Health  England  would review infection data weekly and that it may be possible to be “a little bit more relaxed” about the timing of second doses, depending on vaccine supply and the scientific evidence. Asked if second shots might be given beyond the current 12-week limit, she said: “That’s unlikely, but it’s always possible.” The government’s  joint committee on vaccination and immunisation  has published a list of groups of people who will be prioritised to receive a vaccine for Covid-19 in the UK. The list is: 1 All those 80 years of age and over and health and social care workers. 2 All those 75 and over. 3 All those 70 and over. 4 All those 65 and over. 5 Adults under 65 at high at risk of serious disease and mortality from Covid-19. 6 Adults under 65 at moderate risk of at risk of serious disease and mortality from Covid-19. 7 All those 60 and over. 8 All those 55 and over. 9 All those 50 and over. 10 Rest of the population. Evidence now suggests that spacing out doses of the AstraZeneca/Oxford vaccine may be more effective at protecting people. Clinical trials revealed the efficacy of the vaccine was substantially higher, at 90%, in a subgroup of people who received half a dose followed by a full dose, rather than two full doses, which had an efficacy of 62%. But Prof Wei Shen Lim, the chair of the Covid-19 immunisation group of the JCVI, told MPs further analysis by  AstraZeneca  showed the improved protection came from spacing out the doses. “People who had the half dose then full dose were those who were vaccinated at a longer time interval, roughly six to 12 weeks, and what they’ve seen in their data is that people who have the second dose later probably have a three times higher antibody level than those who were vaccinated earlier. So if anything, it suggests that increasing the dose interval is beneficial,” he said. Sir Mene Pangalos, the executive vice-president of biopharmaceuticals research and development at AstraZeneca, told the committee the first vaccine shot was more protective over time. “What we’re seeing with our data so far is that as you go to the eight- to 12-week interval, you actually increase vaccine efficacy. People are protected enough with the first dose, to around 70%, but we see that within that eight- to 12-week interval is actually the sweet spot,” he said. Lim said the JCVI had yet to decide how vaccine shots might be prioritised during the second phase of the rollout, once healthcare workers, those with underlying conditions, and the over-50s had received their shots. He said essential workers may be prioritised. Modelling suggests one life is saved for every 25 to 40 people vaccinated in care homes, and for every 250 people vaccinated over the age of 80, he added, while “thousands” of train operators would need to be immunised to save one life. AstraZeneca is “imminently” scaling up to release 2m doses of its vaccine a week in the UK, and may be able to go above that from April, the firm’s chief executive said.  Tom Keith-Roach, the president of AstraZeneca UK, said 1.1m doses of the company’s Covid-19 jab developed with Oxford University had been released to the UK to date, but the aim was to reach 2m doses per week on or before the middle of February. Nadhim Zahawi, the minister in charge of the vaccine rollout, said the immunisation programme would be slower than some countries because we have chosen to vaccinate all those at highest risk of dying, such as people in care homes who are harder to reach. “Some of the countries have chosen to say, you know what, we will vaccinate anyone over the age of 60, as Israel’s done. That’s much easier to do.” He said there were “absolutely no plans” to issue vaccine passports that could allow people who had been immunised to travel or enjoy more freedom from the restrictions. First, he said, the vaccines protect against people getting ill but nobody knows whether they prevent transmission. “Second, it will be discriminatory because they’ll be those who, for a number of reasons may not be able to be vaccinated or choose not to,” he told the committee. He agreed with Pangalos, who asked for vaccine production workers to be given priority immunisation because of the urgency of their work.
Wendy Simon: the interim mayor running Liverpool from her living room:	W endy Simon was preparing for a Liverpool-wide open council Zoom meeting on Friday 4 December, when she got a message asking if she, as the council’s designated deputy, would lead the session. That wasn’t unusual, she’d done it several times before. The reason, however, couldn’t have been more out of the ordinary. “My phone was on charge upstairs, I went to make a cup of tea and then I came back into the lounge to lock everybody else out and do the meeting and the chief exec said to me: ‘Have you not seen your phone? I need to speak to you.’” The city’s larger-than-life mayor, Joe Anderson, had been  arrested by Merseyside police  on suspicion of conspiracy to commit bribery and witness intimidation, alongside four other men from the city as part of an investigation into building and development contracts in Liverpool. Hit by this controversy at the same time as the number of coronavirus cases in the city was starting to rise exponentially, Simon took over as interim mayor with immediate effect and has been running the city out of the living room of the house she shares with her partner, daughter, son-in-law and two-year-old granddaughter ever since. Not put off by the long days and occasional sleepless nights, she is bidding to become the first woman to do the role on a more permanent basis, this week launching her candidacy for mayor if local elections go ahead in May. Anderson has denied wrongdoing and is on bail until mid-February, but has said he will not be Labour’s candidate. “It isn’t something I aspired to do, but as I’ve seen the enormity of what we were facing over the coming months and coming years, I do feel it is important that I put myself forward,” says the softly spoken former social worker. “I am fully aware of the situation we face, and I’m confident of being able to work together with the team to get us through this together and make sure  Liverpool  comes through this stronger.” In the lead-up to Christmas, Liverpool’s role in fighting the pandemic was being praised by the government and city leaders alike. A groundbreaking mass test-and-trace system was  piloted in the city  from the second week of November, identifying hundreds of asymptomatic cases. On 19 November the city region had 189 cases per 100,000 people; by 3 December that number had fallen to 88. However, by 7 January it had rocketed to 1,017 cases per 100,000, with 602 Covid beds occupied, compared with 314 in mid-November. The crisis has been monumentally difficult for local authorities to cope with, but has highlighted the extent of the work they do and the expertise they have to offer, says Simon. “Because of the range of services we provide, we’re really at the frontline,” she says. “But as well as it being really intense, it’s been a time when local government has shone.” Often seen as one of the sharpest thorns in the side of any Conservative government, Liverpool has been cited as a shining example of local and national government collaboration – praise that Anderson likened to  a viper showing its teeth . Simon is more pragmatic, pointing out that with only 12% of the council’s funding generated locally, the city has little choice. “There’s a difference between criticising policies and trying to get the best for your city, between highlighting the unfairness and injustice and actually trying to work to bring about better policies to get support and services into the city,” she says. “That doesn’t mean we need to agree with everything that they do, because we certainly don’t.” It could be harder for the city to maintain its position in the limelight with the shadow of criminal proceedings hanging over it. While no charges have been made against Anderson, the government has ordered an  emergency inspection of the council  following the arrests of the mayor and, in 2019, the council’s director of regeneration, Nick Kavanagh. Simon was first elected to the council in 2007 and has held the tourism brief for a decade as well as working as a senior social worker – a job she resigned from at the end of last month. Seen as an Anderson loyalist over the years, she has insisted she is “her own woman”, adding that the city wants to be as transparent as possible during the corruption inquiry. People “do still want to talk to us as a city”, she insists, but when pushed she admits the scale of the damage is not yet known. “We can’t begin to believe that it’s not devastating, for the individuals concerned and for the city as a whole,” she says. “We’ll have to assess the impact of that in the weeks and months to come.” For now, she will continue to slog away in her living room, the door handle of which is fortunately too high for her granddaughter to reach. Despite the scale of the task ahead, she feels “that little bit of hope that you’re moving towards”, and like the city she hopes to serve, says she has to be resilient. “People are really, really tired. And people have been scared,” she says. “But I think as a city, we still have fantastic opportunities. I think we’re a world-class city, the best city in the world,” she says. “But I would say that, wouldn’t I?”
UK coronavirus deaths pass 100,000 after 1,564 reported in one day:	More than 100,000 people have died from coronavirus in the UK since the disease first appeared in the country almost a year ago, in what public health experts have said is a sign of “phenomenal failure of policy and practice”. Government figures on Wednesday showed a record daily reported 1,564 new fatalities, bringing the total to 101,160. Almost one in 660 people in the UK have died from Covid or Covid-related causes so far during the pandemic. The UK has one of the  worst Covid mortality rates in the world , at 151 per 100,000 people, ahead of the US, Spain and Mexico, where there are 116, 113 and 108 deaths per 100,000 people respectively. Gabriel Scally, a visiting professor of public health at the University of Bristol and a member of the Independent Sage group of experts, said the 100,000-plus death toll was an indictment of the way the pandemic had been handled. “It is an astounding number of preventable deaths from one cause in one year, [an] absolutely astounding number. It’s a sign of a phenomenal failure of policy and practice in the face of this new and dangerous virus,” Scally said. There have been 93,418 coronavirus deaths recorded by statistical agencies, based on those with Covid on the death certificate, from the beginning of the pandemic up to 10 January, and a further 7,742 deaths since according to figures published by the government based on deaths within 28 days of a positive test for the virus. Christina Pagel, a professor of operational research at University College London and also a member of Independent Sage, said that with deaths lagging infections by three to four weeks, the death toll would rise further. “I could say it’s shocking that [the] UK has [the] worst death toll in Europe, or we could have prevented this with earlier measures in September or October, and it would be true,” she said. But this had been true for weeks, she added, and scientists had repeatedly stressed the gravity of rising infections. “Scientists were saying it all December, warning that deaths would go up after Christmas.” Official statistics released on Tuesday showed 2020 was the deadliest year in England and Wales  for more than a century . More than 608,000 people died last year, 81,653 of whom as a result of coronavirus. Deaths exceeded 600,000 for only the second time on record, and the toll was just behind that of 611,861 in 1918, the worst year of the flu pandemic. Scally said the final death toll from Covid was likely to be far higher. “It could add another 50,000 [deaths] before we are finished,” he said. The way coronavirus deaths in the UK are counted has changed since the beginning of the pandemic. While statistical agencies count deaths where Covid-19 is noted on the death certificate, the government figures released each day count fatalities within 28 days of a positive test for the virus. The Guardian analyses the data from both sources to achieve the most up-to-date fatality count possible.
'Brazilian horror story': internet melts down over sculptor's peculiar waxworks:	The first household name Arlindo Armacollo smothered in beeswax was Mother Teresa. Then came Albert Einstein, Pope John Paul II and a string of global luminaries who the entrepreneur-turned-artist admired. “It might look simple, but to achieve this richness of detail was hard work,” a local television reporter gushed during  a 2015 visit to Armacollo’s waxwork collection  in southern Brazil. “The artist wanted to capture the character as well as the soul of each person.” Whether the septuagenarian sculptor achieved that goal is now a matter of intense international debate, after images of his wax creations went viral on social media – six years after first being displayed in the town of Rolândia. Footage of Armacollo’s startling figures spread like wildfire last week after internet users unearthed – and ridiculed –  the video report  about their exhibition in a local church. The strangely disfigured personalities on show include Nelson Mandela, who has a beefcake’s body, a tiny head and dazzling peroxide hair; Princess Diana, who wears a crazed and terrifying grin; and Marilyn Monroe, who boasts a neck the size of a tree trunk and a seemingly melted face. Nearby, black hairs sprout from unusual corners of Elvis Presley’s shiny wax face. “Brazilian horror story,”  gasped  one of the numerous Twitter users discombobulated by the models. Word of the collection – which reminded some of  Spain’s jaw-dropping botched restorations  – soon spread. Journalists from leading news outlets in Brazil and beyond pursued the previously unknown artist for a reaction to his newfound fame. “I couldn’t care less [about the criticism],” Armacollo, 77, told the Guardian on Tuesday as he was flooded with interview requests and invitations for television appearances he planned to decline. “If it was about making money it might bother me whether people appreciated what I was doing or not. But I do the things I do because I enjoy them. I did this for our town. If people like it, come and visit. If they don’t, don’t,” he shrugged. “Why worry?” Armacollo’s statues, which each involve about 5kg of wax and imported English eyeballs, have moved since their 2015 television debut and are now housed in a nearby museum named after his father. There, Princess Diana has been joined by newer sculptures, including a similarly peculiar portrayal of the Queen. Until recently the exhibition also featured a statue of the corruption-busting judge Sergio Moro with a distinct resemblance to England defender Harry Maguire. But Armacollo evicted Brazil’s former security minister after  he resigned  from government and  took a high-paid job  with a consultancy involved in the judicial recovery of one of the construction giants he once pursued. “It’s all a bit weird, isn’t it?” Armacollo said. Like many in south  Brazil , Armacollo is a supporter of Jair Bolsonaro, and had considered honouring the right-wing populist president with his wax. “But then I thought: ‘I’m going to hold off for a bit to keep an eye on his behaviour.’ For now I’m still behind him and think he’s on the right path – but let’s wait a bit more to see to see if that solidifies.” The artist scoffed at the idea of celebrating Bolsonaro’s leftwing rival, the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. “You’re not in favour of him, are you?” he asked this reporter with a mistrustful laugh. Politics aside, Armacollo hoped “all this commotion” would attract tourists from other cities and abroad. A similar museum in Norfolk achieved cult status as “the world’s worst waxworks”, drawing thousands of visitors with  its un-lifelike lifelikes . Armacollo’s only regret was the reaction of his teenager granddaughter, left distraught by the mocking of her grandfather’s mannequins. “She’s very sensitive. She even cried,” the artist admitted, “but now she’s laughing about it too.”
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
‘It’s being built on our blood’: the true cost of Saudi Arabia’s $500bn megacity:	“The future has a new home,” proclaims the website. “It’s a virgin area that has a lot of beauty,” says the voice over a string section soundtrack as the  promotional video  tracks colour-tinted panoramic shots of picturesque desert expanses, and deep azure lagoons. “Better humans, better society,” it boasts extravagantly. The brainchild of Crown Prince  Mohammed bin Salman , the new city state of Neom, named from a combination of the Greek word for “new” and the Arabic term for “future”, is intended to cover an area the size of Belgium at the far north of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea coastline. There has been no shortage of outlandish promises for the $500bn (£400bn) city-state. According to  strategy documents leaked last year , the project may include a huge artificial moon, glow-in-the-dark beaches, flying drone-powered taxis, robotic butlers to clean the homes of residents and a Jurassic Park-style attraction featuring animatronic lizards. Advertising materials stressed Neom will be built on “virgin” land, ready to be conquered with futuristic technology. “In 10 years from now we will be looking back and we will say we were the first ones to come here,” declares a Neom staff member featured in the video. Yet part of the site is the home of the Huwaitat tribe, who have spanned  Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Sinai peninsula for generations, tracing their lineage back before the founding of the Saudi state. At least 20,000 members of the tribe now face eviction due to the project, with no information about where they will live in the future. “For the Huwaitat tribe, Neom is being built on our blood, on our bones,” says Alia Hayel Aboutiyah al-Huwaiti, an outspoken activist and member of the tribe living in London. “It’s definitely not for the people already living there! It’s for tourists, people with money. But not for the original people living there.” For some Saudis, the Huwaiti tribe among them, Neom, with its parallel legal system reporting directly to the king, represents an elite version of Saudi society, one designed simply to shut them out. Residents and visitors to the site will probably be allowed to drink alcohol and enjoy fine dining in a futuristic version of paradise that is also set to include a vast  data-gathering network , including drone and facial-recognition technology covering the entire city-state. The  death  of Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti on 13 April highlighted the tension between the tribe and the kingdom’s development plans. A resident of the town of Khuraibat, he had become the face of the tribes’ criticism of their forced eviction, voicing complaints in videos posted to social media, and appearing in others’ videos.  One  piece of footage showed him confronting a Saudi official who visited the town to speak with residents. Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti made one of his last  videos  in mid-April. “They have begun the process of removing people, beginning with surveying homes with the intent of removing people and deporting them from their land,” he said, referring to the security forces in his town. “They arrested anyone who said they’re against deportation, they don’t want to leave, they want to remain [in] their homes, that they don’t want money. “I would not be surprised if they come to kill me in my house now, and place a weapon next to me,” he added. Later the same day, he shot a video from his rooftop of the police down below. “See them? The police have come to get me,” he  said . Others from Khuraibat recorded  videos  of gunfire from outside his house. Later, they recorded  footage  inside his house, pockmarked with bullet holes. In a statement, the Saudi authorities  claimed  he’d been killed in a shootout with regional security forces, stating that Abdul Rahim injured two after he shot back. His supporters have described the shooting as “an extrajudicial killing”. So too have rights groups. “They killed him to set an example – anyone opening their mouth gets the same treatment,” says Alia al-Huwaiti. According to the Saudi rights group Al Qst, the authorities have  since  worked to cover up Abdul Rahim’s killing and placate the tribe. “They are hoping to pull off a major publicity stunt by getting prominent figures among the Huwaitat to publicly disown Abdul Rahim and ‘renew their allegiance’ to the king,” said the group. This was accompanied by the arrest of eight members of the tribe. For Alia al-Huwaiti, the killing of Abdul Rahim and the forced displacement of the Huwaitat people highlights the kingdom’s lack of care towards tribal communities long dominated and suppressed by the state. “MBS [Mohammad Bin Salman] began by telling the tribes: ‘We will develop your area, you will make money.’ They believed him at first. By 2019, they said ‘We will empty three villages, and force people to move,’” she says. “There is nothing called a tribe for Mohammed bin Salman,” she adds. “He doesn’t care about the tribes.” Alia said she has received death threats for posting about the plight of Abdul Rahim and the tribe on social media, including threats she has reported to the British police. The public relations team for Neom, as well as executives from the management consulting firm Teneo, hired by Saudi authorities  for  more than $2m  last year to represent the project, did not return requests for comment. The Saudi Arabian embassy in Washington DC did not respond to a request for comment. But Ali Shihabi,  a member of the Neom advisory board , told the Guardian that the displaced members of the tribe would be compensated. “Practice in Saudi has been that people have to accept it, and have usually done so because the government has a tradition of compensating generously.” He said he did not know how much members of the tribe would be compensated, or when. “We anticipated there might be problems, especially with as large of a land grab as Neom. It’s inevitable that there would be some kind of forced displacement happening,” says James Suzano, of the European-Saudi Organisation for Human Rights. “When the state has done this before, it was accompanied by human rights violations.” The destruction of communities on the Neom site follows decades of tensions between the House of Saud and the tribes it has ruled over since the creation of the Saudi state in 1932. Exerting control over the land through construction projects or destruction of some heritage sites have marked this rule. In 2017, the UN  condemned  the kingdom’s forced demolition of the walled city of Awamia, in the eastern Qatif region, as violating human rights. Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur for cultural rights, said that “historic buildings have been irremediably burned down and damaged by the use of various weapons by the military, forcing residents out of their homes and of the neighbourhood, fleeing for their lives”. A $10bn King Abdullah financial district in Riyadh,  intended  as a “special zone,” has sputtered since its inception in 2006, weathering construction delays and confusion over its purpose, even after government attempts at a relaunch in 2016. Critics of Neom say the project risks the same fate. Construction is ploughing ahead despite the challenges of the pandemic and the  historic drop  in the price of oil, Saudi’s primary export. The project is part of the crown prince’s flagship Vision 2030 project, intended to diversify the economy away from oil, which has sustained the kingdom since the early 20th century. Yet the funds required to see Neom realised will inevitably require oil wealth. “It’s quite revealing that [Neom] is more of a vanity project targeting the domestic elite and an international audience in terms of a new Saudi, one that’s open and economically or socially liberal,” says Josh Cooper, of Al Qst. “But at the same time, not allowing the involvement of local actors or interests in these decision-making processes.” For Cooper, Neom is less a shining vision of the future than a grim symbol of Saudi human rights violations, underscored by the treatment of the Huwaitat tribe. “It shows the lack of platforms people have to express their opinions, even on less contentious matters than civil or political rights,” he says.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
'There is no noise': inside the controversial Bhasan Char refugee camp – a photo essay:	I wanted to come here. No one forced me, and my wife also agreed in a snap. To be honest, though, I didn’t tell my brother. He lives where I used to live – Kutupalong camp. He is very against this island for some reason. He might have tried to stop me coming if I dared to discuss the topic. So I didn’t. I only told him after I arrived. I was amazed that he didn’t yell at me. Instead he wondered if he would ever see me again and even got a bit emotional. ‘The children have nothing to do but play. They said school will start soon’ Now when we phone each other, we compare facts and figures. On the island, we get 15kg of rice per head. They get only 13kg in the camps. We get 500g more dal and 1kg more potatoes here too. I am winning so far in our comparisons. We have been here just over one month. We are getting used to it. ‘I heard from one journalist that they spent $350m on this island. He told me I should be happy. I should not complain about anything’ For some reason, I don’t sleep properly. When I lie awake, in the dead of night, I can hear the sea and sometimes the horn of berthing ships. I feel a bit strange then but by the morning that feeling goes away. My children ask if their little friends from our neighbourhood back in the camp will come to the island. I really don’t know what to tell them. I guess they will find new friends here soon when their school starts.  There are tall buildings here. Refugees are not permitted in upper floors. Maybe they think we will kill ourselves? There are a lot of children here, and when they play and get noisy it makes this island feel better, to tell you the truth –and less abnormal. The buildings are all the same here. We live on the ground floor. There are some tall buildings.  Refugees  are not permitted on the upper floors. Maybe they think we will kill ourselves? ‘Right now this place is OK. But with thousands more, I am not sure’ We can only ascend if there is a cyclone. Those floors are used by administration and [for] other purposes. When I think of the camp, I miss getting together with my mates in our favourite tea stalls after Maghrib or Isha prayers. I miss the Burmese tea and coffee mixes we get in the camps like Rich Mix. And I miss  boma   lapase , which you mix with water. That stuff is addictive. ‘Most of the refugees here I think are children. Without children this place would seem even more abnormal’ I feel sad and guilty about my parents. I guess I also abandoned those kids I used to give private tuition to. I worry about them. If I hadn’t fallen into debt and if the thugs in the camp didn’t harass me like they used to – so much so that I feared for my life – I guess I wouldn’t be here. God knows. Most of all, I hope my parents will forgive me some day.  ‘In the camp, there is a lot of noise. Here there is no noise. Sometimes we hear a ship sound. It is very strange’
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
Manchester City v Brighton: Premier League – live!:	The self-isolating  Sergio Aguero is among those absent  for City, although  Raheem Sterling is back on the bench . Looks like Pep Guardiola is going essentially strikerless to begin with ... So are Brighton, by the looks of it, although it’s hard to tell exactly how they will line up.  It’s a pretty defensive-looking side from Graham Potter  and they miss Yves Bissouma, their influential midfielder, through suspension.  Percy Tau , back from his loan at Anderlecht, may be the most advanced member of Brighton’s team – this will be the South African’s first start for Brighton, two and a half years after he signed. Manchester City:  Ederson; Cancelo, Dias, Stones, Zinchenko; Rodrigo, Gundogan; De Bruyne, Mahrez, Foden; Bernardo.  Subs:  Steffen, Walker, Sterling, Jesus, Torres, Mendy, Fernandinho, Harwood-Bellis, Mbete. Brighton:  Sanchez; Veltman, Webster, Dunk, Burn; Trossard, White, Propper, Bernardo; Mac Allister; Tau.  Subs:  Walton, Maupay, Gross, March, Zeqiri, Sanders, Jenks, Weir, Khadra. What’s that coming over the hill? It’s  Manchester City .  Not Manchester United, they’ve already scaled the summit and are peering down on everyone else. But City are on quietly excellent form, winning their last six games in all competitions and starting to look like the side that once surgically dissected all who crossed their pat. Win tonight and they will be four points off the top, with a further game in hand. Could we be in for a three-horse title race when things all shake down? Brighton will have something to say about that tonight, although we’ll see how much.  While City are on a roll, Graham Potter’s men can’t buy a win – although they have drawn four of their last five top-flight outings and recovered well from 3-1 down against Wolves last time out. They were taken the distance by Newport in the FA Cup on Sunday night, though, despite fielding a strong side. So will they take the hit here and eye other battles in their quest to move away from the relegation question, or will they have a real go? We will soon find out!  Kick-off is at 6pm UK time – so stay close and get your emails/tweets in to the addresses above.
Coronavirus live news: Switzerland announces tough new restrictions; US reports record 4,327 deaths in one day:	Switzerland  announced tough new restrictions Wednesday in a pre-emptive strike against a feared third wave of the Covid-19 pandemic caused by quicker-spreading variants of the virus. The country shut shops selling non-essential goods and ordered people to work from home in a bid to prevent an explosion in case numbers, saying the British-detected mutation had already taken root. The Swiss government had been expected simply to extend the current closure of bars, restaurants and leisure facilities through February, but went much further with measures to be implemented from Monday. “Case numbers are stagnating at a very high level and there is a risk that the new more infectious variants of the virus will lead to another rapid rise in cases,” it said in a statement. Swiss President Guy Parmelin and health minister Alain Berset explained the measures at a press conference where, for the first time, they were separated by plastic screens and wore masks throughout. The  Philippines  on Wednesday confirmed its first case of a British-identified coronavirus mutation that appears to be more infectious, as authorities scramble to secure vaccine supplies. Since taking hold in Britain, the fast-spreading new variant has been detected in dozens of countries and territories globally. Italian  prime minister Giuseppe Conte said Wednesday he was working flat-out to resolve tensions within his coalition, warning voters would not forgive a crisis in the middle of a pandemic. The government is on the brink of imploding following weeks of internal criticism from former premier Matteo Renzi, the leader of the small but pivotal Italia Viva party. Ahead of a press conference in which Renzi was widely expected to announce his withdrawal from the coalition, Conte appealed to him to change his mind. “I hope it won’t come to that,” he told reporters in Rome, saying he was working to keep the government together until the next scheduled elections in 2023.  He added: “For sure, the country would definitely not understand a crisis ... people are asking us to go on, in such a complex, difficult situation.” Italy was the first European country to be overwhelmed by coronavirus cases and remains one of the worst-hit, with almost 80,000 virus deaths and a record recession. Conte was speaking after a meeting with President Sergio Mattarella, the ultimate arbiter of Italian political crises, to discuss the situation. Those mourning loved ones lost in the coronavirus pandemic are increasingly turning to online forums and virtual remembrance websites for support with grief, experts say. Meanwhile, the national bereavement charity Sue Ryder and a coalition of cross-party MPs, charities and healthcare professionals are calling on the government to introduce a minimum of two weeks’ statutory paid bereavement leave for UK employees who have lost someone. The number of deaths due to Covid-19 has exceeded 100,000, and in the absence of physical contact, people are seeking solace through social media, phone helplines and other platforms. But experts say this will not help everyone, as some are unable to access online support while others will still struggle to overcome grief because the pandemic has put their life on hold. More than 100,000 deaths involving coronavirus have occurred in the  UK , PA news agency analysis of official data shows.  A  UK  group attempting to travel to  Switzerland  for a ski holiday were prevented from boarding a Eurostar train at London St Pancras in breach of coronavirus restrictions.  Train manager Justin, who did not give his surname, posted on Twitter that French border police deployed at the station had turned the travellers away on Wednesday morning. A photograph shows the group was carrying at least one large bag of winter sports equipment.  Justin wrote that a ski trip “does not count as essential travel” and there are “very limited reasons for travel to France”.  He added: “I really fancy a trip with my family to eat chips in Brussels but there’s a global pandemic on right now.  “If we all do our bit and are patient for this final push, then hopefully we can get back to doing all of those things we love.”  Last week, a Eurostar passenger trying to travel to a yoga class in Paris was also turned away from London St Pancras. France only permits a limited group of people to arrive from the UK, such as transport workers, people delivering goods or those who normally live in France. I am running the Guardian’s global feed, bringing you updates on coronavirus from around the world. Please get in touch to share news tips. Twitter:  @sloumarsh Instagram:  sarah_marsh_journalist Email:  sarah.marsh@theguardian.com South Africa’s  government has started outlining its Covid-19 inoculation plans, despite not yet receiving a single vaccine dose, as it faces criticism over unrealistic targets and a lack of clarity. The continent’s worst-hit country is placing high hopes on vaccines as the authorities grapple with an unprecedented surge in cases fuelled by a new virus variant. The government is aiming to vaccinate two-thirds of its population - around 40 million out of nearly 60 million people - in order to achieve herd immunity by the end of 2021. One million doses of AstraZeneca’s Covid-19 vaccine are expected this month - the first shipment of 20 million secured doses to be mainly delivered in the first half of the year. “This will be the largest and most complex logistical undertaking in our country’s history,” President Cyril Ramaphosa said during an address to the nation on Monday.  After weeks of public outcry over a lack of planning, Ramaphosa finally laid out a three-phase vaccination blueprint for the year ahead. Russian  president Vladimir Putin on Wednesday tasked officials with launching mass coronavirus vaccinations from next week, touting Russia’s homemade jab as the world’s best. After being the first country to register a vaccine for use, Russia is looking to leap ahead of other countries in the race to inoculate its population of 146 million. Russia in August registered Sputnik V – named after the Soviet-era satellite – months ahead of western competitors but before the start of large-scale clinical trials, which left some experts wary. “I ask you to begin the mass vaccination of the entire population next week,” Putin told officials at a televised government meeting.  “The Russian vaccine is the best in the world.” Britain  will make appointments for coronavirus vaccinations available 24 hours a day “as soon as we can”, prime minister Boris Johnson said Wednesday, reversing his opposition to the idea. Johnson had days ago brushed off calls from the main opposition Labour party for night-time opening of vaccine centres, arguing there was “no clamour” for it. But the government has come under increasing pressure to speed up its vaccination programme and is reported to be planning a pilot scheme to see if there is demand for the late-night jabs. Coronavirus  deaths in the US hit another one-day high at over 4,300 with the country’s attention focused largely on the fallout from the deadly uprising at the Capitol. The nation’s overall death toll from Covid-19 has eclipsed 380,000, according to Johns Hopkins University, and is closing in fast on the number of Americans killed in the second world war, or about 407,000. Confirmed infections have topped 22.8 million. With the country simultaneously facing a political crisis and on edge over threats of more violence from far-right extremists, the US recorded 4,327 deaths on Tuesday by Johns Hopkins’ count. Arizona and California have been among the hardest-hit states. The daily figure is subject to revision, but deaths have been rising sharply over the past two and a half months, and the country is now in the most lethal phase of the outbreak yet, even as the vaccine is being rolled out. New cases are running at nearly a quarter-of-a-million per day on average.
Stage set for impeachment after Pence dismisses House call to invoke 25th amendment:	The US House of Representatives has voted   to formally call on the vice-president, Mike Pence, to invoke the 25th amendment and strip Donald Trump of his presidential authority after Trump incited a mob that led a deadly  assault on the US Capitol  last week. Before the largely symbolic vote, Pence rejected the call to wrest Trump from power, effectively paving the way for the House to move forward with impeachment. Nevertheless, shortly before midnight, the House voted largely along party lines to adopt the non-binding resolution that asked Pence to declare Trump “incapable of executing the duties of his office and to immediately exercise powers as acting president”. The final vote was 223 to 205, with one Republican backing the measure. In a letter to the House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, released as the House debated the resolution, Pence said he did not believe “such a course of action is in the best interest of our nation or consistent with our constitution” and warned that efforts to remove Trump from office risked “further divide and inflame the passions of the moment”. The letter came after Pelosi gave the vice-president what amounted to an ultimatum, with a 24-hour window to respond: either strip Trump of his power or allow him to become the first president in American history  to be impeached  a second time. “Who knows what he might do next?” she said in a floor speech, imploring Pence to remove a president capable of “unhinged, unstable, deranged acts of sedition”. Moments later, Pelosi announced the team of House impeachment managers who would prosecute the case against Trump in the Senate. The team would be led by the Maryland congressman Jamie Raskin, a former constitutional law professor who authored the resolution and helped draft the article of impeachment against him. During a committee hearing earlier on Tuesday, Raskin sought to persuade Pence to act. “The time of a 25th amendment emergency has arrived,” he said. “It has come to our doorstep. It has invaded our chamber.” Before the vote on Tuesday, several Republican members came out in support of impeachment,  including Liz Cheney , the third-ranking House Republican, who said there had “never been a greater betrayal by a president of the United States” than Trump’s encouragement of an insurrection on the seat of American government. “The president of the United States summoned his mob, assembled the mob and lit the flame of this attack,” she said in a scathing statement. “Everything that followed was his doing.” The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, has  reportedly  told associates that he believes Trump committed impeachable offenses, though he has not voiced public support for removing the president from office. In the days since a mob laid claim to the Capitol, which sent lawmakers scrambling under desks for safety, fear has turned to fury as details have emerged about the security failure that left them vulnerable, and the role of Trump and his allies in stoking the mayhem. Exacerbating the anger was Trump’s utter lack of remorse. Earlier on Tuesday, the president lashed out at Democrats for leading the effort to remove him before his term ends next week, and  took no responsibility  for the violent uprising that left five people dead and threatened the lives of members of Congress, congressional staff, law enforcement, journalists and his own vice-president. Instead, he claimed his inflammatory comments to loyalists at a rally in Washington before the Capitol attack, where he urged them to march to the Capitol in last-gasp attempt to overturn the results of an election he lost,   were “totally appropriate” and blamed Democrats for further dividing the nation. “The 25th amendment is of zero risk to me but will come back to haunt Joe Biden and the Biden administration,” Trump said in remarks from Alamo, Texas, after he visited the barrier on the  US-Mexico border . Tuesday night’s resolution called on Pence and members of the cabinet to invoke the 25th amendment to the constitution, and remove Trump from power.   It asked Pence to immediately assume “the powers and duties of the office as acting president”. Such an act,   the resolution stated, would “declare what is obvious to a horrified nation: that the president is unable to successfully discharge the duties and powers of his office.” The 25th amendment allows for the vice-president, with the support of a majority of the cabinet, to remove a president deemed “unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office”. Trump and Pence met on Monday night for the first time since the assault ,  during which some rioters chanted “hang Mike Pence” because he refused Trump’s public demands to block congressional certification of Biden’s electoral victory – a power he did not have. The two men pledged to continue working together for the remainder of their time in office, according to a senior administration official. Three cabinet officials have resigned in the wake of Capitol invasion but none have called for Trump’s removal. The House is expected to swiftly move forward with impeachment, beginning the debate over whether Trump committed “high crimes and misdemeanors” on Wednesday, just one week before Biden will be sworn in. A single article of impeachment charges Trump with “incitement of insurrection” and directly quotes the president’s speech to supporters at the rally near the White House on 6 January. “If you don’t fight like hell,” Trump implored, “you’re not going to have a country any more.” Members of Congress gathered before the vote on Tuesday for the first time since the attack, amid heightened security both inside and outside the building. Cracked glass and newly installed metal detectors were reminders of the breach – and of the continued threat of violence ahead of Biden’s inauguration. Before the vote, lawmakers observed a moment of silence for the two Capitol police officers who died after defending the building during the bloody siege.
Pence says he won't invoke 25th amendment in letter to Pelosi - as it happened:	From me and Joan E Greve:  Representative Fred Upton of Michigan has joined three other House Republicans in saying he’ll vote to impeach  Donald Trump .  Liz Cheney , the third-highest ranking GOP representative has also said she’ll vote to impeach. But her colleagues, Freedom Caucus chair  Andy Biggs  representative  Matt Rosendale  are calling on Cheney to step down from party leadership. Rosendale, a freshman congressman of Montana said Cheney is“weakening our conference at a key moment for personal political gain and is unfit to lead.” The House has approved fines for members who don’t comply with a mask-wearing mandate, voting along party lines.  There will be a $500 fine for a first offense and $2,500 for a second offense. The fines are part of the rules of the resolution calling on Mike Pence to invoke the 25th Amendment.  Three members have tested positive for Covid-19 after the riot last week. While representatives were on lockdown amid the attack on the US Capitol, several Republicans refused to wear masks. This is the first abortion case to be decided with anti-abortion Trump-appointee  Amy Coney Barrett  on the court.  The ruling today reinstates a Food and Drug Administration rule that Mifeprex, a drug used for abortion early in pregnancy, must be administered by medical professionals at clinics or hospitals.  Doctors led by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists fought to relax the rule during the pandemic when access to clinics and hospitals became restricted, winning a case in a US district court.  Today’s Supreme Court ruling reinstates the FDA rule. The three liberals on the court dissented. “Because the FDA’s policy imposes an unnecessary, unjustifiable, irrational, and undue burden on women seeking an abortion during the current pandemic, and because the Government has not demonstrated irreparable harm from the injunction, I dissent,” wrote Justice  Sonia Sotomayor . Representative Jamie Raskin will be taking lead, working with  Diana DeGette, David Cicilline, Joaquin Castro, Eric Swalwell, Ted Lieu, Stacey Plaskett, Joe Neguse and Madeleine Dean. “Tonight, I have the solemn privilege of naming the managers of the impeachment trial of  Donald Trump ,” said Pelosi in a statement. “It is their constitutional and patriotic duty to present the case for the president’s impeachment and removal. They will do so guided by their great love of country, determination to protect our democracy and loyalty to our oath to the constitution. Our managers will honor their duty to defend democracy for the people with great solemnity, prayerfulness and urgency.” Debbie Lesko , a Republican congresswoman of Arizona has complained about the metal detectors that representatives have to go through to enter the floor, describing them as an additional measure “on top of the security we already go through”. But lawmakers do not have to go through additional metal detectors to access the Capitol. “We now live in Pelosi’s communist America!” Lesko complained.  For members of Congress to enter the floor of the U.S. House, we now have to go through intense security measures, on top of the security we already go through. These new provisions include searches and being wanded like criminals. We now live in Pelosi’s communist America! Several Republicans have taken exception to the new metal detectors and safety measures implemented following the deadly attack on the US Capitol last week.  Representative Lauren Boebert refused to comply with a bag check, and Markwayne Mullin and Steve Womack have also reportedly yelled at Capitol police officers enforcing the new protocols.  CNN’s Manu Raju reports:  House GOP furious at new mags outside the chamber. Reps. Markwayne Mullin and Steve Womack erupted at Capitol Police as they were forced to go through the mags. Womack shouted “I was physically restrained!” And Mullin said “it’s my constitutional right” and “they cannot stop me In the letter to Nancy Pelosi, Pence said he is not willing to declare Trump unfit for office.  “I do not believe that such a course of action is in the best interest of our Nation or consistent with our Constitution,” he writes.  Invoking the 25th would “set a terrible precedent” he said.  Members of Congress are still doing a procedural vote on the resolution asking Pence to invoke the 25th.  Even as the House works on passing a resolution compelling Pence to do so, the vice president has said he won’t invoke the 25th Amendment or consider removing Trump from office.  Pence has sent a letter to House speaker Nancy Pelosi... Lauren Boebert , a Republican representative of Colorado who subscribes to the QAnon conspiracy, has reportedly held up the line after setting of newly installed metal detectors at Congress.  Boebert, who has expressed enthusiasm about carrying weapons to Capitol Hill, is reportedly refusing to comply with a bag search.  Representatives are currently partaking in a procedural vote on the resolution calling on Mike Pence to invoke the 25th Amendment. 
US job market weakens in December, fuelling hopes of more stimulus – as it happened:	Just after Wall Street opened, the main indices hit new all-time highs. The Nasdaq rose more than 100 points to 13,176 while the Dow Jones touched 31,140 and the S&P 500 climbed to 3,824. Over here, the FTSE 100 index is flat, Germany’s Dax is 0.71% higher, France’s CAC has gained 0.5% and Italy’s FTSE MiB is unchanged. Stock markets shrugged off news that the  US economy unexpectedly shed 140,000 jobs in December , the first decline since April, while the jobless rate remained at 6.7%. Investors are betting on more fiscal stimulus from the incoming president Joe Biden, as both chambers of US Congress are now controlled by Democrats. In the eurozone, the unemployment rate fell unexpectedly to 8.3% in November  but youth unemployment rose, to 18.4%.  German industrial production was strong , keeping alive hopes that Europe’s biggest economy avoided a double dip recession. Oil prices have climbed to 11-month highs and bitcoin has hit a new record high. Thank you for reading! Have a good weekend. We’ll be back on Monday. Stay safe - JK The S&P 500 and the tech-focused Nasdaq have hit fresh record highs. Trading has begun on Wall Street, and shares are up ! The global economy has just had its worst year of the modern age and 2021 has not got off to the best of starts either,  writes the Guardian’s economics editor Larry Elliott . Yet  stock markets  appear impervious to bad news, with the MSCI world index of developed market shares 10% above its pre-crisis peak. There are a number of reasons why equity markets are so hot. The US dollar erased gains made before the payrolls figures, and is now down 0.09% against a basket of major currencies. Ayush Ansal, chief investment officer at the UK hedge fund Crimson Black Capital, says: The dollar remained fairly resilient in the immediate aftermath of the print as such dire data will reinforce the prospect of the incoming administration reigniting the country with a major fiscal stimulus package. The fact the Democrats now control the Senate, too, gives policymakers in the new administration carte blanche to supercharge the economy and try and move the country on from the unprecedented events on Capitol Hill. Wall Street is now looking forward, to a time beyond Trump, but at the same time market watchers are acutely aware that this is still arguably the most tense time in American political history for decades. In financial markets, European bourses are holding on to their gains, while the FTSE 100 index in London is flat at 6,852. Despite the weakness in the job market, the  US economy  is unlikely to fall back into recession, as a $900bn stimulus programme has been agreed by Congress and the incoming president Joe Biden is expected to expand spending further to prop up the economy. Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, said: The December jobs report marks the first drop in payrolls since April, and an end to the labour market progress that’s been underway since the recovery from the pandemic began back in May. Given the accelerated rise in coronavirus cases recently and the associated drop back in activity, this was not entirely unexpected. Yet it will not go unnoticed by policymakers. With a Blue sweep controlling Congress, further fiscal stimulus is the name of the game and today’s data will only assist that agenda. By contrast, the market reaction to today’s weak data is set to be muted. Investors are already looking through this temporary period of economic weakness and instead focusing on the brighter outlook where fiscal spending, monetary stimulus and mass distribution of the COVID-19 vaccines together ensure the US economy quickly returns to its pre-pandemic path. Here is our full story on the weak US jobs numbers. The recovery in the US jobs market collapsed in December, the last full month of Donald Trump’s presidency, as coronavirus infections soared across the country,  writes Dominic Rushe in New York . The US lost 140,000 jobs in December, down from a gain of 245,000 in November, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The loss ended seven months of jobs growth with the leisure and hospitality sector once again bearing the biggest losses. The unemployment rate stayed at 6.7%, close to twice as high as it was in February before Covid-19 hit the US. It is also three percentage points higher than the 4.5% rate Trump inherited from his predecessor Barack Obama. In the leisure and hospitality sector, 498,000 jobs were lost in December, taking losses in this sector to 3.9 million since February,  the US Labor Department said . Most of the latest loss (372,000) was at establishments serving food and drink. Other areas fared better: Factory jobs increased by 38,000 after an upwardly revised rise of 35,000 in November. Jobs in construction and retail increased by 51,000 and 120,500 respectively. It is the first decline in non-farm payrolls in eight months, and suggests the US jobs market recovery stalled in December. The fall was largely due to job losses at restaurants, bars, cafes and hotels. Adam Button, chief currency analyst at Forex Live, says : The headline was poor but the positive revisions over the last two months mitigated the damage. The earnings numbers are interesting but I’m inclined to think that’s due to lower wage workers losing their jobs. Average hourly earnings rose by 0.8%, while economists had expected a 0.2% gain. The  US economy  shed 140,000 jobs in December, according to the latest US non-farm payrolls data. Economists had expected an increase of 71,000. However, November’s increase was revised higher to 336,000 from 245,000, and October’s rise was revised to 654,00 from 610,000. The unemployment rate remained at 6.7%. U.S. payrolls shrink in December, by 140,000. Another piece of evidence that the  #economy  was losing momentum as 2020 closed. More stimulus needed.  pic.twitter.com/HUumWXc9uZ The US non-farm payrolls data comes out in a couple of minutes. The non-farm payroll (NFP) figure is a key economic indicator for the United States economy. It is also referred to as the monthly market mover. Find out why it has been given this nickname here:  https://t.co/yOUVEEqhc5   pic.twitter.com/d9ZGWpcPuP In other good news, the Covid-19 vaccine developed by BioNTech and Pfizer has been shown to work against a key mutation in the more contagious coronavirus variants discovered in the UK and South Africa.  A laboratory study by Pfizer and and the University of Texas, which has not been reviewed by peers yet, found that the vaccine can neutralise the virus with the so-called N501Y mutation of the spike protein. More  here . You can read more about the  Moderna vaccine approval  on our coronavirus live blog: The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said: We have already vaccinated nearly 1.5 million people across the UK and Moderna’s vaccine will allow us to accelerate our vaccination programme even further once doses become available from the spring. Futures tracking Wall Street’s main indices have climbed to new highs ahead of the US jobs data at 1:30pm GMT. The Dow Jones futures are up nearly 0.3%, the S&P 500 is 0.4% higher and the Nasdaq 0.5% ahead.  All three indices hit record highs yesterday and the S&P closed above 3,800 points for the first time amid expectations of a bigger stimulus package and infrastructure spending once Joe Biden takes office, triggering buying of financial, industrial and material stocks.
New York City to terminate business contracts with Trump after Capitol riot:	New York City will terminate business contracts with Donald Trump after last week’s  deadly attack  on the US Capitol that the president incited when he exhorted his supporters to march on Congress to overturn his election defeat by force, the city’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, announced on Wednesday. The president’s business empire, under the umbrella of the Trump Organization, is under city contract to operate the two public ice rinks and a carousel in Central Park as well as a golf course in the northern city borough of the Bronx. The Trump Organization profits about $17m a year from those sites, de Blasio said. “I’m here to announce that the city of  New York  is severing all contracts with the Trump Organization,” de Blasio said. An email seeking comment was sent Wednesday to the Trump Organization. It is the latest example of how the 6 January breach by a violent mob of ultra-loyal Trump supporters is impacting the Republican president’s business interests. The PGA of America voted on Sunday to take the prestigious PGA Championship  away from  his New Jersey golf course next year, a move that came after social media platforms disabled Trump’s accounts and Shopify took down online stores affiliated with him. On Wednesday it was announced that YouTube was suspending the president’s account from uploading new videos for at least seven days amid concerns that content risked inciting further violence. De Blasio ran a short, unpopular and unsuccessful campaign for the presidency,  ending his run  in September 2019 for the Democratic nomination ultimately won by the now president-elect, Joe Biden. Donald Trump  was born in the New York City borough of Queens and became an unlikely property mogul in the city and beyond. Protesters  chanted “you’re fired”  outside his Fifth Avenue Trump Tower offices and apartment on the day the November presidential election was called for Biden.
Trump impeachment: House debates charge of 'incitement of insurrection' – live:	House speaker  Nancy Pelosi  went outside to thank the National Guard troops who are protecting the Capitol today, as members vote on the article of impeachment against  Donald Trump.  The Democratic speaker also presented the troops with her challenge coin as a token of appreciation, per NBC News. Pelosi just went outside and thanked the troops protecting the Capitol, and game them all her challenge coin:  pic.twitter.com/VbOhyFxcVj Lindsey Graham  has released a statement expressing opposition to the second impeachment of  Donald Trump,  claiming the resolution “will do great damage to the institutions of government and could invite further violence.”  Supporting the impeachment of President Trump under these circumstances will do great damage to the institutions of government and could invite further violence at a time the President is calling for calm. “If there was a time for America’s political leaders to bend a knee and ask for God’s counsel and guidance, it is now,” the Republican senator said in the statement. “The most important thing for leaders to do in times of crisis is to make things better, not worse.” Graham interestingly leveled criticism at fellow  Republicans  who are supporting the impeachment. “As to Senate leadership, I fear they are making the problem worse, not better,” Graham said. “To my Republican colleagues who legitimize this process, you are doing great damage not only to the country, the future of the presidency, but also to the party.” Graham’s statement comes after reports indicated that Senate Republican leader  Mitch McConnell  has told colleagues he believes Trump committed impeachable offenses. It also comes one week after Graham seemed to distance himself from the president in response to Trump inciting a violent mob to storm the Capitol.   “All I can say is count me out,” Graham said last week. “Enough is enough.” The Republican proposal to amend the rule for debate on the article of impeachment has failed, by a vote of 221-205. The House voted 221-205 to order the previous question on H.Res. 41.  https://t.co/KQHegRyHhp The House is now voting on the rule itself. If it passes, as is expected, that will kick off two hours of debate on the article of impeachment. Andy Biggs,  a Republican congressman of Arizona, is circulating a petition calling on  Liz Cheney  to resign from her post as House Republican conference chair, according to Axios. This petition is being sent around by  @RepAndyBiggsAZ ’s team  pic.twitter.com/S3eoLlEYXE The petition comes one day after Cheney, the third-ranking House Republican, announced she would support the article of impeachment against  Donald Trump.  “The President could have immediately and forcefully intervened to stop the violence. He did not,” Cheney said in a statement explaining her vote. There has never been a greater betrayal by a President of the United States of his office and his oath to the Constitution.  “I will vote to impeach the President.” Republican leadership in the US Senate is mulling the possibility of beginning an impeachment trial of Donald Trump as early as Friday if (as appears highly likely) the Democratic Party-dominated  House of Representatives  approves one article of impeachment, according to a report this morning. A senior Senate Republican aide, who asked not to be identified, has told the above to the Reuters news agency, and stressed that no decisions had yet been made on whether to take that step. Jim Jordan,  one of the president’s fiercest congressional allies, said  Liz Cheney  should be removed as House Republican conference chair for supporting impeachment. “We ought to have a second vote,” Jordan said, per the Washington Post. “The conference ought to vote on that.”  NEWS:  @Jim_Jordan  says  @Liz_Cheney  should be removed as conference chair. "We ought to have a second vote." "The conference ought to vote on that." The proposal to oust Cheney for her impeachment vote seems to be at odds with  Republicans ’ calls for unity and healing after a violent, pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol last week. Apparently the unity does not apply to House members. The vote on the rule to set up debate on the article of impeachment is underway, and a number of  Republicans  are voting by proxy. The decision is noteworthy because Republican members have criticized House speaker  Nancy Pelosi  for allowing voting by proxy amid the coronavirus pandemic. But today, a week after a violent mob stormed the US Capitol, many Republican members are taking the proxy option. As the vote continues, House members are once again sidestepping the metal detectors that have been set up outside the chamber. Rep. Bob Gibbs walks right around the metal detector and enters the House floor. We’re back to this. A HuffPost reporter saw three Republican members --  Bob Gibbs,  Chip Roy  and  Garret Graves --  ignore the metal detectors. Another Republican member,  Russ Fulcher,  pushed past a cop guarding the metal detectors to gain access to the floor. The metal detectors were set up yesterday to provide more security on the floor, in response to the violent riot at the Capitol last week, but some Republicans have objected to their use or ignored them entirely. The House is now voting on the rule to open debate on the article of impeachment, incitement of insurrection, against  Donald Trump. Dozens of  Republicans  have already voted against the rule, but it is expected to pass with all  Democrats ’ support. This is a procedural vote that will allow the House to move on to debate the article of impeachment itself. The final vote on the article will come this afternoon. A New York Times reporter captured a picture of a group of black National Guard troops posing for a photo with the statue of civil rights leader  Rosa Parks  in the Capitol’s Statuary Hall. Taking a photo with the statue of Rosa Parks in Statuary Hall.  pic.twitter.com/wUcGRnPFLS The picture resonated with many, given that it was taken just a week after violent rioters (many of whom espoused white supremacist views) stormed the Capitol. These black service members are now protecting the very lawmakers who were forced to shelter in place because of that mob. Nancy Mace,  a Republican of South Carolina, delivered her first floor speech as a congresswoman moments ago, addressing the article of impeachment against  Donald Trump. “This is not the reason why I wanted to give my first speech in our chambers,” Mace said. Republican Rep. Nancy Mace, making her first speech on the House floor, argues against Trump's impeachment because it's "rushed" and "there is violence on both sides of the aisle"  pic.twitter.com/Ym534qDLbx Mace expressed dismay about the violence at the Capitol last week, saying she was very grateful that she sent her children home before Wednesday because she was worried about the rhetoric she was seeing. Mace, who has been very critical of Trump and his allies who have echoed his baseless claims of widespread fraud in the presidential election, then went on to argue this impeachment is “rushed,” so she will not be supporting it.  She added that “there is violence on both sides of the aisle.” But the violence last week, which resulted in five deaths, was incited by the president and was carried out by a group of his supporters.  “I hold him accountable for the events that transpired,” Mace said of Trump. And yet ... she is not supporting impeachment.
