Sri Lankan holy man’s ‘miracle’ potion for Covid turns sour:	A self-styled Sri Lankan holy man’s supposed miracle potion to prevent Covid-19 has turned sour after a minister who publicly drank it was taken to hospital with the virus. Thousands defied public gathering restrictions to swamp a village in central  Sri Lanka  last month to get the syrup made by Dhammika Bandara. The women and child development minister, Piyal Nishantha de Silva, was among several politicians who consumed the concoction, but parliamentary officials said he had since tested positive for coronavirus and was taken to a treatment centre. Family members of another politician from Bandara’s village had also been infected despite taking the syrup. Pro-government media gave widespread publicity to the holy man, who claimed the formula was revealed to him by Kali, the Hindu goddess of death and destruction of evil. The only ingredients he acknowledged were honey and nutmeg. The government has scrambled to distance itself from Bandara, whose preparation was approved as a food supplement by the official indigenous medicine unit. “Although some parliamentarians took it, the government does not endorse it,” said Keheliya Rambukwella, the minister of mass media. Sri Lanka is in the grip of a coronavirus surge, with the number of cases rising from 3,300 in early October to a total of 53,750 infections now.
UK Covid live: Priti Patel holds news briefing after 1,290 further Covid-related deaths reported:	And here are some more of the key figures from today’s update to the  UK government’s coronavirus dashboard , which is recording 1,290 further deaths. (See  4.27pm.) Northern Ireland’s coronavirus lockdown restrictions will be extended to 5 March 5, PA Media is reporting. Its story goes on: Stormont health minister  Robin Swann  proposed the step to help drive down case numbers. Ministerial colleagues at the executive in Belfast agreed the move and there are suggestions the curbs could ultimately continue until Easter. An extended lockdown closing non-essential retailers, keeping schools shut to most pupils and encouraging employees to work from home began after Christmas. Family gatherings are prohibited and police enforcement has been stepped up. The proportion of positive tests for Covid-19 in England declined for the second week in a row, according to  Public  Health  England  data to 17 January. In week 2, 10.5% of Covid-19 tests in England came back positive, down from 13.3% the week before and 17.5% the week before that.  There was also a decline in the number of confirmed cases; however, test results for the most recent week are provisional due to a delay in processing samples. The figure also showed hospital and ICU admissions began stabilise, but more data is needed to confirm this trend. The UK has just updated i ts coronavirus dashboard , and it says 1,290 further Covid deaths have been recorded. That is well down on the totals recorded for yesterday (1,820 - the highest so far) and for Tuesday (1,610), but it is still very high compared with previous daily headline figures. Prior to last Tuesday, there were only two days during the entire pandemic recording daily death totals of more than 1,200. Now the seven-day rolling average is running at 1,224. I will post more from the dashboard shortly. Northern Ireland will extend its lockdown until 5 March, the BBC’s  Jayne McCormark  reports. Confirmation that NI’s current lockdown restrictions will be extended until 5 March after the executive met this afternoon, with the next review date 18 February. Question of keeping schools closed later to come in a paper to next week’s executive Here is  the BBC’s full story,  which also says ministers on the Northern Ireland executive were told the lockdown might have to remain in place until Easter. The Al-Abbas Islamic Centre in Balsall Heath, Birmingham, opened as a vaccination centre today, and is expected to vaccinate up to 500 people a day.  Sheikh Nuru Mohammed , the imam, said the programme was going well, and the first woman to be immunised was “elated and excited”. He told BBC Radio 4’s The World at One: We believe we are together in this, we have a role to play in the fight against this pandemic. My community has had its share of  Coronavirus , we’ve lost people, and so we thought we cannot sit on the periphery, sit on the fence, we need to stand up and be counted. Secondly, fake news is making rounds and we cannot allow it to be doing the damage it is doing. Opening the mosque [for vaccinations] will send a very strong, powerful signal. In my own community, thankfully, people are slowly but surely accepting that the way out is vaccination. We have a group of medical doctors in our community who each week answer very important questions. That is helping a lot.... I strongly believe as an imam, as a religious leader of this community, by opening our doors for this to take place we will definitely solve the problem. And our religious authorities have issued verdicts saying there is nothing wrong with this vaccination - go for it, otherwise you’ll keep on suffering from this pandemic. Just under a quarter of people aged over 80 in Wales have received the Covid-19 vaccine, PA Media says. Its report goes on: Public  Health  Wales said 43,879 first doses had been given to the over-80s - 23.9% of the 183,394 people in that age group. The agency confirmed 56.4% of care home residents had received their first jab, totalling 9,364 out of 16,602, while 67.5% of care home staff had been vaccinated. There have been 86,717 jabs given to health care workers across Wales, the figures released today showed. Here are  the latest daily vaccination figures  from  NHS England , showing the total number of people to have received a first dose and a second dose, by region, by yesterday. According to the government’s dashboard, which has not yet been updated since yesterday, on Tuesday the cumulative total for first doses in England was 3,985,579, implying 318,151 first doses were administered yesterday. Dr Marc Baguelin , an epidemiologist at Imperial College London and a member of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (SPI-M), one of the groups that feeds advice into Sage, the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, told the World at One that bars and restaurants should not reopen before May. He told the programme: We looked at the partial reopening [of the hospitality sector] and the increase in the R number; it will generate an increase in the R number, the extent of which we don’t know really. Something of this scale, if it was to happen earlier than May, would generate a bump in transmission, which is already really bad. So you have a lot of pressure on hospitals, you will have another wave of some extent. At best you will keep on having very, very unsustainable levels of pressure on the  NHS . Northern Ireland  has recorded 21 further Covid deaths (up from 16 a week ago today) and 732 further cases (down from 973 a week ago). The Department of Health  #COVID19  dashboard has been updated. 732 individuals have tested positive for COVID-19 in the past 24 hours. Sadly, a further 21 deaths have been reported (5 outside the 24 hour period). https://t.co/YN16dmGzhv   pic.twitter.com/xARF1hWTzQ Julian Knight , the Conservative MP who chairs the Commons culture committee, has said that  the cancellation of Glastonbury this year  is “devastating” and that the government should be doing more to protect music festivals. The news that the UK has lost the Glastonbury Festival for a second year running is devastating. 1/  https://t.co/5dFj68VSSo We have repeatedly called for Ministers to act to protect our world renowned festivals like this one with a Government-backed insurance scheme. Our plea fell on deaf ears and now the chickens have come home to roost. 2/  https://t.co/5dFj68VSSo The jewel in the crown will be absent but surely the Government cannot ignore the message any longer – it must act now to save this vibrant and vital festivals sector. 3/3  https://t.co/5dFj68VSSo Public  Health  Wales  has recorded 46 more Covid deaths (down from 54 a week ago today) and 1,153 further cases (down from 1,644 a week ago today). The rapid COVID-19 surveillance dashboard has been updated 💻  https://t.co/zpWRYTbM6P 📱  https://t.co/HSclxqgUsP Read our daily statement here:  https://t.co/u6SKHyIY46   pic.twitter.com/25lVegxFbQ Public Health England  has published  its latest weekly Covid surveillance report (pdf).  It covers the period to the end of last week, and it says case rates are falling in all regions, but remain highest in London. Our weekly  #COVID19  surveillance report also shows that case rates have fallen in all regions and continue to be highest in  #London . Read the full report:  https://t.co/8dYt9zEVk9   pic.twitter.com/sRD62DK1bD Hospital admissions for  #COVID19  remain highest in those aged 85 and over. Find out more in our weekly surveillance report:  https://t.co/8dYt9zEVk9   pic.twitter.com/yZevqrNucA Hospital admission rates for  #COVID19  are still rising in several regions and are now highest in the West Midlands. See the data in our weekly surveillance report:  https://t.co/8dYt9zEVk9   pic.twitter.com/c4x8zvmnn7 On his visit to Didsbury, south Manchester, to inspect damage caused by the flooding,  Boris Johnson  said he was a passionate believer in the value of planting trees as a means of reducing the risk from flooding. He said: One idea that everybody in the Environment Agency talks about, and I believe in absolutely passionately, is planting trees on the higher ground to help absorb some of that rainfall, to help mitigate the effects of flooding. This government has a very ambitious tree-planting programme, but, in my view, we’re not going fast enough. As the spring comes and we come out of the pandemic, we’re going to want to see a lot done to build in long-term resilience against flooding and against climate change, and planting trees is a big part of that. He also said the government had spent £60m on flood defences in the Greater Manchester area, and that another £20m would be spent as part of a £5.2bn programme of flood defences over the next six years. Ministers from the Northern Ireland executive have been meeting today and, according to the BBC’s  Jayne McCormack , they are considering a recommendation to extend their lockdown until 5 March, with the possibility that it could be extended until Easter. Covid-19: NI lockdown could be in place 'until Easter' Per ⁦ @endamcclafferty ⁩ - it’s understood ministers have been told it’s possible lockdown restrictions could last beyond 5 March date, with real concern about easing restrictions prematurely  https://t.co/uMHgTiRH8a According to  a report in today’s Telegraph (paywall) , hotel groups have begun talks with the government about the possibility of their facilities being used as quarantine centres for people arriving in the UK. Sir Keir Starmer  said he was not against the idea, but that what mattered most was that checks are carried out to ensure people are complying with quarantine, not where people stay. He said: The most important thing is not where somebody is located but are we checking? Is the system really working? That’s been the structural flaw since the start. It would be easier to monitor [in hotels] but the central question for the government is why have you been so slow with borders. I’m not against hotels but I don’t think that’s the answer. Wherever people go are they being checked on, that’s the critical question. If that works better in hotels, then so be it. I don’t stand or fall on hotels, I stand or fall on how well the system works. Vaccine supplies to the north-east and Yorkshire will be halved next week, mainly to allow other regions to catch up with the progress they have been making, the   Health  Service Journal  reports. In  its story , which it attributes to well-placed sources, the HSJ says this will mean around 100,000 doses will be available for vaccination centres in the region run by GPs, where most vaccinations are taking place – down from around 200,000 this week. The HSJ says people have been told “the main reason is that large parts of the north-east and Yorkshire  have vaccinated a greater percentage of their population  than other regions, including very many of the over-80s, meaning they are more quickly moving on to groups under 80”. One in 10 major hospital trusts had no spare adult critical care beds last week,  NHS England  figures show. The report from PA Media goes on: Some 15 out of 140 acute trusts reported 100% occupancy of all “open” beds each day from January 11 to 17. These included University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, one of the largest trusts in England, along with Portsmouth Hospitals University NHS Trust and Dartford & Gravesham  NHS  Trust, both in south-east England. The figure is up slightly on 12 out of 140 acute trusts that reported 100% occupancy of beds each day from January 4 to 10.
Portugal's health system 'very close to limit' – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Brazil  had 33,040 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 551 fatalities, the first day in six the death toll has been below 1,000, the health ministry said on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 8,488,099 cases since the pandemic began, and the official death toll has risen to 209,847, according to ministry data. It is the world’s third worst outbreak behind the United States and India. Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the  NHS  in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. Stevens said the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” Stevens said on Sunday. Over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the  UK  government has announced. More than 3.8 million people – including over-80s, care home residents and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will begin to be offered to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups but sites that have enough supply, and capacity to vaccinate more people, will be allowed to offer jabs to the next two cohorts. Ghana ’s Covid-19 infection rates are skyrocketing and include strains of the virus not previously seen in the country, threatening to overwhelm the health system, President Nana Akufo-Addo said on Sunday. Since 5 January, the number of active cases has risen to 1,924 from about 900 , Akufo-Addo said in a speech. There are now  120 severe cases, up from 18 a week ago . The president said that some people arriving from abroad had tested positive for “new variants” of the virus. Last week, Gambia recorded its first two cases of the highly infectious UK variant, in what appears to be the first confirmation of its presence in Africa. Ghana is not yet close to the peak seen during the first wave of infections in the middle of last year, but could quickly reach that level if cases keep rising at the current rate. If they do, the president said he would impose another partial lockdown, despite worries about what that would do to one of west Africa’s largest economies. “Our Covid-19 treatment centres have gone from having zero patients to now being full because of the upsurge in infections,” the president said. “At this current rate ... our healthcare infrastructure will be overwhelmed.” Across Africa, a second coronavirus wave is infecting twice as many people per day than at the height of last year’s first wave  and has yet to peak, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The rise has raised concern across the continent where, unlike in  Europe  and the United States, cash-strapped governments have been unable to secure supply deals with vaccine manufacturers, putting the onus for now on containment. Akufo-Addo said details about access to vaccines and a rollout plan would be announced “very soon”. Schools in  Malawi  will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday. After reporting no positive cases for almost two months, the country has seen a sudden resurgence in coronavirus cases since the middle of last month. The country of 19 million people has reported 12,470 cases of Covid-19 and 314 deaths since the pandemic began last year. Chakwera said  a third of those deaths were reported in the past 16 days , forcing the government to seek additional funding to contain the pandemic at a time when the country is in 4.1tn kwacha ($5.37bn) of debt. The new measures concerning schools and bars will take effect from Monday. Chakwera also said the government has allocated an additional 1.6bn kwacha ($2.1m) in funds to be spent on recruiting frontline healthcare workers, 1,000 intensive care unit beds and 1,000 oxygen cylinders among other requirements. Last week the government reported that two senior cabinet ministers and two other high-profile members of the government had died from Covid-19. Workers in  Melbourne  are expected to return to city offices in large numbers on Monday, with research indicating most feel safe and ready to return after nine months of remote working. Private workplaces in  Victoria  are able to return to 50% capacity from Monday, with public service offices permitted to ramp up to 25%. A Roy Morgan survey of 503 city workers from late November to mid-December shows almost two-thirds were either willing to return to their central  Melbourne  workplaces (44%) or had already (15%). The most commonly cited factors making workers feel safe to return were Covid-safe plans and adherence to health measures. France  reported a further 141 deaths from coronavirus on Sunday, taking the cumulative toll since March to 70,283, the public health authority said. It also reported 16,642 new infections within the previous 24 hours. The infection figures on Sundays are usually lower because fewer tests are taken. The number of daily cases has been hovering around 20,000 for the last week. The health ministry said in a separate statement that 422,127 people had now been vaccinated, up from about 413,000 on Saturday. Eurostar  has said it is facing an existential threat, as business leaders pleaded with the government to step in and save the “vital link” with Europe. A 95% drop in passenger numbers  has brought the cross-Channel train service to its knees, and the company reiterated on Sunday that while government loans had been extended to aviation, international high-speed rail had also been severely affected by the pandemic. Here’s a graphic showing the number of vaccine doses US states have administered, courtesy of ourworldindata.org  Portugal ’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. “Our health system is under a situation of extreme pressure,”  Health  Minister Marta Temido told reporters on Sunday afternoon after a visit to a struggling hospital. “There is a limit and we are very close to it.” The health system, which prior to the pandemic had the  lowest number of critical care beds per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe , can accommodate a maximum of 672 COVID-19 patients in intensive care units (ICUs), according to health ministry data. The number of people in ICUs with COVID-19 reached 647 on Sunday, according to health authority DGS. The Portuguese Association of Hospital Administrators said the number of coronavirus patients needing hospitalisation was likely to dramatically increase over the next week. Three days into a nationwide lockdown, the country of just 10 million people reported 10,385 new cases and 152 fatalities on Sunday, bringing the total number of infections to 549,801, with the death toll increasing to 8,861. According to  ourworldindata.org , supported by Oxford University,  Portugal had the highest number of coronavirus cases in Europe per capita over the last seven days . Most new cases were concentrated in Lisbon, where many patients at the city’s public hospitals have already been transferred elsewhere, including to health units in the country’s second biggest city Porto. The  UK  variant of the coronavirus has killed three residents at a retirement home in northwestern  Belgium  and infected 111 people including 39 staff members, its director Jurgen Duyck told AFP on Sunday. The cluster represents two-thirds of the residents of the De Groene Verte home in the  western Flanders city of  Houthulst  near the border with France. Belgium has suffered one of the worst per capita death rates in the world during the epidemic with its nursing homes representing more than half of overall deaths from the disease, according to the Public  Health  Institute. Mayor Joris Hindryckx said the outbreak prompted a halt to “all social and sporting activities” in the town of around 10,000 people. The source of the contamination is unknown, but the mayor said the infection must have been “indirect” as none of those testing positive was known to have travelled to Britain. Brazil ’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. The vaccines produced by Oxford/AstraZeneca and China’s Sinovac will both now be permitted in South America’s biggest country, which has the world’s second highest Covid death toll with more than 209,000 deaths. The decision was taken on Sunday afternoon after three of Anvisa’s five directors voted for the move. The ruling is a major victory for Brazil’s 212 million citizens - reeling from one of the worst epidemics in the world - but a stinging political defeat for the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro. Bolsonaro has failed to acquire any doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and as a result vaccination with Sinovac’s CoronaVac is likely to begin on Sunday in São Paulo state. São Paulo is governed by one of the president’s biggest political rivals, João Doria, who has championed the Chinese vaccine. Doria will reportedly offer the first shot to a local intensive care nurse called Mônica Calazans on Sunday, making a high-profile pronouncement he hopes will cement his image as Brazil’s Covid saviour in the public imagination. “Brazil is in a rush to save lives,” Doria tweeted on Sunday afternoon. Bolsonaro’s Twitter account remained silent.
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Indian hesitancy sets back world's biggest Covid vaccination drive:	India’s Covid-19 vaccine drive has been hampered by turnout as low as 22% in some states, as fears over the safety of the vaccine and the spread of misinformation has fuelled widespread hesitancy. On Saturday,  India  launched the world’s largest vaccination programme as it began the massive task of vaccinating its 1.3 billion citizens against coronavirus. On the first day of India’s vaccine drive on Saturday, more than 200,000 vaccinations were given – the highest one-day total of any country – but nonetheless fell short of the nationwide government targets by over 100,000. By Tuesday evening, the government said 631,417 people had been vaccinated, far below the expected figure. So far the overall national turnout has averaged a lacklustre 64%, while in states such as Tamil Nadu and Punjab, uptake of the vaccine was as low as 22% and 23% in the first two days of the vaccination drive. The low turnout was attributed to a nervousness about safety among the healthcare workers who were first in line to receive the vaccine, as well as technical difficulties with the app designed to alert people to their vaccine appointments. Two Covid-19 vaccines have been approved for emergency use in India, the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine – known as Covishield in India – and a domestically developed vaccine called Covaxin, produced by Indian company Bharat Biotech. The Oxford/AstraZeneva vaccine, which has completed international trials and was found to have about 62% efficacy with two doses, has already been widely distributed in the UK. Britain’s NHS  says  of the vaccines in use in that country: “The coronavirus vaccine is safe and effective. It gives you the best protection against coronavirus.” Covaxin has not completed phase 3 trials and so there is no final data on its efficacy, making India one of the few countries rolling out a vaccine still in its trial stages. However, the drugs controller of India said interim data from an ongoing trial of more than 22,000 people showed it was “100% safe” and effective. Nonetheless, some healthcare professionals in India expressed concerns that they had not been provided with enough data on the vaccines’ safety and efficacy and were nervous at the speed the vaccines were being rolled out. Dr Namrata Agarwal, a paediatrician in Kashipur, was among those not eager to take the vaccine. “I’m very hesitant,” she said. “All the protocols have been rushed and hurried through. I am not so concerned about the efficacy of a vaccine – that can vary – and I can handle that but what concerns me is its safety and the chance that it might cause harm.” On Tuesday, Bharat Biotech released a fact sheet of those with underlying heath problems who should avoid the Covaxin vaccine, raising questions about why it had not been publicised before the vaccine was released. Dr Mandeep Aulakh, a pathologist in Chandigarh, said she would wait a few weeks before getting vaccinated. “The vaccine development was rushed,” she said. “I also have a few allergies so I have not volunteered to take it.” The Indian government had hoped to vaccinate 300 million people by August, a target that will prove challenging if uptake remains at its current rate. In the capital, Delhi – which hopes to vaccine 100,000 people a day – only 3,598 healthcare workers received their vaccine on Monday, far below the daily target of 8,136, making uptake just 44% that day in India’s capital. In Delhi’s largest hospital, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), just eight healthcare workers out of an expected 100 turned up on Monday for their jab. In Mumbai, one of the cities worst affected by Covid-19, turnout for vaccines was 48% on the first day, with 1,926 out of a target of 4,000 people turning up for their vaccine. It was far below Mumbai’s ambitious target of vaccinating 50,000 healthcare workers a day. Dr Amit Thadhai, director of Niramaya hospital in Mumbai, said: “There have been a long series of questions which have been raised about the safety and efficacy of the vaccine. The fact that doctors have been asked to take it first has caused problems; doctors are not used to enrolling in trials which is why the uptake has been so low.” Thadahi said there was also a decreased sense of urgency to take the vaccine because the number of Covid cases in India was in rapid decline, with new cases at their lowest level since mid-June. “The motivation to take a vaccine is not great at the moment,” he said. On Saturday, the state of Maharashtra, which is home to Mumbai, temporarily suspended the vaccination drive after less than 2,000 people were vaccinated across the state. It was partly attributed to widespread technical glitches which meant people were not given alerts for their vaccination appointments. Misinformation and fake news about the vaccine was also doing the rounds on WhatsApp. In one widely circulated video, Dr Johan Denis, an alleged “medical doctor and homeopath” from Belgium, made the unsubstantiated claim that “the vaccine is not proven safe or effective” and the false statements that: “It’s a fake pandemic … it’s all been orchestrated to create fear to make you take the vaccine which might cause irreversible changes to your DNA.” Ashraf Buchson, a carpet seller from Delhi who had been forwarded the video, said the videos had given him second thoughts about the vaccine. “When I see these videos, I feel anxious. I don’t know who to believe and everyone in my family is divided,” said Buchson. The low turnout appeared to take state governments by surprise. In Karnataka only 47% of people registered to receive a vaccine had turned up to their appointments by Monday, making the state government unlikely to hit its target of vaccinating 650,000 healthcare workers by the end of the week. “Despite the district having the highest literacy rate in the state, I am surprised at why healthcare workers are reluctant to take vaccines,” Karnataka’s health minister, K Sudhakar, told local media. Many doctors said politicians and public figures should be publicly taking the vaccine to allay fears. “If well-known figures take it, it will help push up the numbers,” said Dr Sanjiv Zutshi, a cardiologist in Delhi who is going to get the jab in two days. Dr Arun Shah, a senior paediatrician in Muzaffarnagar, agreed. “The prime minister himself and the health minister should have the vaccine. That would reassure many people. And to create a sense of confidence, every vaccinated person should share photos and their experience on WhatsApp to spread reassurance,” said Shah.
China revives conspiracy theory of US army link to Covid:	Attempts by Chinese authorities to shift the narrative around Covid-19’s origins have reignited on social media this week after a government spokesperson revived a  conspiracy theory  that it came from a US army lab. Hua Chunying, a spokesperson for the foreign affairs ministry, was responding to a US state department “fact sheet” released last week that claimed there was new evidence of researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology falling ill before the first known cases of Covid-19 in the city. The state department did not provide data to back up  its assertions . Hua accused the US of spreading “conspiracy theories and lies” as part of the “last-day madness of Mr Liar”, apparently referring to either Donald Trump or his secretary of state, Mike Pompeo. “I’d like to stress that if the United States truly respects facts, it should open the biological lab at Fort Detrick, give more transparency to issues like its 200-plus overseas bio-labs, invite WHO experts to conduct origin-tracing in the United States, and respond to the concerns from the international community with real actions,” said Hua. On the microblogging platform Weibo, the Chinese hashtag for “biological laboratory in US Fort Detrick” has been viewed more than 900m times, with comments latching on to the conspiracy theory that the US could be the source. “The origin of coronavirus – American virus!” said one commenter. Another said: “Apologise to the bats!” Tit-for-tat accusations of the virus beginning in a lab have bubbled since at least mid-2020, after China’s attempts to cover up the initial outbreak. In recent months Chinese officials have ramped up efforts to  suggest the virus began outside of China , airing theories without evidence linking it to US military personnel, and there has been blanket state media coverage of virus detections on frozen food imports and ice-cream. WHO’s director of the health emergencies programme, Michael Ryan, said it was “highly speculative” to argue that coronavirus came from outside  China , and investigations should start where the first confirmed human cases emerged. China only this month  allowed a team of scientists  from the WHO into the country on a mission to investigate the source of the outbreak. The team is completing quarantine in Wuhan, and several members have told media that their investigation is not about apportioning blame but about finding as much information as possible to reduce the risk of the disease. They have expressed concern about Chinese officials blocking access. The virus was first identified among people who had worked at or visited a  market in Wuhan , and there is evidence to suggest the virus jumped to humans from bats via an intermediary animal.
I thought my eating disorder was my protector, but I have been anorexia's prey:	Name:  Melis Layik Age:  21 Dreams of:  Being a lawyer, an author and a grassroots organiser I increased my dosage of antidepressants today. With the loosening of Victoria’s Covid restrictions and the surge of New Year’s weight loss marketing, my eating disorder has once again overwhelmed me with feelings of inadequacy and self-loathing. I’m splayed on the couch, light-headed and nauseous; classic side effects of my medication. But it’s worth it. Antidepressants have been a life-saving intervention in my mental health journey, particularly in the past year. I’m so glad I never listened to the fear-mongering and mythology which surrounds them. The notions that I would “feel nothing” and that my “personality would change” have turned out to be completely unfounded. To the contrary, they have allowed me to live my life free from perpetual rumination, anxiety and self-harm. In the short term, though, I am dizzy. I’ve been recovering from an eating disorder for over five years. The illness has infiltrated my mind and robbed me of joy. I have missed out on dinners, parties and holidays because of my chronic fear of gaining weight. I have spent hours at the gym instead of seeing friends and have self-harmed after eating food I perceive as unhealthy. I have internalised so deeply that my value lies in my proximity to thinness that my self-worth has become directly proportional to how little I can consume on any given day. I have been anorexia’s prey, all while thinking that it was my friend and protector, my arbiter of discipline. When I heard that gyms were going to be closed during the pandemic, I spiralled into paranoia. My mind was plagued with visions of my future obesity, accompanied with delusions that my friends, family and partner would find me repulsive. While I recognised the absurdity of these claims, the power of the illness was overbearing; my rationality did not stand a chance. My fears were validated by the endless barrage of home workouts which were marketed to me and I loathed myself for not creating an at-home gym using my couch and some sacks of rice or lifting my fridge a hundred times a day. My mind repeated its bigoted script:  You are so lazy, you are weak, you are repulsive. With so much time on my hands during Victoria’s extended lockdown, with uni being online and still with no work for me to go to, it became even easier to berate my appearance. Hours were spent in front of the mirror, pinching my skin, measuring my waist, checking my reflection from every angle for signs of imperfection. I felt profoundly lonely in these ruminations and feelings. It seemed like everyone else could eat and exist without a second thought. But I recognise now that I wasn’t the only one. Around one million Australians suffer from eating disorders and the limitations of extended Covid lockdowns and restrictions have reportedly  worsened many people’s illnesses . Disruptions to routine, use of videoconferencing (which exposes individuals to their own image) and increased marketing of weight-loss programs have also culminated in heightened negative body image and restrictive behaviours in the  general population. Now in the New Year, I once again feel victimised by the fitness industry. It jeers that I need to fix myself, become thinner and transform into a better “me”. My eating disorder agrees, bolstered by this external validation. Years of therapy have taught me that I need to resist the compulsion to appease my illness and buy into this narrative, but it’s so hard when both the outside world and my internal dialogue is telling me otherwise. I feel defeated, but equally, I feel enraged. It’s the same trick every year. Images of models chiseled and photoshopped to perfection, thrust upon us all to inspire feelings of inadequacy, all cloaked in the language of health. Ads meticulously engineered to target feelings of insecurity so we buy whichever product promises us thinness and eternal happiness. No wonder eating disorders are so prevalent. It’s essential to raise awareness for the insidiousness of these tactics and advocate for better mental health education. I’m glad I can finally recognise this propaganda for what it is. I’ve lost years of my life to an eating disorder and I will not lose any more. The truth is I don’t want to lose weight in 2021. I want to gain mental wellbeing. •  In Australia, support is available at  Beyond Blue  on 1300 22 4636,  Lifeline  on 13 11 14, and at  MensLine  on 1300 789 978. In the UK, the charity  Mind  is available on 0300 123 3393 and  Childline  on 0800 1111. In the US,  Mental Health America  is available on 800-273-8255
At least 500 to be hired for vaccine rollout – as it happened:	We will leave our live coverage here for the day. You can follow our rolling global coverage of the coronavirus pandemic  here . This is what happened today:  Thanks for your company today. We’ll see you again in the morning.  It’s fair to say  Scott Morrison ’s comment about how 28 January, 1788  “wasn’t a particularly flash day for the people on those [first fleet] vessels either,”  has not gone down well.  Labor’s Indigenous Australians spokeswoman,  Linda Burney,  said:  Suffering is not a competition. What the prime minister has said makes no sense. As the leader of the country, he has an example to set for the rest of the nation and he should know better. How can we expect to see real progress on issues such as reconciliation and closing the gap when he makes such ignorant and unhelpful comments like this? And Labor MP  Graham Perrett  offered a fact check – there were only 11 ships in the first fleet, not 12 as the PM said. Morrison’s electorate is Cook, named for Captain James Cook.  Perrett quipped: Luckily our prime minister doesn’t have an electorate connected with this event. We shared Greens senator  Lidia Thorp e ’s  criticism of Morrison’s comments earlier. She wasn’t alone in her anger.  . @ScottMorrisonMP  says it (Jan 26, 1788) “wasn’t such a flash day for the people on the vessels”. Show me the “flash days” Blackfullas have had since then? When you talk about “how far we’ve come”, you mean white prosperity. Coz I’m still set to die 10-15 years before my mates. And a name change has been suggested: Could we perhaps change 'Australia Day' to 'Not a Flash Day'?  pic.twitter.com/qNObGOXcHU Berejiklian has also said that coronavirus restrictions in NSW will not be eased before 26 January, amid concerns of “super-spreading events”. She was talking primarily about Australia Day parties.  There are different rules for protests, which you can find  here .  NSW premier  Gladys Berejiklian  has joined the prime minister and  Peter Dutton  in criticising Cricket Australia for changing the name of its Big Bash game on 26 January. To be clear, they are still holding the games,  they’ve just decided to drop references to ‘Australia Day’ in the name of promoting inclusivity . The bare minimum, if you will. But like Morrison and Dutton, Berejiklian disapproves. She was asked by 2GB host  Jim Wilson  if the decision to remove references to “Australia Day” was “political correctness gone crazy”. Berejiklian replied: Can I just say Cricket Australia is a really professional outfit and our government loves dealing with them but I don’t think it’s too late for them to change their mind on this one. Wilson: Would you hope they do?  Berejiklian:  I do absolutely,  I hope they do change their mind . I mean, you can’t imagine Australia Day or summer without the cricket, cricket and Australia Day kind of go hand in hand. Look as I said they’re a professional outfit, extremely well-run organisation and  I would hope they reconsider that on behalf of the nation. To be clear: the cricket is still being played on 26 January. They are just dropping Australia Day from the branding. This does not in any way prevent people who celebrate Australia Day from watching the cricket on Australia Day. Tasmania has dropped coronavirus border restrictions for greater Brisbane and much of Sydney. From AAP: The  greater Brisbane region will shift from medium risk to low risk from 12.01am on Friday , Premier  Peter Gutwein  announced on Thursday. It means travel between  Queensland  and Tasmania can occur without restrictions. “Queenslanders entering the state will no longer need to quarantine,” Gutwein said. Tasmania had declared greater Brisbane high risk on 8 January after an outbreak of the more contagious UK Covid-19 strain and forced all recent arrivals into isolation. Those people still in quarantine will be allowed out at 12.01am on Friday. “I want to thank them for their patience during this. It’s been a challenging period of time,” Gutwein said. “Not everybody I’m sure will race out at one minute past 12. Some may like to sleep through the course of the night, but it will be welcome news.” Twenty-four local government areas in greater Sydney have been downgraded from medium to low risk. “The outbreak in the northern beaches appears to be over. The last diagnosed case was over a week ago now,” State Public  Health  Director  Mark Veitch  said. However  10 council areas in the city’s west, including Canterbury and Parramatta, remain medium risk, meaning people who have recently been in those areas must still quarantine upon arrival. It is the only remaining quarantine requirement for domestic travellers entering Tasmania. Both Queensland and NSW recorded no locally acquired cases on Thursday. This is quite cool. Students in Western Australia  will be able to learn Hindi, Korean, and Tamil at school in just two years’ time. The curriculum for Hindi and Korean will be developed for years 11 and 12, and for Tamil it will be pre-primary to year 12. Every student in years three to six in WA has to study a language.  Education minister,  Sue Ellery,  said:  We have an internationally diverse culture in Western Australia and these new subjects will give schools the opportunity to offer a broader choice to students in their local area.  Western Australia’s engagement with Asia is a state priority, and giving students the opportunity to engage with these additional languages will set them up for jobs for the future.  Parents often raise with me the choice of languages in WA schools so I am thrilled to be able to announce this today.” The Law Council says criticism of Australia’s age of criminal responsibility at the United Nations overnight was a “stark reminder” that Australia was behind the rest of the world in its treatment of juvenile offenders.  The council’s president,  Dr Jacoba Brasch QC , said Australian governments should commit to raising the age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14. It is unconscionable that in 2021 Australia, while a child under 13 years cannot sign up for a Facebook account, cannot board a plane unsupervised if under 12, but children as young as 10 can be found to be criminally responsible, charged with a crime and   kept in detention. The Law Council is not discounting that there are some legitimate concerns held amongst some parts of the community about community safety and juvenile crime. However, children aged 10 to 14 are statistically very unlikely to commit serious crimes such as homicide. However, evidence strongly suggests that  having a low minimum age of criminal responsibility of 10 years old does not work . It does not make our communities safer because it fails to prevent reoffending or to rehabilitate children. It does not make the children themselves safer. Instead, it is likely to entrench criminality and creates cycles of inter-generational disadvantage that heighten reoffending rates.  Guardian Australia’s  Laura Murphy-Oates  has written extensively about the damage the juvenile justice system in Australia has wrought upon Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children. You can read the latest in her series  here .  Australian Open  tennis players who have not been locked down as potential close contacts of coronavirus cases are let out of hotel quarantine to practise. A man  fatally shot by police following a car chase in Gippsland  was fired upon very soon after being confronted by officers, police have said. The man in his 30s died after being shot twice in Drouin, about 100km east of  Melbourne , this morning. He had allegedly stolen a silver Audi at knifepoint at Mirboo North, about 60km further east, at 7.40am and drove “erratically” before police began a pursuit. That ended when the Audi crashed into a guard rail in Drouin.  Acting commissioner  Glenn Weir  told reporters: Police confronted the male who exited the car with the edged weapon, refused demands to put the weapon down, advanced on police. Two shots were fired and the male was struck. Police on the scene rendered first aid and called for an ambulance ... Unfortunately the efforts of the police and the ambulance were unsuccessful and the male is deceased at the scene. Weir said  the firing of the shots was “fairly instantaneous” with the man getting out of the car. The man was known to police in the Latrobe Valley, and was “fairly itinerate”, Weir said.  He would not comment on what kind of knife the man was allegedly holding, but said it was:  Certainly fairly terrifying for the owner of the Audi and also the police who were confronted with that knife. The driver of the Audi was not hurt. The state coroner, judge  John Cain , attended the scene and will conduct a public inquest. Witnesses have been asked to contact Crime Stoppers. Fatal shootings by police officers and of people who shoot themselves in police custody account for 30% of all deaths in police custody, according to the Australian Institute of Criminology. Australia’s biggest bank, the Commonwealth Bank, says there has so far been a “seamless transition” away from government benefits – but any further Covid clampdowns are likely to cause more economic damage once the jobkeeper scheme expires at the end of March. CBA’s chief economist,  Gareth Aird , based his prognostications on the bank’s internal data about customer accounts – a pretty good snapshot of the country given the group’s dominant market position. In a note out this afternoon, Aird said  household income has “inched higher over the past few months”,  despite cuts to jobkeeper and jobseeker payments by the government. He said: Growth in salary and wages paid into CBA bank accounts has lifted materially over recent months reflecting strong growth in employment, hours worked and the personal income tax cuts. Household savings have also rocketed, fuelled by government benefits, increased employment and withdrawals from superannuation – in December, average savings balances per household among bank customers was up by 16.7% on the same time in the previous year. The average total savings balance per household continues to rise sharply and the huge amount of savings accrued by the household sector will be a key source of support for household consumption in 2021. However, CBA’s data still shows government benefits continuing to pump into customer accounts. Aird thinks government policy on benefits is “very well calibrated” – so far. But if restrictions return and government support for business and workers does not, it will be a different story. In shark news, this good boy has been spotted just 100 metres off Cottesloe Beach, one of the most popular beaches in Perth.  A shark has been spotted 100 metres off Cottesloe Beach just weeks after a monster great white stalked the Perth coastline and forced the evacuation of the popular ocean spot. 🔒  https://t.co/S737DghAI7   #wanews   #perthnews   pic.twitter.com/p95LA6anjC Great whites are beautiful animals and pretty common off the coast of Western Australia at this time of year.  And I will just correct the wording of the above tweet: North Cottesloe beach was closed because a five-metre great white shark was  spotted  300 meters offshore, and a tiger shark was detected multiple times.  Former Victorian minister  Marlene Kairouz  could face expulsion from the Labor party after her initial answers to an audit on allegations of branch stacking failed to satisfy party stalwarts, AAP reports. Marlene Kairouz  has been issued a show-cause notice by audit administrators  Steve Bracks  and  Jenny Macklin , who have  already purged the party of 1,700 “non-genuine” members. The high-profile duo is digging deeper into the scandal, with former powerbroker  Adem Somyurek  accused of handing over cash and using parliamentary employees to create fake branch members and amass political influence. A factional ally of Somyurek, Kairouz and fellow minister  Robin Scott  resigned from cabinet in June after their staff were implicated in his alleged branch-stacking efforts. All three are under investigation as part of a joint probe between the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission and Victorian Ombudsman. Kairouz has vowed to clear her name and was offered the opportunity to respond to the party elders in a questionnaire. Despite legal advice to the contrary, the ex-minister for consumer affairs, gaming and liquor regulation returned the form only to be chastised. She said in a statement on Wednesday: The administrators were not satisfied with my responses and issued a show-cause letter due to my responses being deemed to be ‘non-responsive answers that have done little to assist us’.  Kairouz said she was told to keep her answers “succinct” to avoid inadvertently impeding the ongoing corruption watchdog probe. My responses to the questionnaire were prepared in good faith. The state member for Kororoit in Melbourne’s outer west insists the Labor party is not accusing her of branch stacking. I am disappointed that my attempts to co-operate with this investigation have not been interpreted as such. After consultation with IBAC, Kairouz said she had provided more information to Bracks and Macklin, who are due to finish in their roles at the end of January. Kairouz will be booted from the party and forced to sit on the crossbench, effectively ending her political career, if the allegations of misconduct are not properly addressed, the Age reports. Asked if he believed she would stay in the fold, the Victorian Labor leader and premier,  Daniel Andrews,  said:  I’m not briefed on either of those processes and I really can’t offer any comment on them.
From 'supermax for kids' to family man and Indigenous role model:	It’s five minutes before kickoff of the Penrith Oztag men’s semifinals in western  Sydney , and there’s a problem. Two players on the all-Indigenous Native Sons team haven’t played enough games this season to qualify. The boys in question have been embroiled in the justice system and couldn’t make all the games. After some back and forth, it’s decided the boys are good to go, doing something most people would take for granted: playing sport. This team represents Mount Druitt, a strong Indigenous community but also a suburb where more  young people are under surveillance , via a secretive New South Wales police blacklist, than anywhere in the state. The idea for the touch football team started with Isaiah, who works as a youth engagement officer for Just Reinvest NSW, a non-profit organisation focused on the overrepresentation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people in custody. He grew up in this area, and remembers footy games were often broken up by police, who told players to move on. Under NSW consorting laws it’s an offence for a person 14 years or older to “habitually consort with convicted offenders after being warned not to by police”. The laws were introduced in 2012 as part of a crackdown on outlaw motorbike gangs but a review in 2016 found they were frequently being used to target young Indigenous people. “They couldn’t even go to a park to play football,” says Isaiah’s friend and mentor Daniel Daylight, a 33-year-old Gamilaroi man and Just Reinvest executive committee member. So a plan was hatched. Isaiah designed the jerseys – an Indigenous design that features the handprints of his young son. “I turned it into a jersey for the brothers because through Oztag we’ve created a community and a family – we are there for each other,” he says. The outfits, transport costs and registration fees came from the Western Sydney Community Legal Centre and Just Reinvest. Now there’s a demand for more teams, including a girls’ and a mixed team. These games are important. The boys won’t engage with most social services in Mount Druitt, but they’ll turn up for Oztag, and they want to train and play more. “We’re doing something we love,” Isaiah says. “You get them playing footy together, you’re gonna hear nothing but laughing … to be a part of something, I suppose, it makes them feel included, you know?” For Isaiah, a team like this could have made a big difference for him when he was younger. With nothing to do, he quickly found himself in trouble. At 12 years old, he spent his first night in police custody. At 13, he was strip-searched on his way to the shops with a big group of friends. From a group of 13 children, Isaiah says he and his cousin – the only black kids in the group – were singled out for questioning. He was told to strip down to his underpants on the side of a busy road. “It was embarrassing,” he says. “I didn’t know what to do, so I just complied.” Indigenous kids are  significantly overrepresented  in the number of strip-searches conducted by police in NSW. Eleven per cent of the more than 450 children who were strip-searched between 2016 and 2019 were Indigenous, despite Indigenous children being about 6% of the under-18 population. NSW police have also been operating a   blacklist  known as the STMP, largely made up of Indigenous children deemed to be at risk of committing crimes. Many of the children – including some as young as nine – have not been charged with a crime and are not aware they are a target. The NSW Law Enforcement Conduct Commission found that police were using “unreasonable surveillance” and harassment that could increase young peoples’ risk of entering the justice system. Between 2017 and 2019, the state’s highest concentration of kids subject to the STMP was in Mount Druitt. Isaiah doesn’t know if he was on the STMP. He just knows there were periods when he was stopped by police almost daily. One time he was stopped twice by the same police on the same day. The first time he was strip-searched. The second time he was questioned. “I don’t know if we were targeted, but it happened to us quite a lot when we were younger,” he says. At 16, he was sent to youth detention and spent over 3 years in and out of custody, getting out at 20. But being inside was a chance to reunite with family and friends. “It’s like a Mount Druitt reunion in there,” he says. “I had a three-course meal and I got a bed to sleep in. At one stage there was 40 of us. Almost every unit was full of us boys from Mount Druitt.” In 2016 he was released for the day to attend his auntie’s funeral. He was one of six who arrived in handcuffs. “I mean handcuffs from head to toe,” he says. “I couldn’t even hug my brothers – and I’m the baby brother.” In 2015 Isaiah was placed in the Chisholm behaviour program, run across two youth detention centres, including Cobham juvenile justice centre on the outskirts of Sydney, where Isaiah was held. Over the lifetime of this program, 66 “high-risk” detainees, many of them Aboriginal, were separated from the general youth detention population. The program was dubbed by people working in the system as a “supermax for kids”. Isaiah says he was greeted by “officers with shields and helmets”. He was kept in a tiny cell with a see-through door, surveilled by cameras. Most of the time, if he wanted to use the toilet or brush his teeth, he had to buzz for a guard. “We weren’t even allowed a change of clothes in our room, we weren’t even allowed a towel. We had to eat with our hands for the first two weeks – breakfast, lunch and dinner.” In 2016 Youth Justice NSW was forced to close the program down, after legal complaints about extensive isolation of boys. A 2018 report by the NSW inspector of custodial services found that young people were in isolation 22 hours a day, for weeks at a time. Isaiah was in the program for 199 days. “Most of the boys just go crazy,” he says. “Just kind of talking to themselves and shit. No kid ever should ever go through that.” It was around this time that Isaiah met Daylight, at the youth Koori court, where magistrates, elders and youth workers try to divert kids away from the justice system. Isaiah appeared for an offence committed in youth detention. When he walked in he was amazed. “I’ve never seen this many blackfellas in a room,” he joked. The Koori court began figuring out what he needed for his life after detention. They linked him up with services, to create a   “leaving care” plan that would help him transition from being in care to adulthood.  Juvenile Justice and Daylight arranged for him to get his driving licence and organised housing. In the last three months of Isaiah’s sentence, Daylight would take him to visit relatives. Sometimes, the two of them would just hang out. “I’ve never met anyone like him,” Isaiah says. “I wish I did meet more people like him … that’s the workers they should have in juvies.” When Isaiah was finally released, he assumed it wouldn’t be for long. “I wouldn’t have even thought I would last two days … a day! Yeah, I’ve got Dan and a lot of people to thank for that.” It’s more than two years since Isaiah left youth detention behind him. In that time he has started a family; he has two young boys. He’s working with Just Reinvest on a project called Mounty Yarns, which plans to gather stories from young people about what it’s like to get trapped in the system, and what it can do to your mental health.  “Young people in Mount Druitt want services that operate outside of nine to five, they want youth workers who care, they want to stop being harassed by the police,” Isaiah says. In October he was named Youth Action’s NSW emerging youth worker of the year. But Isaiah is an outlier. Daylight says many of the other boys he’s met are now back in jail. When he visits, they ask after Isaiah. “They’re all proud of him,” Daylight says. “For them he’s that fella who stayed out, you know? And so he’s that hope for these fellas when they get out, in a couple of years.” Back at the Kingsway playing fields, the hooter goes for full-time. The Native Sons have won 6-3 and they’re off to the grand final. The boys are ecstatic. Later, in the car park, they crowd around Isaiah’s car, posing for their victory portrait. I ask Isaiah what he would say to kids who are still inside right now, losing hope. “My advice is just, this is … better than crime. Like, there’s more to life, there’s a lot more opportunities than getting told when to eat, when to shit, when to shower. Getting told when to wake up, when to go to sleep. “There’s way more to do than to be behind them fucking doors.”
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
The preparation for an inauguration like no other – a photo essay:	A  presidency like no other ended in an inauguration like no other. The twin forces of Covid-19 and domestic terrorism bent the event – and its  host city  – out of shape. There were no cheering crowds on the Mall and this was no “shining city on a hill”. Instead Washington DC was wrapped in perimeter fencing, road barricades and security checkpoints. Meanwhile 20,000 troops from the national guard patrolled a Capitol that had been sacked two weeks earlier by  insurrectionists  wishing to overturn the election result. We asked the photographer Jordan Gale to record this extraordinary inauguration – he has been in the city since Saturday – and he captured these sombre images that reflect a city, and country, in the grip of terror and anxiety. –  John Mulholland
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Binged Bridgerton? Find your next lockdown watch with our TV quiz:	 Stuart Heritage  Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.00 GMT   Last modified on Tue 19 Jan 2021  13.03 GMT   Lockdown three is a nightmare for television viewers. All the good stuff – the stuff you really wanted to watch – was wolfed down in the first two lockdowns, and now chronic indecision has set in. You now spend your evenings scrolling endlessly through streaming menus, from Netflix to Disney+ to iPlayer, desperately looking for something – anything – to fit your mood. Well – fear not. Take this personality quiz and, based on your answers, we will provide you with the perfect series to watch, and some wild cards, too. Grab a pen and paper, and enjoy.  A.  Approximately 125 hours B.  Approximately 56 hours C.  Approximately 26 hours D.  Exactly 22 hours and 32 minutes A.  A bit of fun escapism B.  An excuse to laugh C.  An opportunity to demonstrate my intellectualism D.  A chance to witness the relentless cruelty of humanity A.  That we are decent people who usually do the right thing B.  That we are flawed and messy, but often bound by a common cause C.  That we exist to be exploited by larger interests for money D.  That we are meaningless pawns destined to be slaughtered by our indifferent masters A.  Wacky, inspirational, occasionally melancholy B.  Gross, offensive, borderline illegal C.  Sophisticated, luxurious, aloof D.  Dry, gruelling, genuinely horrific A.  Candid and earnest B.  Obnoxious and loud C.  Knowing and superior D.  I don’t understand. What is a ‘laugh’? A.  Trippy imagery and a thumping electronic theme B.  Ironic wholesomeness C.  High-end glamour D.  Just loads and loads of burning human faces, if possible A.  James Corden B.  Josh Groban C.  Monica Bellucci D.  General Hasso von Manteuffel A.  My children B.  My partner C.  Nobody D.  The group of ghosts who live in my house A.  “Hate is always foolish, and love is always wise” B.  “I am untethered, and my rage knows no bounds” C.  “Who wants good news in this ocean of misery and drama?” D.  “Down this road on a summer day in 1944, the soldiers came. Nobody lives here now” A.  Happy, uplifted, slightly frustrated about declining quality B.  Happy, dirty, slightly frustrated about declining quality C.  Happy, intelligent, continental D.  Completely, irreparably depressed Answers Mostly As: Doctor Who You need something bright and fun to distract you from the relentless drudgery of lockdown, and ideally something family-friendly. This is a perfect opportunity for you to watch all 167 episodes of Doctor Who currently available on iPlayer; every new-Who episode ever made. True, it won’t all be plain sailing, because Doctor Who is lumpy by nature, but what else are you going to do with your time? Wild cards:   Chilling Adventures of Sabrina  (Netflix) | The Great Pottery Throw Down (All4) | The Vicar of Dibley (iPlayer) | Absolutely Fabulous (Britbox)  Mostly Bs: It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia You want comedy, and lots of it, which is why you should watch  It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia , 14 seasons of which are on Netflix. If you haven’t seen it, you have missed out on one of the grimiest, most amoral sitcoms in television history. One episode is called Mac Kills His Dad, for instance. But even if you have seen the show, it’s worth rewatching from the beginning, if only for the scene where Danny DeVito crawls out of a sofa naked.  Wild cards:   Pls Like  (iPlayer – series three released on 24 Jan) | Chewing Gum (Netflix) | Crashing (All 4) | Ramy (Amazon Prime) Mostly Cs: Call My Agent! OK, we get it, you’re a smartypants. Your favourite TV show of all time is Mad Men, but a part of you is upset that it was performed in a language you speak. Behold  Call My Agent !, a Paris-set comedy-drama about a talent agency in crisis. This isn’t just great TV, it’s great TV brimming with highbrow cinematic and literary references. You want a show where Jean Cocteau is cited for a punchline? This is for you. Better yet, a new series comes to Netflix this week. Get started now and you’ll be all caught up in plenty of time. Wild cards:  Trigonometry  (iPlayer) |  Pretend It’s a City  (Netflix) | The Bureau (Amazon Prime) | Succession (Sky Atlantic/Now TV) | Mostly Ds: The World at War You dislike fiction, and lightness, and fun. Therefore the only option for you is  The World at War , ITV’s 26-part 1973 monolithic documentary about the causes and consequences of the second world war, narrated in doomy tones by Laurence Olivier. In all honesty, everyone should watch this landmark series at least once. That said, everything is terrible at the moment and this will probably make it worse. The full series is on UKTV Player right now. Just pick your moment, OK? Will you be watching our lockdown picks? And which other unexpected TV treats have you discovered of late? Have your say in the comments. 
Kevin Lasagna and other footballers with surnames that are tasty dishes:	“Udinese have a player named Kevin Lasagna,”  notes Yuval Hyman.  “Do you know of any other players with a tasty dish as a surname?” Finding specific delicious meals in a footballer’s surname is no easy feat (or treat) but Tim Postins jumped at the opportunity to combine a few ingredients and serve up some choice dishes on the back of this question. “Adam Curry (currently on loan to Alfreton Town from Hull) would operate well with Declan Rice (West Ham 2016-present). And then there’s Mark Fish (ex-Bolton and Charlton) but only if Worthing’s striker James Lemon is putting the squeeze on. Plus the former Margate defender Paul Lamb who’d go well with a dash of Scott Mint(o). Or maybe you’d prefer a Patrick Berger with a portion of Jonas Fries?” Milton has written in with a menu that has a distinctly Mediterranean flavour. “The last name of  Víctor Espárrago , a winner of Libertadores and Intercontinental Cups, and coach of many teams in Spain, means ‘asparagus’ though it is debatable whether that counts as a tasty dish.”  If Yotam Ottolenghi’s cooking, then yes it probably does . “In Spanish there are the last names Zarza (blackberry) and Piña (pineapple) – Barcelona’s Clàudia Pina and former Mexico forward Enrique López Zarza are two examples.” If Frank Leboeuf was given a roasting he could be served up for Sunday lunch and Real Madrid’s wing-back Nacho would count as a dish if he had former Bristol City forward Paul Cheesley melted down and served up alongside him. And sticking with the cheesy theme, who can forget Massimo Maccarone at Middlesbrough? “Football Weekly posited that Erling Haaland and Alexander Sorloth may be the tallest strike partnership ever, both being 6ft 4in,”  writes Dylan Kenny.  “However, I think Jan Koller and Vratislav Lokvenc could be an even taller ‘big man, big man” duo. Did they ever play together? Is there a taller pair of forwards out there?” “It seems that Jan Koller (6ft 7 1/2in) and Vratislav Lokvenc (6ft 4in) did play together at least once – during the Czech Republic v France game at Euro 2000,” writes Nicholas Mandalos. “Lokvenc joined the fray just after half-time. I can’t be bothered to work out what overall height this gives them but I’m sure some anorak will [12 ft 11 1/2in – Knowledge Anorak Ed].” Tom Leonard thinks he can reach higher. “I’m not sure you could ever call them a ‘strike partnership’ but Peter Crouch (6ft 7in) and Nwankwo Kanu (6ft 5in) played more than a few games together at Portsmouth.” Two games together – against  Milan  and Heerenveen in the 2008-09 Uefa Cup – counts as a strike partnership in our book, Tom. Their combined height is a lofty 13ft. Can anyone take us higher? “In the Boxing Day match between Dover Athletic and Dagenham & Redbridge, the referee was James Durkin, son of former top-flight referee Paul, who officiated Dover Athletic v Cheltenham Town in the 1998 FA Trophy semi-final,”  reports Alex Crane.  “Are there any other instances of a father and son refereeing at the same ground at National League level or higher?” There are hundreds of cases of father and son playing professionally, so it’s only logical that there should be a few refereeing examples. “Scottish referee Andrew Dallas is the son of Hugh,” writes Keith Legg. “Both refereed in the Scottish top flight, so have been at all the current SPFL Premiership grounds, as well as some European and international ones too.” Chris Matterface also has a cracking tale to tell. “In 2009, Clive Oliver took charge of the League Two play-off final between Gillingham and Shrewsbury at Wembley,” he writes. “The following day his son Michael, then aged just 24, was the man in black for the League One play-off final between Millwall and Scunthorpe on the same ground. The older Oliver was arguably instrumental in Gillingham gaining promotion when he awarded a corner in the last minute from which the only goal was scored; replays showed it should actually have been a goal-kick. Mind you, as a Gills fan I am not complaining!” “A while back  there was a question and answer  about who would be Premier League champions if boxing rules were used,”  mails Michael Avilés. “Just wanted to share that I did some number-crunching and spreadsheet-reading and came up with a list of champions on a running basis. As a high-school chemistry teacher I tend to be a little familiar with number crunching, and  this  was a nice little micro-hobby to help pass time over Christmas break. A few things that jumped out at me: Manchester United never actually held the title when they won the Treble; and the game where Steven Gerrard slipped and Chelsea ended up winning also cost Liverpool the title under these rules!” “Steve Kabba has scored for Crystal Palace, Grimsby Town and Sheffield United this season,”  wrote Andy Holt way back in January 2003.  “Not counting own goals, what is the largest number of teams any player has scored for in a single season? I can’t imagine it would be many more than Steve’s achievement.” “Didn’t Tony Cottee score for four teams in four different divisions a couple of seasons ago, those being Leicester, Norwich, Millwall and Barnet,” mused Martin Smith. Although he was on the right track, Martin was wide of the mark. While Cottee  played  for four different clubs in four different divisions in 2001 (doubling up as Barnet’s hapless gaffer and steering them to relegation into non-league football for good measure), he blew his chance of making history by scoring only for Norwich and Barnet. “Cameroon international goalkeeper Fabrice Ondoa, 25, has played 44 times for his country since 2014, yet has only made a total of 38 league appearances,” writes Andrew Blackburne. “Is there anyone else who has more international caps for fewer domestic outings?” After Roma's debacle tonight, has any team ever lost a match by default after making too many substitutions before? Also, what's the shortest gap between red cards awarded for separate incidents - can anyone beat the 41s managed by Mancini and Pau Lopez tonight? “Some years ago I read a newspaper story of an ill-disciplined non-league team the rest of teams in the league refused to play, therefore allowing them to claim all points. As a result they were promoted and no longer a problem for the division. Any thoughts on who this was?” asks Chris Davis. @TheKnowledge_GU   @oilysailor  who was the oldest u21 international cap? Surely someone played at age 23 and 364 days. “With Tom Cairney not getting game time, Joachim Andersen is currently captaining Fulham,” writes Jim Miles. “Has there ever been an occasion where a loanee was the full-time captain?” Newport vs Brighton ended at 10.30pm last Sunday, surely the latest a match has ever ended on that day. But what's the latest in the evening a domestic match in the UK has ever finished? “A work colleague alerted me to the fact that Obafemi Martins is still playing, and while verifying this by checking his Wikipedia page, I noticed Martins only played six times for Birmingham and yet scored one cup final winner (the 89th-minute gift in the 2011 League Cup final). He featured in about seven minutes of League Cup action for Birmingham and scored the competition-winning goal. Can anyone boast such an impressive games- or minutes-to-cup-final-winning goal ratios?” wonders Michael Pilcher. One for  @TheKnowledge_GU , surely there can't have been many goals scored directly from a goal kick in England's top four divisions? @TheKnowledge_GU  Brazil have never won the World Cup when they have been drawn in the group stages with Scotland (1974, 1982, 1990 & 1998). Can any other pairing of countries beat this? •  Email your questions and answers to  knowledge@theguardian.com  or tweet  @TheKnowledge_GU .
Wear medical-grade masks if you can't socially distance, Britons told:	Scientists have urged Britons to wear medical-grade masks when they cannot physically distance, amid growing concerns of faster-spreading Covid-19 variants – but said that any face covering is better than none at all. This week  French health officials advised  people to wear surgical masks rather than homemade fabric ones as these afford greater protection against highly contagious new variants. Germany went a step further and followed  Austria  and Bavaria in making it compulsory for full protective filtering face piece (FFP) masks to be worn on public transport and in shops. Unlike fabric and surgical masks, which are designed to protect other people from larger respiratory droplets produced when we speak, cough or sneeze, FFP masks also protect the wearer because they filter both the inflow and outflow of air. They also give a degree of protection against smaller droplets or aerosols, depending on the mask’s rating. Scientists have long cautioned that masks alone will not prevent Covid-19 transmission, and should be combined with physical distancing and hand-washing. Even so, “the research suggests that cloth face coverings are a useful tool in the fight against Covid-19 and help to reduce the risk of transmitting the virus”, said Prof Miles Carroll, head of research at Public  Health  England’s National Infection Service. Yet, faced with more transmissible variants, some experts believe people should consider wearing medical-grade masks – particularly if they are likely to be in close proximity to other people indoors for extended periods of time. “People should be using the best mask available to them, and the government should make it as clear as possible as to what this means,” said Dr Allen Haddrell at the University of Bristol’s Aerosol Research Centre. “Given the concern with how infectious this new strain appears to be, the goal of the French government is to try to limit the amount of viral aerosol exposure across the board,” he said. “Increasing the number of people correctly wearing high-quality masks will dramatically limit the degree to which Sars-CoV-2 can be spread through the aerosol phase. No mask is 100% efficient, but some are definitely much less effective than others.” The  World Health Organization  (WHO) currently recommends that medical or surgical masks should be worn by healthcare workers, people with Covid-19 symptoms, those caring for someone with suspected Covid-19, and anyone aged 60 or over, and those with underlying medical conditions where distancing of at least 1 metre cannot be achieved. The medical mask is “widely recognised as a better and more standardised viral filter than most cloth masks”, said Trisha Greenhalgh, professor of primary care health sciences at Oxford University. Fabric masks are appropriate for most younger people, including those working as cashiers and in other service roles – but they should ideally have three layers, the WHO said. A  recent investigation  by the consumer magazine Which? found that fabric masks vary hugely in their ability to filter particles, with the best multi-layer masks capturing 99% of bacteria (the same as surgical masks) compared with 35% for single-layer fabric masks. Although bacteria are larger than coronavirus particles, the results were still likely to be relevant to Covid-19, independent researchers said. “I am convinced that [fabric face coverings] as well as the even flimsier versions commonly worn by the public are a serious weak point in efforts to control the spread of Covid,” said Alex Donaldson, former head of the Pirbright Institute and a visiting professor of virology at the Royal Veterinary College. “Wearers of masks may not be as well protected against inhaling virus as they might believe. “That is not to say they don’t have value. There seems little doubt that the dispersion of Covid droplets is reduced when people wear a mask or even a face covering. An additional benefit is that the amount of hand-to-face contact will be significantly reduced when a mask is worn.” However, although respirator masks provide an additional level of protection, increased consumer demand could make it harder for hospitals to access supplies. They are also more expensive, worse for the environment, and  may be ineffective  if they are not correctly fitted; if there is a gap between the mask and the wearer’s skin, they will end up breathing through this, rather than through the designated filter.
Biden and Harris dress to reassure that normal service is restored:	There were a number of concerns about what might happen at the 59th presidential inauguration, but what  Joe Biden  would wear was never one of them. With reassuring predictability, he was sworn in as the 46th US president wearing a navy blue, single-breasted suit by that most wholesomely all-American of designers, Ralph Lauren. In contrast to his predecessor’s erratic approach to proportions, it fitted him perfectly. His sky blue tie was of a normal length. The message: normal service is restored to the White House.  The optics of this inauguration were serene, respectful and quietly joyous. Biden and his vice-president,  Kamala Harris , the rock stars of the hour, presented as humble public servants, not as celebrities. They dressed to reassure that their administration would serve all of America, instead of revolving around the attention-seeking theatrics of individual politicians. “Today we celebrate the triumph not of a candidate but of the cause of democracy,” the president said. A capital city in semi-lockdown, in a country where Covid-19 has claimed 400,000 lives, is no place for a catwalk show. American designers who were asked to submit inauguration day sketches and suggestions for Harris and the first lady,  Jill Biden , were told that neither woman wished to convey a “fashion” message. Instead, both chose to promote independent, purpose-driven American brands. The vice-president chose a purple coat and dress ensemble by two black American fashion designers, Christopher John Rogers and Sergio Hudson, for her big moment.  Rogers, who is from Louisiana and based in Brooklyn, is just 27. He was named the American Emerging Designer of the Year at last year’s CFDA fashion awards. He declared his team “honoured and humbled to have played a small part in this historic moment”. Hudson, who is based in Los Angeles, also designed Michelle Obama’s claret suit for the occasion. While both the president and the first-ever “second gentleman”, Doug Emhoff, wore Ralph Lauren, the women in the spotlight chose instead to promote small labels.  Jill Biden wore an ocean-blue tweed coat and matching dress designed by Alexandra O’Neill, whose Markarian brand, established in 2017, makes clothes to order to minimise wastage, with production taking place in New York City. O’Neill told Womenswear Daily that her six-strong team had been “all hands on deck” since December to create the pearl- and crystal-embellished two-piece look. It was not until Jill Biden appeared in front of the cameras on the morning of the ceremony that she knew her design had made the final cut. Harris also wore her signature pearls, an accessory with a classic heritage in the iconography of Washington power dressing. They have been favoured by first ladies Jackie Kennedy and Michelle Obama, but have personal significance for Harris as a symbol of solidarity with Alpha Kappa Alpha, the first black Greek-letter sorority, whose members are each given a badge decorated with pearls upon initiation. The stand-out colour of the day was not Democratic blue, but purple. The theme of the inauguration was “America United”, and purple – which represents common ground between red and blue on the colour wheel – was a visual flag for the message of unity, which featured repeatedly in Biden’s speech. The vice-president’s choice of a purple two-piece, with tonal blueberry leather gloves, was echoed in Hillary Clinton’s vibrant purple outfit. Laura Bush’s decision to join Jill Biden and Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, in wearing blue could be seen as another nod to bipartisan symbolism. It was left to the performers to bring the glamour, which they did in some style. The joy and relief felt by many of the audience watching the ceremony around the world found expression in the sunshine yellow jacket, scarlet silk Prada headband and diamante-studded mask worn by the young poet Amanda Gorman. Lady Gaga wore a red silk ballgown skirt of fairytale proportions, and a gilded peace dove on her fitted navy jacket. Lady Gaga’s look was custom-made by the avant-garde Paris fashion house Schiaparelli, currently designed by an American, Daniel Roseberry. Roseberry called the ensemble “a love letter to the country I miss so dearly”. Jennifer Lopez wore diamond-white Chanel, while Garth Brooks rocked blue jeans and a stetson. The internet also enjoyed Bernie Sanders’ parka and knitted mittens, which was dubbed “Vermont dadcore”. Sanders   explained his clothing choices to CBS News. “You know, in Vermont, we know something about the cold,” he said. “We’re not so concerned about good fashion. We want to keep warm.” The morning departure of the Trumps stood in stark contrast. None of his family wore masks for their appearance. (The inauguration was conscientiously masked up.) Melania Trump looked, as ever, like an ice-sculpture of a first lady – one so frosty that she has not melted, even in four years.  Her clothes were all-black, staggeringly expensive, and pointedly non-American. Her jacket was by Chanel, her dress Dolce & Gabbana, her shoes Christian Louboutin. The crocodile Hermes Birkin that she carried has a price tag of about £30,000. When the couple arrived in Florida, Melania had changed into a more relaxed ensemble – a colourful Gucci kaftan.  For the Covid memorial on inauguration eve, Harris wore a camel coat by Kerby Jean-Raymond of Pyer Moss, a black designer who last year transformed his New York studio into a donation centre and led fundraising for minority and female-owned small businesses hit by the pandemic. At that event, Jill Biden wore a mulberry coat, amethyst gloves and matching mask by the independent New York designer Jonathan Cohen. Cohen is a pioneer of upcycling, and the mask, and the lining of the coat, were made from past seasons’ fabric remnants.
From volunteering to building a memorial garden: how we are making lockdown work for us:	Interviews by Rosie Mullender  Thu 14 Jan 2021  16.16 GMT   Last modified on Thu 14 Jan 2021  16.19 GMT   When the UK was first plunged into lockdown in March 2020, many who weren’t key workers or overnight home school teachers were left with an unprecedented amount of free time on their hands – and just when they really needed the distractions of everyday life the most. With restrictions in place once more, we meet people across the four nations of the UK who have managed to find the positives of life being on pause. ‘I’ve been working on helping others’ Aqeel Ahmed, 22, is a civil servant from Glasgow I work in social policy for the Scottish government, and during lockdown, I started a postgrad course in community learning at the University of Dundee. It focuses on how we ensure there’s parity of access to services and learning, and opportunities to gain new skills, and both the course and lockdown have made me more aware of what goes on in the community. Among other things, I’ve been helping to tidy neglected community spaces, and working with a local organisation called the Village Storytelling Centre to help them set up a telephone befriending service that will connect with isolated and older people. I’ve also been working with a charity I helped to start called What About Me?, which helps tackle bullying within schools across Scotland. With young people learning at home, there’s a lot of cyberbullying going on that schools can’t tackle, so I’ve set up a Youth Advisory Group that’s looking at supporting people in lockdown. On a personal level, I’ve connected with volunteers and seen more of my friends, albeit virtually. There’s a lot more openness to virtual meetings now, which means we can meet up more regularly. Because one of the only things we’ve been allowed to do is exercise outdoors, I’ve also taken up walking every day. I think for me, walking is going to be the personal legacy that comes out of lockdown – it’s a great chance to get away from a screen. My heart goes out to those finding lockdown incredibly difficult, but better times are ahead. My advice would be to cherish the good things, stick to a routine, keep in touch with people, and reach out if you need help. We’ll get there. ‘I built a memorial garden for my dad’ Sharon Hughes, 51, is an on-set tutor from Penymynydd, Flintshire Renovating the garden over lockdown came about by accident. My business, Tutors on Location, teaches child actors while they’re working in TV and film, so when filming stopped due to Covid-19, work stopped too. Although I used the time to work out how to teach remotely via Zoom, I still had some free time. My husband, Pete, and I were sitting in the garden reading when we started looking around, thinking about what needed doing. We didn’t have a grand plan – it just started with painting the fence. But then I began working on one little section that evolved into a memorial to my dad. Dad died suddenly in 2015, when he and mum were on holiday, and we went into autopilot organising everything. I put my feelings in a box and pushed it to one side, which meant five years on, his death was still having a huge impact on my life. He was a very proud Welshman, so I found a local stonemason who creates signs out of Welsh slate. He made a marker with a heart carved through it, inscribed with “Dad” and I added it to the garden along with lights and hanging CDs – when the sun hits them it sends rainbows twinkling across his patch, which looks beautiful. My son Kristian got involved, too. Dad was always doing things like dismantling and restoring old tractors, and Kristian loved joining in. So when he decided the garden paving looked a mess, he took it all up, cleaned the slabs, hired a cement mixer and relaid it. That’s definitely Dad’s influence. This lockdown, I’m going to create some animated videos for my business that will help children learn maths. Without lockdown, I wouldn’t have had time to get to grips with the software, but surprisingly, I’ve found I quite enjoy being creative. Finding something, however small, to focus on is the best way to get through this. ‘I took up a host of new hobbies’ Janet Mullender, 67, is a retired nurse from Billericay, Essex When my husband John and I got married 46 years ago, we were living with my mum. Then we had our two children, and were both working – as a nurse I worked weekends, nights and most Christmases – so we’ve never had any time just for us. It was only when the first lockdown hit that John finally retired, at 68. Before, I’d be on my own all week, so I’d meet friends, visit museums, and volunteer in a charity shop. But when everything stopped, I had John at home with me instead – and it has been a revelation. We’ve worked on projects together, from sorting out the garden to doing a daily weights workout, and have our own hobbies too. When we cleared out the loft, we found lots of old china, so I tried my hand at making mosaics. I didn’t care how they turned out, but I’ve made a birdhouse and edged the garden paths, and really enjoyed it. I converted the spare room into a craft room, buying secondhand children’s books and turning them into cards and wrapping paper. I’ve also been writing my personal history, including details of my 30-year nursing career, for the family archive. Meanwhile, John has taken up sewing and makes face masks for the family. He’s also working on building a cigar-box guitar, learning to cook, and adding to his collection of musical instruments. As well as trying new things, exercising is an important part of getting through lockdown. After our morning workout, we go for a half-hour walk, and although we don’t always feel like doing it, we feel much better afterwards – I’ve even lost half a stone. ‘I’ve had time to enjoy my first year of married life’ Eileen Donaghey, 32, is an afternoon tea expert from Belfast I specialise in hosting luxury afternoon tea events and before lockdown, I’d travel from Belfast to London each week, where you’d find me on Park Lane with a cup of tea in hand, entertaining tourists. The business was really starting to take off in 2020, but then lockdown happened. I noticed afternoon tea deliveries were proving popular, and thought it would be useful to write a guide on how to prepare one at home, so I wrote an ebook, A Beginner’s Guide to Afternoon Tea at Home: Tips and Tricks to Teach You How to be the Host With the Most. I held a virtual book launch in December, and people attended from all over the world – people outside the UK are fascinated by all things afternoon tea. My husband, Peter, helped me test out my new sandwich recipes, too. Peter and I were very lucky to have gotten married in November 2019, because otherwise we might not have had the wedding we wanted. We saw being able to spend more time together during our first year of marriage as a blessing. It was lovely to be able to take lots of walks and go hiking around Belfast. Before Covid-19, I travelled a lot for work. I’d be away during the week and come back on a Thursday evening, so lockdown was a change of pace. Obviously it’s disheartening that we’re in another lockdown, but I tell myself there are brighter days ahead. I recommend making a list of things you’ve always wanted to do but never had the time for, and seeing which of them you can do at home. I never thought I’d write a book, but I surprised myself – I’m sure lots of other people have hidden talents they can uncover this time around, too. There are things we can all do to look after our mental wellbeing at this time. Every Mind Matters can get you started with a free NHS online plan, showing you simple steps to help manage anxiety, sleep better, and boost your mood. For your mental health action plan, search Every Mind Matters today. For NHS-approved free tools and support for getting active or losing weight visit:  nhs.uk/better-health For guidance on dealing with bullying and cyberbullying, go to:  youngminds.org.uk/find-help/feelings-and-symptoms/bullying For more information, visit: England:  gov.uk ; Scotland:  gov.scot ; Wales:  gov.wales ; Northern Ireland:  nidirect.gov.uk This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (Stay at home) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit  gov.uk/coronavirus
Blow for French ski resorts as Covid rules hit holiday season:	French ski resorts have been warned they are unlikely to be allowed to fully reopen in time for the half-term school holidays, normally one of the busiest times of the year. The government has announced that lifts and cable cars must remain closed due to the continuing Covid-19 spread.  Ski resorts  had been hoping to restart the lifts on 1 February in time for what are known as the winter sports holidays, when they are usually packed. The government decision means the season is likely to be a write-off for the winter sports sector in  France  that employs up to 400,000 people directly and indirectly and is worth around €11bn (£9.7bn) a year. France’s mountain resorts are open, but restaurants and bars remain shut and there is a 6pm curfew across the country. Cross-country skiing and snow-walking continue but the more popular downhill skiing and snowboarding is not possible without lifts and cable cars. The ski stations had hoped ministers would allow this vital infrastructure to reopen on 1 February, but the tourist minister, Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, has announced this will not happen. And he warned that reopening in mid- or late-February “seems highly unlikely”. Speaking after a defence council meeting headed by the French president, Emmanuel Macron, on Wednesday to consider easing or tightening coronavirus restrictions, Lemoyne acknowledged the government’s decision was a blow for the sector. “We are looking at a  saison blanche  (a white season),” Lemoyne said. The term does not refer to the amount of snow, which has been copious this year, but that it will be a non-event. The decision is particularly galling as ski lifts are open in neighbouring Switzerland. Resorts in Italy will not reopen before mid-February at the earliest, and ski stations in Spain and Austria that remain open are open only to locals. “The government is well aware that the sector needs clarity and we are committed to providing this with regard to the rest of the season as quickly as possible,” Lemoyne added. Domaines Skiables de France (DSF), the professional body representing 200 of France’s ski stations, had demanded a “firm decision” from the government by Wednesday but did not get the one it had hoped for. DSF officials described Lemoyne’s announcement as a “catastrophe”. France’s February school break is stretched to four weeks for maximum benefit to the winter sports sector. The country is divided into three geographic sectors each of which has a fortnight off, with at least one concurrent week a sector. Alexandre Maulin, DSF president, said members felt “frustrated and angry” and that they had been “sacrificed”. Maulin said he did not believe the ski resorts would be able to resume normal business at all this season. “We had our very last hopes for February … and we just took a massive hit in the face,” he told AFP. “Now, we will have to take the president’s word, that everyone in the sector will be saved ‘whatever the cost’. Everyone. A rescue plan is needed quickly. We can’t allow ourselves to be left to die.” Maulin told Alpes1 radio: “We have let people travel to many countries, to Dubai, the Maghreb the Caribbean … so why deprive the mountains of tourists? How is it less of a risk to go to Dubai than go to the mountains? These are things we don’t understand. We have worked on a health protocol covering everything and everyone in all the stations. It’s incomprehensible. We have been sacrificed.” The French prime minister, Jean Castex, is expected to meet representatives from the sector in the next few days to “finalise economic support measures” for those hit by the closures. In normal years, tens of thousands of skiers from across France and Europe head for the Alps and Pyrénées from December to March.
'Freedom': UK Covid patient returns home after 306 days in hospital:	A retired lawyer who survived Covid-19 after contracting the virus in the early weeks of the pandemic made an emotional return home today after spending 306 days in hospital. Geoffrey Woolf, 74, who was rushed to hospital last March after collapsing over breakfast, is believed to have spent one of the longest periods in hospital of any Covid patient before being discharged. Such was the seriousness of his condition that his three sons were called in to say goodbye at one point during the summer, before their father then, in their words, “suddenly woke up” in July. Since his discharge from an intensive care unit at Whittington hospital he has been undergoing treatment at the Royal Hospital for Neuro-Disability in Putney in London for the brain damage caused by the virus, which also caused paralysis down one side of his body, and aphasia. “The staff and carers at the hospital have been amazing. And also the staff at the Whittington,” said Woolf, who added that he was happy to be coming home to Holloway in north London on a day that meant “freedom”. Asked what was most looking forward to, he replied: “Steak and chips.” Woolf had been studying for a degree in art history at London’s City Lit adult education college having retired shortly before contracting the virus. As an active gym goer with no underlying health conditions, his sudden collapse had come out of the blue, while doctors who first saw him after his sons dialled 999 on 23 March had suspected meningitis. His initial hospital treatment for the virus had taken place over the course of 127 days, 67 of them on a ventilator.  Footage showed him being applauded  out on his discharge before he was transferred for neurological rehabilitation on his speech and language, as well for physical therapy. “It’s been a heck of a fight,” said his son, Nicky, who described how his father demonstrated that he had lost none of his sense of humour as he arrived home. “His first joke was that he chose quite a difficult way of skipping the last year of the Trump administration, but that it was still probably worth it.” He and another of Woolf’s sons, Sam, had turned to their father’s love of literature as a way of helping him and others struggling with the long periods of isolation associated with Covid-19 recoveries. “He always said if he was in hospital for a long time, he would be able to deal with it if he had a book,” said Sam. They loaded an e-reader with Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice – what the brothers called their father’s “comfort read” – and played it as he initially lay unconscious. Setting out then to acquire more devices for other patients, the idea has given rise to  the Books for Dad project , which aims to provide recovering Covid-19 patients with Kindle devices loaded with audio content to provide some stimulation and relief. “We feel overwhelmed with relief and gratitude for everyone that’s looked after Dad – we can’t wait to get back into a home life routine now, and he can’t wait to settle down with a good book.” Among other long-term survivors of Covid-19 who are still battling complications from the virus, the broadcaster Kate Garraway said today that her husband Derek Draper was “still ravaged by effects of coronavirus”. “It’s been a strange time,” she said on GMB as she provided an update on his condition as a milestone of a year approached since he was taken into hospital. “I’ve been a bit low since Christmas, physically low. I felt physically at the end of my tether and had to regroup a bit,” added Garraway, who said that a friend’s 51-year-old mother-in-law had died from Covid-19 after contracting it at Christmas. “I’m trying to look for new things and new ways and talking to doctors about what we can do for him. Meanwhile, people are still dying in extraordinary numbers – people that aren’t older and haven’t got underlying conditions. It’s unbearable.” Despite the UK’s rising daily death toll from the new wave of Covid-19, incredible stories of survival against the odds continue to emerge. After testing positive for Covid-19 on New Year’s Eve, the centenarian was able to recover in time to celebrate her 106th birthday at the Elizabeth Court care home in St Helens, Merseyside. “It’s a big birthday – 106. I’ve been fantastic, and I’m happy and enjoying myself. Earlier on I had a cough but I’m feeling better,” said the pensioner, who is known as Polly. “It’s nice to be able to celebrate after being in isolation because of the virus. But I’m feeling good after Covid and nothing can hold me back. I’ll get back to normal as quickly as I can.” A former catering worker who lived alone in her home in St Helens until she was 102, she was described as “fiercely independent” by her niece, Jean Humphreys. After spending 243 days in hospital with Covid-19, the British Airways pilot has returned home after he was taken into hospital in Texas in March. “I went through a dark phase where psychologically there were issues I had to deal with,” said the father of two from Betchworth, Surrey, who was filmed punching the air and hugging medics as he was discharged from hospital. “It was a tough journey but, we’ve got where we are,” added the 59-year-old, who fell ill after a flight to Houston. He spoke of getting through the ordeal with the help of his wife, Nicki, who was at the hospital for almost every day of her husband’s stay, and the thought of returning to his children. “There was a dark phase. Psychologically there were issues that I had to come to terms with,”  he told a US television station . Doctors have said that every organ of his body was affected by the virus but they believe that his prior fitness as a pilot had helped him to survive. “There was always a question: ‘Is he even in there?’ Given the enormous number of the medications, the other multi-organ issues that were happening,” said Dr Bindu Akkanti, a clinician at Memorial Hermann hospital, where Synnott was treated. “I think all of us on our team agreed that it was his wife [that helped him pull through].” Another doctor, Biswajit Kar, added: “We were firstly overwhelmed by the joy that someone this sick could make it.” Seery, 58, a HGV driver from Billingham, a town in the borough of Stockton-on-Tees, fell ill after being placed on furlough from his job. In  a video posted by North Tees and Hartlepool NHS foundation trust , he spoke with emotion about how he was admitted to hospital and woke up three-and-a-half weeks later.  Another shows him being applauded  out of an intensive care unit. Seery’s oxygen saturation was measured to be as low as 40% shortly after his wife, Joyce, called an ambulance and he was admitted to University Hospital of North Tees in Stockton. Soon after arrival he was placed in a medically induced coma. “The scary part was saying goodbye to my wife. I went away and I was on my own, basically,” said Seery. “It was devastating for my family; my wife just had to sit in the house and wait for the phone to ring with an update as to what was happening and not knowing whether she was going to get bad news. Twice she was told I wasn’t going to make it. She wanted to come and say goodbye to me.” It was only on the day that the tubes were removed that he was able to talk, and he phoned his wife to speak to her for the first time in nearly a month. The road to recovery was far from easy and he was only able to walk with a frame and a stick initially. “I couldn’t walk far and I lost three and a half stones in weight and muscle mass. It was difficult because the weather was warm. I was tired constantly.” He made a plea to the public to take the virus seriously, before tearing up as he spoke about “feeling good” after returning to work three weeks earlier.
EU could ban travellers from Britain to contain Covid variants:	The  European Union  could ban travellers from Britain and restrict movement at the bloc’s own internal borders under proposals to be debated by leaders at a videoconference summit. The need to clamp down on the spread of the new variants of coronavirus will dominate discussions between the 27 heads of state and government on Thursday evening. The prevalence of the variants in any area, whether the country is in the EU or outside the bloc, would be sufficient to ban travel under one proposal paper drafted by the German government. For those outside the EU, such as the UK, the prohibition on movement would be countrywide, according to Berlin. “Where member states consider this necessary to protect public health, they are free to impose further-reaching temporary bans on entry and on transporting passengers entering from third countries with virus variant areas,” German officials write. On Thursday, Angela Merkel’s chief of staff, Helge Braun, told ARD television that the EU’s own internal borders would also need to be closed if the new, more transmissible, variants could not be brought under control. “The danger is that when the infections in a country go up, this mutation becomes a quasi-majority variant and then the infection can no longer be controlled,” he said. “And therefore even stricter entry rules at our internal borders are unavoidable, and since everyone does not want that, it is important that we act together now.” In the German paper sent to the 27 member states earlier this week, officials in Berlin write that “protecting the health of EU citizens while ensuring freedom of movement within the EU and travel without border checks within the Schengen area make it necessary for member states to take coordinated action to contain the spread of new variants of concern of the Sars-CoV-2 virus”. “The variants known so far are B117 (British mutation) and 501V2 (the South African mutation); there is the fear that further mutations will emerge,” the paper adds. “Only if member states take joint and coordinated action can the virus be contained effectively. For this reason, we see an urgent need to act in order to prevent, or at least slow down, the spread of worrying virus variants to and within the EU+ area (EU member states plus Switzerland, Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland).” The priority, the German government says, is to maintain essential supply chains while clamping down on further infection. Berlin has proposed test centres at internal EU borders as one tool, with mandatory quarantine for those coming from areas with high prevalence of the new variants. There would only be exceptions for transit and people working in the passenger and goods transport sector and health workers. But Berlin has said the prevalence of virus variants in parts of the EU should also be added to the criteria for restricting freedom of movement, with the option to prohibit movement out of a virus variant area “in line with national law, for example to a 15km [9-mile] radius”. Diplomatic sources said there was a determination to avoid the scenes in March and April last year, when countries acted unilaterally to close their borders to fellow EU citizens.
Biden gets to work as Pelosi says Trump impeachment will head to Senate 'soon' – live:	The Democratic chairwoman of the House oversight committee has sent a letter to  Christopher Wray,  the director of the FBI, asking him to investigate the role of the social media platform Parler in the Capitol riot. #BREAKING :  @OversightDems  Chair  @RepMaloney  requests  @FBI  Director Christopher Wray conduct a thorough investigation of the social media platform Parler's role in the Jan. 6th domestic terrorist attack on the U.S. Capitol. https://t.co/JPeiT6NvsX   pic.twitter.com/5aGUhLN3J7 “I am writing to request that as part of its comprehensive investigation of the January 6 assault on the Capitol, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) conduct a robust examination of the role that the social media site Parler played in the assault, including as a potential facilitator of planning and incitement related to the violence, as a repository of key evidence posted by users on its site, and as a potential conduit for foreign governments who may be financing civil unrest in the United States,”  Carolyn  Maloney  wrote to Wray. “Questions have also been raised about Parler’s financing and its ties to Russia, which the Intelligence Community has warned is continuing to use social media and other measures to sow discord in the United States and interfere with our democracy,” Maloney added. “For example, posters on Parler have reportedly been traced back to Russian disinformation campaigns.” Parler had become a favorite social media platform for far-right supporters of  Donald Trump,  due to the company’s very lax rules about content moderation. After the Capitol riot, Parler was removed from Apple’s App store and Amazon Web Services, severely limiting its reach in the US. Maloney notes in her letter that Parler has reportedly re-emerged on a Russian hosting service. Nancy Pelosi  has now concluded her weekly press conference, and she provided no further clarity on when a Senate impeachment trial might begin. The Democratic speaker said Senate leadership has signaled it is ready to receive the article of impeachment against  Donald Trump,  which charges the former president with incitement of insurrection. “It will be soon; it will not be long,” Pelosi said. Pelosi is not concerned about second impeachment hurting unity: "The president of the United States committed an act of incitement of insurrection. I don't think it's very unifying to say, 'Oh, let's just forget it and move on.'" She says "Thank God" that Trump is now gone  pic.twitter.com/M7bCaUzsa6 The House speaker said that it was important to hold Trump accountable, even though he has already left office. “Just because he’s now gone, thank God, you don’t say to a president, ‘Do whatever you want in the last months of your administration. You’re going to get a get-out-of-jail card free,’” Pelosi said. Nancy Pelosi  condemned House members who echoed  Donald Trump ’s lies about widespread election fraud, which culminated in the violent attack on the Capitol earlier this month. The Democratic speaker told reporters, “There is no question that there were members in this body who gave aid and comfort to those with the idea that they were embracing a lie -- a lie perpetrated by the president of the United States that the election did not have legitimacy.” Pelosi on the Capitol rioters: "There is no question that there were members in this body who gave aid and comfort to those with the idea that they were embracing a lie. A lie perpetrated by the president of the United States that the election did not have legitimacy."  pic.twitter.com/OHtB3snJsJ The speaker once again warned that those found to have aided and abetted the Capitol rioters could face prosecution. Pelosi previously announced she is launching an after-action security review of the Capitol, led by retired Lt Gen  Russel Honoré,  and she said he would be reviewing all available evidence about how the attack occurred. Nancy Pelosi  declined to provide any clarification on when the House would transmit its article of impeachment to the Senate. When asked if she could be more exact about the timing of an impeachment trial, Pelosi simply replied, “Nope.” That answer prompted some chuckles from the Capitol Hill press corps. “There’s no use asking. I’m not going to be telling you when it is going,” the Democratic speaker told reporters. But Pelosi made clear that she thought it was important to move forward with impeachment, even though  Donald Trump  is out of office now. “I don’t think it’s very unifying to say, ‘Oh, let’s just forget it and move on.’ That’s now how you unify.” Pelosi said. “People died here on January 6.”  Nancy Pelosi  said she believed the House would approve a waiver for  Lloyd Austin  to lead the Pentagon when the chamber holds its vote this afternoon. Because Austin left the military less than seven years ago, the retired general needs a waiver from Congress before he can be confirmed as secretary of defense. “Once the waiver is approved, I feel confident the Senate will confirm,” the Democratic speaker said. Nancy Pelosi  is now holding her weekly press conference on Capitol Hill, and the Democratic speaker celebrated the inauguration of  Joe Biden  yesterday. Pelosi described the inauguration as “beautiful” and “so perfect”. She told reporters, “That inauguration was a breath of fresh air for our country.”  The speaker added that she was “overwhelmed with joy” about the two new Democratic senators from Georgia being sworn in yesterday, giving Democrats control of the chamber.  Joe Biden  intends to keep  Christopher Wray  as FBI director, according to multiple reports. Wray was confirmed as FBI director in 2017, after  Donald Trump  fired  Jim Comey  because of his frustration with the Russia investigation. But Wray and Trump also bumped heads repeatedly, and the former president  reportedly  considered firing the FBI director after the bureau failed to provide any kind of last-minute boost to his re-election campaign. FBI directors usually serve a 10-year term, so if he stays on, Wray would be able to remain in the role until 2027. Joe Biden  and  Kamala Harris  have just participated in the Presidential Inaugural Prayer Service, which was virtual this year because of the coronavirus pandemic. Biden and Harris sat in the White House’s State Dining Room with their spouses –  Dr Jill Biden  and  Doug Emhoff  – to participate in the service. Some other members of Biden’s family, including his granddaughter  Finnegan,  were also in attendance. Biden is in Blue Room for prayer service. “God bless you President Biden and Vice President Harris,” singer says before Star Spangled Banner. Press pool in room for about three minutes.  pic.twitter.com/HaFCwavilj A singer at the prayer service offered the new president and vice-president a blessing for their term in office. The White House press pool was ushered out of the room after a few minutes. Biden did not take any questions. Pete Buttigieg,  the former Democratic presidential candidate, is currently testifying before the Senate commerce, science and transportation committee. Joe Biden  nominated his former primary rival to lead the transportation department, and the Senate committee will soon vote on Buttigieg’s confirmation to that post. Buttigieg was introduced at the hearing by  Todd Young,  a Republican senator from his home state of Indiana, which points to his likely confirmation by the Senate. Transportation Secretary nominee Pete Buttigieg introduces his husband, Chasten, during his opening statement at confirmation hearing: "I want to thank him for his many sacrifices and his support in making it possible for me to pursue public service."  https://t.co/U1rm9zKsCq   pic.twitter.com/RozDHiPL0s Buttigieg said in his opening remarks, “I want you to know that if confirmed, I will work every day to ensure that the department meets its mission of ensuring safety – for both travelers and workers – and I will work closely with Congress to do so.” The former South Bend mayor also took a moment to introduce his husband,  Chasten,  who is in the committee hearing room today. “I want to thank him for his many sacrifices and his support in making it possible for me to pursue public service,” Buttigieg said. If confirmed, Buttigieg would be the first openly gay cabinet secretary to be confirmed by the Senate.  Steny Hoyer,  the House majority leader, announced a change in the chamber’s schedule.  The House will now be out next week and will return the week of February 1. On the  @HouseDemocrats  call this morning, I announced the following change to the House schedule: the week of Jan. 25 will now be a Committee work week. The House will now be in session the week of Feb. 1. The change may signal that  Democrats  need more time to figure out how to move forward on the next coronavirus relief bill. Joe Biden  has promised a massive relief package, but the new president has also pledged to seek bipartisan solutions to the country’s problems, and those two goals may be at odds with a 50-50 Senate. Normally, bills need 60 votes in the Senate to pass. But according to Politico, Democrats are discussing using a budgetary mechanism called reconciliation to pass the bill, which would lower the number of needed Senate votes to 51. Politico  has more details :  In recent days, Democrats on the Hill and incoming administration officials have been privately discussing several potential paths to bringing legislation to the floor quickly. One of the leading options is a powerful budgetary maneuver that would allow Democrats to evade a Senate filibuster and muscle their package through both chambers with virtually no support from Republicans. But that tool — known as reconciliation — would be a divisive first move for a  Biden administration  insistent on bipartisanship. It’s also an imperfect process: any bill would likely be limited in scope to comply with strict budget rules, and Democratic leaders would have zero room for error to secure the 51 votes for passage in the Senate. ... Some House Democrats are also eyeing another possible alternative: a bipartisan bill to dole out quick cash for vaccine distribution and $1,400 stimulus checks that would cost far less than the $1.9 trillion package that Biden initially sought. That path, those Democrats argue, would address two critical areas of relief and deliver a much-needed win in the early weeks of Biden’s term. And some lawmakers in both parties are still holding out hope for a big, bipartisan bill that moves through both chambers quickly with enough Republican backing that Democrats could hold reconciliation in reserve. That would require support from at least 10 GOP senators to clear the Senate’s 60-vote threshold — an uncertain outcome. This is Joan Greve in Washington, taking over for Martin Belam. House Democrats are discussing the possibility of sending over the article of impeachment as soon as tomorrow,  according to CNN. Once the article is transmitted to the Senate, the chamber must start a trial to determine whether  Donald Trump  should be convicted, which could result in the former president being barred from seeking federal office again. House Dems in discussions to send over the articles of impeachment to the Senate as early as Friday, two sources tell  @FoxReports  and me, but a complicating factor remains the fact that former President Donald Trump still does not have a lawyer to represent him in a Senate trial. But according to CNN, one remaining complicating factor is that Trump still does not have a lawyer to defend him in the Senate trial. A number of Trump’s former lawyers, who represented him in his first impeachment trial, have already said they  don’t want the job . Joe Biden ’s first full day in office has begun with more depressing news on the jobs front. Another 900,000 people filed for unemployment benefits last week - more people than live in San Francisco. Another 424,000 claims were filed for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, an emergency federal program for gig workers, freelancers and others normally ineligible for state jobless benefits. The 900,000 figure was 26,000 lower than the previous week but remains extraordinarily high. Before the pandemic weekly filings typically totaled around 200,000. New restrictions imposed after the latest surges in coronavirus infections have led to a rise in layoffs and until the virus is under control these historically high numbers look set to continue. By the way, here’s president Joe Biden’s public schedule for today. It’s no “President Trump will work from early in the morning until late in the evening. He will make many calls and have many meetings.” Here’s Biden’s public schedule for today. (Public schedules don’t include all of a president’s activities.)  pic.twitter.com/Gm411vKZQ3 100 days has become a cliched typical measure of a new administration, but John Nichols suggests a faster timetable in an op-ed in The Nation today –  ten days . He urges Joe Biden to bury obstruction in a blizzard of executive orders: Even as Biden issued Wednesday’s orders evidence of the congressional obstruction he will face came into focus, as noxious Missouri Senator Josh Hawley blocked quick consideration of Homeland Security nominee Alejandro Mayorkas. This Democratic president will have a Democratic House and Senate to work with, but the margins are so narrow that the fights on Capitol Hill will be difficult—especially with an impeachment trial in the offing. Biden, a veteran of 36 years in the Senate, is familiar with such difficulties. But he cannot allow obstructionists like Hawley and Texas Senator Ted Cruz—or reluctant Democrats like West Virginia Senator Joe Manchin—to delay action. The  Biden administration  must be prepared to govern by every means necessary. His administration is reportedly preparing to take additional action on coronavirus policies, economic relief, “Buy American” procurement standards, racial equity, climate change, health care, immigration, and international affairs and national security by 1 February. It must do all of that—and more, including the gun violence issues that Kamala Harris proposed to address with executive orders. Some vital initiatives will take 100 days, or longer. But the identification of this new presidency as an activist response to the failures of the past, and to the demands of the future, requires a first 10 days “blizzard” of executive orders—and it looks like that’s what’s going to happen. Read more here:  The Nation – Forget about ‘100 Days.’ These are the 10 days that will define Biden’s presidency
Europe can only fix its relationship with Africa if it exorcises its colonial ghosts:	Black Lives Matter protests last summer sparked an uncomfortable reckoning for many European nations with a legacy of slavery and colonialism. Excavating this dark history via revised school curriculums and initiatives such as  Black History Month  is difficult. But it is badly needed, and not just to dispel the self-congratulatory and entirely false narratives about Europe’s “civilisational” past still being driven by nationalist and populist politicians. The new conversation is urgently required if the EU is to salvage flagging efforts to launch a so-called  partnership of equals  with African nations. And it is needed, too, if European governments are to put relations with  African European  citizens on a sounder and more respectful footing. There are encouraging signs. In Germany, BLM protests injected momentum into efforts to  change street  names with colonial-era or racist references. In France, the  armed forces  ministry provided local authorities with a guide to 100 Africans who fought for France in the second world war, so that streets and squares may be named after them. President  Macron  had, in 2019 during a visit to Ivory Coast, denounced the French “hegemonic view and the trappings of colonialism”, which he said were “a grave mistake – a fault of the republic”. In Belgium, authorities responded to protests by removing at least some public monuments to King  Leopold II , whose forces seized Congo in the late 19th century and ran an exploitative regime that led to the deaths of millions. And in an unprecedented step last summer, Belgium’s King Philippe, an indirect descendent of Leopold II,  wrote to the Congolese president , Félix Tshisekedi, to offer his deepest  regret  for the “humiliation and suffering” inflicted during Belgium’s colonial occupation of the country. The pain of the past, said the king, was “revived by the discrimination that is still all too present in our societies”. They may have been a long time coming, and carry only symbolic value, but such gestures matter. Macron’s  recent decision  to invite young Africans rather than their political leaders to a France-Africa summit on biodiversity in July and to involve African Europeans in the effort are also steps in the right direction; as are efforts to bring female entrepreneurs, cities and business leaders into continuing African-European conversations. Because  Europe  and Africa are interconnected and interdependent. They need each other to create jobs and growth on both continents, to   ensure a post-pandemic economic recovery and to tackle climate change. The EU remains the  leading aid, trade and investment  actor across the continent. African  exports  of raw materials, chemicals and petroleum products, minerals and metals as well as fishery and agricultural goods, continue to be the mainstay of many European industries. Yet, even if Africa’s once dynamic growth rates have been slowed by the pandemic, its economic potential, youthful population and plans to build an  African Continental Free Area , (AfCFTA) modelled on the EU single market,   will intensify international rivalry and competition – especially between Europe and China. EU policymakers insist that their policies are better than Beijing’s, and that while China’s investments under the  belt and road initiative  grab global attention, they are worsening Africa’s already  high debt burden  and making debt-relief measures even more urgent. African commentators  accuse  the EU, which makes its aid conditional on human rights and other norms, of harbouring “paternalistic” attitudes, saying the bloc could learn from Beijing on consulting, informing and working with African states as true equals. They have a point. African Union leaders cancelled a much-trailed online EU-Africa mini-summit in early December at the last minute. That followed the postponement because of coronavirus of a full-format meeting scheduled for October. This can not be brushed off as just another routine diplomatic mishap. It is time to come clean. A reset of this relationship is difficult because many increasingly self-confident Africans are understandably sceptical about Europe’s motives. Africa-Europe relations have for years been marked by an imbalanced donor/recipient relationship, with African governments seeking access to EU trade and aid preferences, while European leaders have cultivated privileged ties with African elites and ignored the needs of the continent’s younger generation. Fortress Europe’s aim to keep out African migrants has added to the mistrust. Tasked with picking up the pieces, Portugal, as current holder of the rotating EU presidency, is hoping it can replicate this year a successful EU-Africa summit it organised in 2007. But times have changed. Geopolitics have become more unpredictable, the uncertainties triggered by the pandemic are countless and more countries, including post-Brexit Britain, are vying with the EU for economic opportunities in  Africa . One way forward would be an EU acknowledgment of the damage wreaked by colonialism followed by a recognition by African governments that a new generation of modern European leaders – as EU council President Charles Michel noted last year – can no longer be weighed down by the “ burden of nostalgia ”. A joint statement that admits the missteps of the past but also promises fresh beginnings may not lead to an immediate uptick in EU-Africa relations. But it would represent a very good start. If they are to make good on plans for a  fairer revamp of relations  with African states, EU leaders must take collective action to exorcise the ghosts of Leopold II – and those of other colonial “heroes” who trod similar ground. That will mean addressing African grievances over Europe’s role in the slave trade and the crueller aspects of colonial rule, as well as persistent modern-day discrimination, racism and unconscious bias. It will require a change in Europe’s toxic debate on migration, implementation of a  new EU anti-racism agenda  and stepping up work on “ international partnerships ” to replace the traditional EU policy of aid – or, as it was known in Brussels until recently, “development cooperation”, in which outdated white saviour narratives were firmly embedded. Shada Islam is a Brussels-based commentator on EU affairs. She runs New Horizons project, a strategy, analysis and advisory company
Coronavirus live news: Portugal closes schools after fourth day of record deaths; US aiming to join Covax:	EU  countries are rushing to secure special syringes needed to extract six doses from each vial of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine in an attempt to inoculate more people and avoid paying extra, Reuters reports. The vaccine developed by Pfizer and its German partner BioNTech was the first to get EU approval in December. It was initially sold in the EU in vials meant to deliver five doses, but a global shortage of shots and a viability assessment on dosage convinced the EU drugs regulator to approve on Jan. 8 the extraction of six doses from the same vials . The decision increased availability, prompting Pfizer to raise its output targets for this year to 2 billion vaccines from 1.3 billion initially envisaged. For buyers of the vaccine, however, there was a drawback because EU states face the prospect of paying the price of six doses for each vial, regardless of their ability to extract a sixth shot. “We will fulfil our supply commitments in line with our existing agreements which are based on delivery of doses, not vials and in accordance with locally approved labelling,” Pfizer said after the EU drugs regulator’s decision to shift to a six-dose label. Officials and healthcare professionals in Germany and France, the bloc’s largest states, have pointed to yields short of six doses because of technical difficulties and warned of a lack of the special syringes, known as ‘Low Dead Space Syringes’, needed to extract the sixth dose. China will donate 500,000 doses of its Covid-19 vaccine to  Pakistan , the country’s foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi has said, AFP reports. “Pakistan greatly appreciates the 500,000 doses of the vaccine gifted by China,” Qureshi tweeted. The news follows similar announcements from other nations in the region - the Philippines, Cambodia and Myanmar have all announced they were set to receive vaccine donations from Beijing. Qureshi had earlier told reporters: “China has assured us that the first shipment of half a million doses will be free of cost and will arrive by end of January”. Beijing also promised to send another one million doses by end of February, he said, adding that emergency use and authorisation of the SinoPharm vaccine had been approved in Pakistan. The South Asian country, which has a population of 217 million, has seen over 11,000 Covid-related deaths since the virus was first detected in February last year. South African  president Cyril Ramaphosa has paid tribute to Jackson Mthembu, a minister and presidential advisor who was the public face of South Africa’s fight against Covid, after he died from the virus ( see 2.59pm ), AFP reports.  “It is with deep sorrow and shock that we announce that minister in the presidency Jackson Mthembu passed away earlier today from Covid-related complications,” the president said in a statement.  “Mthembu was an exemplary leader, an activist and life-long champion of freedom and democracy.” Mthembu, 62, was the senior-most of six South African cabinet members who have contracted Covid-19, and the first to die from the disease. His death follows that on Wednesday of Zimbabwe’s foreign minister, Sibusiso Moyo - the third minister in South Africa’s neighbour to succumb to the microbe. Mthembu last week announced he had tested positive during a check-up for “abdominal pain” and said plans were underway to test his family members and close associates. The veteran politician was among a group of parliamentarians who drafted South Africa’s liberal constitution at the end of apartheid. The country, population 59 million, has registered over 1.3 million cases since the start of the pandemic, of which 38,854 have been fatal. Dubai  has suspended elective surgeries for a month and live music at restaurants and hotels indefinitely as coronavirus infections surge in the Middle East trade hub. Non-essential surgeries have been halted to ensure that health facilities are prepared to manage Covid cases, Dubai’s health regulator said, Reuters reports. Elective therapeutic surgeries” that require deep sedation or general anesthesia would only be permitted in stances of medical emergencies or necessity, it said. Live entertainment, including DJs, live bands and performers, at hotels, restaurants and beach clubs are also suspended until further notice. Violations of coronavirus precautions at hotels and restaurants had increased during “entertainment activities”, one circular said. New daily infections of the novel coronavirus in the UAE reached a record 3,529 today, the health ministry said, the highest in the Gulf Arab region, where daily tallies in each of the other five states have fallen below 500. The UAE, population almost 10 million, does not give a breakdown of infections in each emirate. There have been 762 Covid-related deaths. Visitors have continued to flock to Dubai, an international travel hub that is gearing up to host an expected 25 million visitors for an Expo 2020 world fair from October, even as other countries imposed new lockdowns. The UAE has lifted most coronavirus restrictions but mask-wearing in public and social distancing are still required. Declan O’Sullivan, an Irish musician living in Dubai, resumed live performances in August. Events and revenues have been 3040% of what they were before the pandemic, he told Reuters after the new live music ban was announced, but he was thankful for the opportunity to work. “That’s my perspective on this shutdown again. As long as the bars can stay open and people can go out – if the entertainers have to take a bit of pain for a while and not be able to perform – better that than prolong it for a longer period ... I still count myself very, very lucky.” Bosnia  plans to order Russian and Chinese-made coronavirus vaccines, fearing that deliveries ordered under the Covax scheme for poor countries and from the EU will be too little too late, officials have said, Reuters reports. Inoculations in the western Balkans have begun in Serbia, which has directly ordered Pfizer/BioNTech, Russian Sputnik V and Chinese Sinopharm vaccines. But Bosnia, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Kosovo have not received any vaccines as yet. Albania has received some. Bosnia has ordered 1.2m vaccines under the Covax scheme and nearly 900,000 vaccines from the EU for its two autonomous regions, the Bosniak-Croat Federation and the Serb Republic, and expects the first batch to arrive soon, Prime Minister Zoran Tegeltija said. Bosnia applied for EU membership in 2016. The Covax scheme, led by the World Health Organization and the Gavi vaccine alliance, is due to start rolling out vaccines to poor and middle-income countries in February, with 2bn of 3bn doses expected to be delivered this year. But it has so far struggled to secure enough shots due to a shortage of funds, while wealthy nations have booked large volumes of vaccines for themselves.  Europe  has also suffered delays in deliveries from Pfizer. Bosnia’s central government, over which Tegeltija presides, does not have the authority to order vaccines directly from producers. The two regions also can only make orders through authorised agencies. Under strong public pressure, the two regions and the central government agreed today to work together to order directly from Pfizer and the Russian and Chinese producers, Tegeltija told a news conference. “Bearing in mind the delays in deliveries, we have decided to start this very complicated procurement system,”  Tegeltija  said. Bosnia, with a population of about 3.5 million, has recorded a total of 119,206 coronavirus infections, with 18,123 active cases and 4,536 deaths. Portugal ’s government has indeed ordered the closure of schools for two weeks amid a surge in Covid-19 infections that the prime minister blamed on the rise of a more contagious variant, after suggestions they were primed to do so earlier. Earlier today, the country’s health authority reported the fourth consecutive day of record Covid-linked deaths – with 221 recorded over the past 24 hours ( see 2.29pm ). AP reports: The risk of this virus spreading through society has increased,” prime minister António Costa told a news conference. “We have seen that, in the space of a week, the variant has spread significantly.”  The proportion of Covid-19 cases attributed to the variant, which was first identified in south-east England, has jumped from 8% last week to 20% this week and may reach 60% in coming weeks, Costa said. “Faced with this new reality, a new set of measures is required.” Schools will be closed starting from Friday. Catholic church authorities in Portugal also announced that services would not be held from Saturday and until further notice due to the “extreme seriousness” of the pandemic. Portugal has the highest seven-day average rate in the world of new cases per 100,000 population and the second-highest rate of new deaths after the UK, according to data collated through Wednesday by Johns Hopkins University.  The country of 10.3 million has been in lockdown since last week but cases continue to climb sharply, setting almost daily records and threatening to overwhelm hospitals. The  Dutch  government’s plans to introduce a curfew between 8.30pm and 4.30am have been blocked by opposition lawmakers who consider it a restriction too far, Associated Press reports.  The comments during the lengthy parliamentary debate underscored growing frustration at months of restrictions intended to tackle the pandemic that has killed more than 13,000 people in the Netherlands. With the government in caretaker mode since resigning on Friday, it needs approval from lawmakers to impose the curfew. After hours of debate in parliament, it remained unclear if a majority would support the measure. The presidency minister, Jackson Mthembu, has become the latest  South African  politician to die after testing positive for Covid-19, Reuters reports.  Born in 1958, Mthembu fought against apartheid from his student days in the 1970s and helped set up two metal workers unions when he worked in the steel industry which campaigned for better conditions for black workers. In the 1980s, he became the African National Congress leader in his hometown of Witbank, north-east South Africa. When South  Africa  became democratic in 1994, he served in parliament, becoming national ANC spokesman the following year, a position he held from 2009 to 2014 as well, before becoming minister in the presidency in 2019. Here are the key developments from the last few hours: The  Portuguese  government is preparing to shut all schools, kindergartens and universities from Friday as coronavirus cases rage out of control, Reuters reports. Overwhelmed by record numbers of Covid-19 patients, doctors in Portuguese hospitals say they are exhausted and in despair. Western Europe’s poorest country coped well in the first wave of the pandemic last year but has been swamped in recent weeks by a faster-spreading variant of the virus, registering the world’s highest infection and death rates. France  is offering all university students cheap meals and counselling to help them cope with the pandemic, AFP reports.   President Emmanuel Macron on Thursday promised all students in France two square meals a day for just €1 (89p) each to help them cope with Covid-19 restrictions. He said students would also be given subsidies to pay for professional counselling if they felt overwhelmed by the restrictions, which include closed universities, a 6pm nationwide curfew and diminishing opportunities for student jobs. India  plans to give millions of doses of Covid-19 vaccine to  south Asian  countries in the next few weeks to push back against  China ’s dominating presence in the region, Reuters reports.   Free shipments of AstraZeneca’s vaccine manufactured by the Serum Institute of India, the world’s biggest producer of vaccines, have begun arriving in the Maldives, Bhutan, Bangladesh and Nepal. Myanmar and the Seychelles are next in line to get free consignments as India uses its strength as one of the world’s biggest makers of generic drugs to build friendships.
Brazil records 1,340 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  McKesson will replace some Moderna Covid-19 vaccines in the United States after they arrived colder than the low end of the required temperature range, Reuters reports. The company, which is the US distributor of Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccines, said some of the gel packs used to maintain appropriate temperatures during shipping on Sunday were too cold and it also impacted some shipments slated for Monday. Moderna expects to supply about 100m doses to the US by the end of the first quarter, with 200m doses in total by the end of the second quarter. McKesson, which did not provide the number of doses affected by the temperature issue, said it had not shipped the vaccines and would replace them within the next 24 hours. The doses are currently quarantined, waiting for a determination on whether they are viable, the company said. McKesson coordinated with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to notify each state expecting the shipments of the delay, the company said. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Oxford scientists are preparing to rapidly produce new versions of their vaccine to combat emerging more contagious Covid-19 variants  discovered in the UK, South Africa and Brazil,  The Telegraph has reported . The team behind the vaccine from Oxford and AstraZeneca is undertaking feasibility studies to reconfigure the technology, the newspaper said, citing a confirmation from the Oxford University. A university spokesman told the newspaper that Oxford is carefully assessing the impact of new variants on vaccine immunity and evaluating the processes needed for rapid development of adjusted Covid-19 vaccines. Separately, British prime minister Boris Johnson said on Wednesday that the nation’s medicines regulator will be ready and able to give approval to new versions of Covid-19 vaccines designed to counter new variants of the coronavirus that may appear. Brazil has registered 1,340 new coronavirus deaths , bringing the country’s total to 212,831. It has also registered 64,385 new cases of the disease, which now total 8,638,249.  Brazil’s foreign minister, Ernesto Araujo, said he still could not provide a timeline of when new coronavirus vaccine doses would arrive from India and China, raising concern in a country that is lagging behind others in vaccinating its people, Reuters reports. The World Health Organization (WHO) plans to approve several Covid-19 vaccines from Western and Chinese manufacturers in the coming weeks and months , a document published on Wednesday shows, as it aims for rapid rollouts in poorer countries. Covax, a global scheme co-led by the WHO, wants to deliver at least 2bn Covid-19 doses across the world this year, with at least 1.3bn going to poorer countries. But it has so far struggled to secure enough shots due to a shortage of funds, while wealthy nations have secured large volumes of vaccines for themselves. In the race to deploy vaccinations, regulatory approvals are key to confirming the effectiveness and safety of vaccines, and to boosting output. But some poorer countries rely mostly on WHO authorisations as they have limited regulatory capacity. The WHO is therefore “expediting” emergency approvals, according to a Covax internal document seen by Reuters. The Covid-19 vaccine developed by  AstraZeneca  and manufactured by the  Serum Institute of India  (SII) could be authorised by the WHO in January or February, the document says. The same vaccine produced in  South Korea  by  SK Bioscience  could be approved by the UN agency in the second half of February at the earliest, a provisional calendar published by the WHO on Wednesday shows. As well as vaccines, regulators usually authorise their manufacturing processes in different plants. Covax has supply contracts with AstraZeneca and SII for about 400m doses and an option for many more hundreds of millions, although the timing of deliveries is uncertain. Nobody should panic about getting access to a Covid-19 vaccine because everyone who wants one will get one , the World Health Organization said. AFP reports: The WHO’s assistant director general for access to medicines, vaccines and pharmaceuticals, Mariangela Simao, said the UN health agency was working towards ensuring access to coronavirus jabs all around the world. “No one needs to panic, because you’re going to get a vaccine,” said Simao. “We’ve been working very hard to ensure that all countries, all populations, do have the opportunity to access these vaccines.” Simao said that around 50 countries have started vaccination campaigns, with more than 40 of them being high-income states. The WHO co-led Covax facility, a globally-pooled vaccine procurement and distribution effort, has struck agreements with five manufacturers for two billion vaccine doses. It aims to secure vaccines for 20% of the population in each participating country by the end of the year, with funding covered for the 92 lower- and lower-middle income economies involved. “We are expecting to have the first doses reaching countries end of February,” Simao said. Amazon has offered to help with the Covid-19 vaccine efforts in the United States , according to a letter addressed to president Joe Biden, seen by Reuters. The world’s largest online retailer has an agreement with a healthcare provider to administer vaccines at its facilities, Dave Clark, chief executive of Amazon’s worldwide consumer business, said in the letter.  He added, “We are prepared to leverage our operations, information technology, and communications capabilities and expertise to assist your administration’s vaccination efforts.” Syria’s White Helmets , who rescue victims from the rubble of airstrikes, have added making personal protective equipment to their efforts saving lives in areas of the country outside Bashar al-Assad’s control. The civil defence service’s uniform-making unit has recently pivoted to manufacturing PPE with the help of a £920,000 award from a nonprofit organisation funded by the UK, US and Dutch governments. The local facility has already produced more than 2m masks, as well as protective gowns and face shields, and is handling the safe disposal of used PPE for north-west Syria’s  vulnerable population  of more than 3 million people. “The Covid-19 pandemic was the most difficult challenge the White Helmets faced in 2020. We witnessed the spread of the virus in north-western  Syria  among humanitarian workers and medical personnel while the global pandemic made cross-borders logistics almost impossible,” said Munir Mustafa, the White Helmets’ deputy general manager for humanitarian affairs. While doctors and humanitarian workers in Syria are still working at great personal risk to respond to and treat the disease, with the help of  Creating Hope in Conflict: a Humanitarian Grand Challenge , the White Helmets have been able to scale up community efforts to keep people safe from coronavirus. “Our volunteers and fellow humanitarians, healthcare providers, and other essential workers are safer now [thanks to the project] and can together continue caring for Syrian civilians and responding to the pandemic,” Mustafa added. Dubai has ordered hospitals to cancel non-essential surgery for the next month after a surge in coronavirus cases in the Middle East’s tourism and business hub, Reuters reports.  Health authorities said the decision, which takes effect on Thursday and could be extended in a month’s time, aims to ensure preparedness of health facilities to manage Covid-19 cases. The daily number of infections in the United Arab Emirates, which includes Dubai, crossed the 3,000 threshold on 12 January and has continued to climb, hitting 3,506 on Wednesday. It is the highest in the Gulf Arab region where daily cases in each of the other five states have fallen below 500. Visitors have flocked to international travel hub Dubai, as other countries imposed new lockdowns. The UAE has lifted most coronavirus restrictions but mask-wearing in public and social distancing are still required. Britain this month removed the UAE from its travel corridors list due to the rise in infections. Guardian reporters Archie Bland and Matthew Weaver looked into the flock of UK social media influencers who have headed to Dubai in recent weeks while their home country remains in lockdown, with the writer Clive Martin describing the hotspot as “the Covid Casablanca”.  Here is a quick re-cap of the key Covid-related events around the world: Some good news, as the Associated Press reports: Zélia de Carvalho Morley (106) rolled up a sleeve and looked stoically to the side as a nurse slid in a Covid-19 shot. She was one of thousands in Brazil to get the shot on Wednesday, but one of very few old enough to recall an earlier viral pandemic that swept her nation and the world a century ago. Born in  Rio de Janeiro  in 1914, Morley was a girl when the so-called Spanish flu killed millions around the world in 1918-1920, when no vaccines were available.  The French health ministry reported 26,784 new confirmed Covid cases over the past 24 hours, up from 23,608 on Tuesday and 23,852 last Wednesday. Wednesday’s tally was the highest since the 28,383 registered on 18 November, during  France ’s second lockdown, Reuters reports.  Spain  logged another record number of new infections on Wednesday afternoon, recording 41,576 new cases in the preceding 24 hours and bringing the country’s total caseload to 2,412,318. It also recorded 464 deaths. The new record came five days after the previous single-day high of 40,197 new cases.  The number of cases per 100,000 people also rose from 714 on Tuesday to 736 on Wednesday. To date, the central government has distributed 1,346,100 doses of the vaccine to the country’s 17 self-governing regions, of which 1,025,937 have been administered, meaning that around 2% of the country’s 47 million people have been vaccinated.  On Wednesday, the regional health minister in  Murcia , southeastern Spain, resigned after it emerged that he, his wife, and around 400 staff in the health department had been vaccinated despite the current round of vaccinations being intended for the staff and residents of care homes, and for frontline health workers. Health authorities in  Madrid  have started mass testing hundreds of young people for Covid-19 at universities in a bid to detect asymptomatic carriers. With the country in the grip of a third wave of infection, authorities called on young people to attend makeshift medical centres at nine university campuses to take a rapid antigen test, Reuters reports.
'It gives us hope': migrants stranded in Mexico buoyed by prospect of Biden reform:	Selma López, 31, has spent nearly a year holed up in a two-room house not far from Mexico’s border with the US, along with her 11-year-old son Darikson and another woman who also made the long journey from Honduras in search of a new life. They are among thousands of people stranded south of the frontier by a Trump administration policy known as migrant protection protocols (MPP), which obliges asylum seekers to await their court hearings in some of Mexico’s most dangerous cities, instead of in the US. Children and adults have been  raped, kidnapped and murdered while awaiting their court date . In Piedras Negras, police routinely harass migrants, said López. Earlier this week, a mysterious white car followed her as she walked to the store. And as a Garifuna woman, she has suffered overt racism and anti-Black insults from locals. But López’s mood brightens when conversation turned to the US presidential inauguration – and what it might mean for her and thousands of others. “We’re encouraged and feeling a little hopeful,” said López, who fled northern Honduras after gangsters threatened to kill Darikson for not making protection payments. “It’s giving us a little hope that we can at least enter the US and fight our cases there.” Joe Biden has promised to do away with MPP and restore the asylum process, raising hopes among MPP participants that their claims will be treated seriously – and that they won’t have to risk their lives while waiting. Biden plans to restore asylum and refugee programs and officials from the incoming administration say MPP will be addressed in an executive order in the near future. But they cautioned it could take months to address all the changes to the immigration system introduced by Trump. Activists on the border have tried to temper migrants’ enthusiasm. “They think things are going change immediately. I’m trying to make them understand it’s not that easy,“ said Israel Rodríguez, a Baptist pastor, who feeds migrants in Piedras Negras. Piedras Negras, a city of factories opposite Eagle Pass, Texas, attracted asylum seekers because of safety perceptions, according to Rodrigúez. But MPP participants must attend hearings in Laredo, Texas, a journey of 125 miles through cartel territory. The threats do not just come from criminals: police in Piedras Negras regularly detain and extort migrants – and even destroy immigration documents. The local government has closed down migrant shelters under the pretext of the coronavirus and in December ordered them from providing hot meals for migrants left homeless. “They’re making charity illegal,” said Dominican brother Obed Cuellar, director of a diocesan migrant shelter. “There’s a way of thinking here that migrants come to destroy the city or make it dirty … or they’re taking our jobs.” Mexico’s president,  Andrés Manuel López Obrador , came to office promising not to do the US’s “dirty work” on migration matters. But he immediately went along with the MPP scheme and promised to provide the participants and their children with access to health and education, employment opportunities and shelter. Lawyers and activists say little of that help has materialized, but volunteers from Mexico and the US have provided MPP participants with everything from food and clothing to legal and medical advice. Within Mexico, MPP largely went unnoticed as its participants were largely out of sight and out of mind. But a lawyer representing a number of MPP participants said the program served its purpose for the Trump administration, however. “The cornerstone of MPP is xenophobia. And it worked because 68,000 people were kept out of the US,” said Charlene D’Cruz, a border fellow for Lawyers for Good Government’s  Project Corazon . “What MPP did was show people stuck at the border and that was enough for Trump’s base to say that he did what he set out to do: keep all the ‘Mexican rapists’ out.” The pictures from Matamoros – tucked into the extreme north-east corner of Mexico – were at times shocking as MPP participants lived in the squalor of a tent camp along the Rio Grande. The camp has been flooded out, infested with snakes and insects and eventually infiltrated by criminal groups – which charge $500 for permission to cross the frontier and inflict severe beatings on those not paying. “My son [age five] saw someone being beaten by the river … He’s traumatized,” said Marlen, 24,a Salvadoran asylum seeker. But people at the camp felt they had particular reason for optimism: in December 2019 Jill Biden came here and helped serve meals to the migrants. “This is the only place along the border the now first lady visited. That’s why they’re so hopeful,” said Juan Sierra. “We think Biden is going to push an immigration reform,” said José Luis Guerra, a skinny Cuban. “With Trump, there wasn’t any reason for hope.” Additional reporting by Amanda Holpuch
‘It’s being built on our blood’: the true cost of Saudi Arabia’s $500bn megacity:	“The future has a new home,” proclaims the website. “It’s a virgin area that has a lot of beauty,” says the voice over a string section soundtrack as the  promotional video  tracks colour-tinted panoramic shots of picturesque desert expanses, and deep azure lagoons. “Better humans, better society,” it boasts extravagantly. The brainchild of Crown Prince  Mohammed bin Salman , the new city state of Neom, named from a combination of the Greek word for “new” and the Arabic term for “future”, is intended to cover an area the size of Belgium at the far north of Saudi Arabia’s Red Sea coastline. There has been no shortage of outlandish promises for the $500bn (£400bn) city-state. According to  strategy documents leaked last year , the project may include a huge artificial moon, glow-in-the-dark beaches, flying drone-powered taxis, robotic butlers to clean the homes of residents and a Jurassic Park-style attraction featuring animatronic lizards. Advertising materials stressed Neom will be built on “virgin” land, ready to be conquered with futuristic technology. “In 10 years from now we will be looking back and we will say we were the first ones to come here,” declares a Neom staff member featured in the video. Yet part of the site is the home of the Huwaitat tribe, who have spanned  Saudi Arabia , Jordan and the Sinai peninsula for generations, tracing their lineage back before the founding of the Saudi state. At least 20,000 members of the tribe now face eviction due to the project, with no information about where they will live in the future. “For the Huwaitat tribe, Neom is being built on our blood, on our bones,” says Alia Hayel Aboutiyah al-Huwaiti, an outspoken activist and member of the tribe living in London. “It’s definitely not for the people already living there! It’s for tourists, people with money. But not for the original people living there.” For some Saudis, the Huwaiti tribe among them, Neom, with its parallel legal system reporting directly to the king, represents an elite version of Saudi society, one designed simply to shut them out. Residents and visitors to the site will probably be allowed to drink alcohol and enjoy fine dining in a futuristic version of paradise that is also set to include a vast  data-gathering network , including drone and facial-recognition technology covering the entire city-state. The  death  of Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti on 13 April highlighted the tension between the tribe and the kingdom’s development plans. A resident of the town of Khuraibat, he had become the face of the tribes’ criticism of their forced eviction, voicing complaints in videos posted to social media, and appearing in others’ videos.  One  piece of footage showed him confronting a Saudi official who visited the town to speak with residents. Abdul Rahim al-Huwaiti made one of his last  videos  in mid-April. “They have begun the process of removing people, beginning with surveying homes with the intent of removing people and deporting them from their land,” he said, referring to the security forces in his town. “They arrested anyone who said they’re against deportation, they don’t want to leave, they want to remain [in] their homes, that they don’t want money. “I would not be surprised if they come to kill me in my house now, and place a weapon next to me,” he added. Later the same day, he shot a video from his rooftop of the police down below. “See them? The police have come to get me,” he  said . Others from Khuraibat recorded  videos  of gunfire from outside his house. Later, they recorded  footage  inside his house, pockmarked with bullet holes. In a statement, the Saudi authorities  claimed  he’d been killed in a shootout with regional security forces, stating that Abdul Rahim injured two after he shot back. His supporters have described the shooting as “an extrajudicial killing”. So too have rights groups. “They killed him to set an example – anyone opening their mouth gets the same treatment,” says Alia al-Huwaiti. According to the Saudi rights group Al Qst, the authorities have  since  worked to cover up Abdul Rahim’s killing and placate the tribe. “They are hoping to pull off a major publicity stunt by getting prominent figures among the Huwaitat to publicly disown Abdul Rahim and ‘renew their allegiance’ to the king,” said the group. This was accompanied by the arrest of eight members of the tribe. For Alia al-Huwaiti, the killing of Abdul Rahim and the forced displacement of the Huwaitat people highlights the kingdom’s lack of care towards tribal communities long dominated and suppressed by the state. “MBS [Mohammad Bin Salman] began by telling the tribes: ‘We will develop your area, you will make money.’ They believed him at first. By 2019, they said ‘We will empty three villages, and force people to move,’” she says. “There is nothing called a tribe for Mohammed bin Salman,” she adds. “He doesn’t care about the tribes.” Alia said she has received death threats for posting about the plight of Abdul Rahim and the tribe on social media, including threats she has reported to the British police. The public relations team for Neom, as well as executives from the management consulting firm Teneo, hired by Saudi authorities  for more than $2m  last year to represent the project, did not return requests for comment. The Saudi Arabian embassy in Washington DC did not respond to a request for comment. But Ali Shihabi,  a member of the Neom advisory board , told the Guardian that the displaced members of the tribe would be compensated. “Practice in Saudi has been that people have to accept it, and have usually done so because the government has a tradition of compensating generously.” He said he did not know how much members of the tribe would be compensated, or when. “We anticipated there might be problems, especially with as large of a land grab as Neom. It’s inevitable that there would be some kind of forced displacement happening,” says James Suzano, of the European-Saudi Organisation for Human Rights. “When the state has done this before, it was accompanied by human rights violations.” The destruction of communities on the Neom site follows decades of tensions between the House of Saud and the tribes it has ruled over since the creation of the Saudi state in 1932. Exerting control over the land through construction projects or destruction of some heritage sites have marked this rule. In 2017, the UN  condemned  the kingdom’s forced demolition of the walled city of Awamia, in the eastern Qatif region, as violating human rights. Karima Bennoune, the UN special rapporteur for cultural rights, said that “historic buildings have been irremediably burned down and damaged by the use of various weapons by the military, forcing residents out of their homes and of the neighbourhood, fleeing for their lives”. A $10bn King Abdullah financial district in Riyadh,  intended  as a “special zone,” has sputtered since its inception in 2006, weathering construction delays and confusion over its purpose, even after government attempts at a relaunch in 2016. Critics of Neom say the project risks the same fate. Construction is ploughing ahead despite the challenges of the pandemic and the  historic drop  in the price of oil, Saudi’s primary export. The project is part of the crown prince’s flagship Vision 2030 project, intended to diversify the economy away from oil, which has sustained the kingdom since the early 20th century. Yet the funds required to see Neom realised will inevitably require oil wealth. “It’s quite revealing that [Neom] is more of a vanity project targeting the domestic elite and an international audience in terms of a new Saudi, one that’s open and economically or socially liberal,” says Josh Cooper, of Al Qst. “But at the same time, not allowing the involvement of local actors or interests in these decision-making processes.” For Cooper, Neom is less a shining vision of the future than a grim symbol of Saudi human rights violations, underscored by the treatment of the Huwaitat tribe. “It shows the lack of platforms people have to express their opinions, even on less contentious matters than civil or political rights,” he says.
Too early to say if England lockdown can be eased next month, says Johnson:	It is too early to say whether the coronavirus lockdown in England could start to be lifted from mid-February as was initially hoped,  Boris Johnson  has said, with Downing Street refusing to rule out it lasting into the summer. Speaking to reporters during a visit to  flood-hit Didsbury  in Greater Manchester, the prime minister cited the spread of the newer variant of Covid-19 as a complicating factor. Announcing the  third lockdown  in England at the start of the month, Johnson had said the measures would be reviewed during half-term week, in the middle of February. But on Thursday he said: “I think it’s too early to say when we’ll be able to lift some of the restrictions.” Asked about the mid-February target, he said: “We’ll look then at how we’re doing but I think what we’re seeing in the ONS [Office for National Statistics] data, in the React survey, we’re seeing the contagiousness of the new variant that we saw arrive just before Christmas – there’s no doubt it does spread very fast indeed. It’s not more deadly but it is much more contagious and the numbers are very great.” Data from the React study carried out by Imperial College London has raised fears that infection rates in England  may not yet be falling . Based on swab tests from more than 142,000 people across England between 6 and 15 January, it suggests that while new infections may have fallen recently, they could now be stable or even growing slightly. Scientists have said severe coronavirus restrictions will still be needed because research suggests vaccination alone may not be enough to shrink the epidemic. Prof Mark Woolhouse, the chair of infectious disease epidemiology at the University of Edinburgh, said vaccination remained a gamechanger in tackling Covid, preventing disease and reducing the burden on the NHS. “The general consensus is that a gradual releasing of restrictions would be possible but we would have to feel our way there, the way we did after the first lockdown,” Woolhouse said. But he added: “If [Covid vaccines] can’t take us past the [herd immunity] threshold, then we are going to be living with some kind of countermeasures for ever.” Others said even partial relaxing of restrictions before May could put significant pressure on the NHS. “I would be worried about any early opening of any bars and restaurants, or just reducing the controls,” said Matt Keeling, professor of populations and disease at the University of Warwick. “At the moment we are in an unsustainable position.” Woolhouse said a key issue was that even in a best-case scenario it was unlikely that vaccine uptake would be above 90%, meaning about 1 million vulnerable people would remain susceptible to Covid after the first phase of the vaccination programme. In addition, none of the approved Covid vaccines have a greater than 95% efficacy against Covid symptoms. A number of research teams across the UK have produced models looking at a range of scenarios relating to the easing of coronavirus restrictions amid the ongoing vaccination programme The results suggest that, even with vaccines, the epidemic could continue to grow in the absence of other measures. Should the vaccines completely fail to prevent infections, and all coronavirus restrictions are removed on 1 April, researchers at the University of Warwick found there could be more than 6,000 deaths and more than 20,000 hospitalisations a day by early summer – should no action be taken – despite assuming an 85% uptake of the vaccine across the highest priority groups and 30m doses given. “There is no way there would be 6,000 deaths a day – that is not going to happen,” said Woolhouse. “It shows where the system is pushing us, where the epidemic is pushing. It is pushing towards a high number of deaths so we would have obviously to do something more to bring it down.” If the vaccine blocks 85% of infections, the model suggests a peak of about 3,000 deaths and 10,000 hospitalisations a day by early summer. “Even after three months of vaccination and 30m doses, completely stopping all controls is disastrous,” said Keeling. Woolhouse said it was important to realise the models were not predicting a guaranteed outcome, but shed light on the dynamics of the epidemic. Johnson’s spokesperson was asked if he could rule out the lockdown lasting into the summer, but would not. The spokesperson said: “We will continue to keep all of the scientific evidence and data under review. It remains our position that we want to ease restrictions as soon as it is safe to do so, but in order for us to do that we need to see the transmission rates of the virus come down and we need to see the pressure on the NHS reduce.” Johnson said it was “absolutely crucial” to obey the current restrictions “in what is unquestionably going to be a tough few weeks ahead”.
Morocco detects first case of UK variant – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Morocco ’s health ministry confirmed its first imported case of the more contagious variant of coronavirus first discovered in the UK. The variant was detected in the northern port of Tangier in a Moroccan national returning from Ireland via Marseille, the ministry said in a statement. Morocco has announced plans to launch a free vaccination campaign targeting 25 million people, or 80% of its population. The country ordered 66m vaccine doses from AstraZeneca and China’s Sinopharm. It has not yet received any. On 23 December, Morocco imposed a nationwide four-week curfew from 9pm to 6am to contain the virus. On Monday, the country said it has recorded a total of 460,144 coronavirus infections, including 7,977 deaths and 16,481 active cases. Health experts have raised concerns over new highly-transmissible mutations of the virus first reported in the UK and South  Africa  and now cropping up in several other countries. A third new variant has since been reported in Brazil. Donald Trump, the US president, has rescinded entry bans imposed because of coronavirus on most non- US  citizens arriving from  Brazil  and much of  Europe , including the  UK , effective 26 January, two officials briefed on the matter told Reuters. The restrictions are set to end on the same day that new Covid-19 test requirements take effect for all international visitors. Joe Biden, the president-elect, once in office could opt to reimpose the restrictions.  Rio de Janeiro  has kicked off its coronavirus vaccination campaign with what is likely to prove the most breathtaking immunisation launch ceremony on earth. Two Brazilian women, aged 80 and 59, received their first shot of the Chinese Coronavac vaccine at the feet of Rio’s Christ the Redeemer statue at dusk on Monday. The  spectacular televised event  on Corcovado mountain was attended by Rio’s media-savvy mayor, Eduardo Paes, and state governor Cláudio Castro. Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro – who is from Rio but has repeatedly undermined containment measures and vaccination and has attacked the Chinese vaccine – was a notable absence. Rio is one of the Brazilian states worst-hit by Covid-19, having registered more than 27,000 of Brazil’s 209,000 deaths. If the beachside state capital was a country, it would have one of the worst national Covid death rates. Ahead of the ceremony Paes, who took office early this month, tried to strike a positive note. “The start of vaccination is not the end of the pandemic but it is a light at the end of the tunnel,” he  tweeted , urging residents to continue wearing masks and respecting containment measures. Vaccination began in Brazil on Sunday after the country’s health regulator approved the emergency use of vaccines produced by China’s Sinovac and Oxford/AstraZeneca. More than 37,000 people with a symptomless Covid-19 infection have been detected through rapid lateral flow testing in the  UK , the chief medical adviser for NHS Test and Trace has said. Dr Susan Hopkins said the devices, which can give results in less than 30 minutes, were being rolled out across the country to enable those with no coronavirus symptoms to be tested. Lateral flow tests are regularly used by NHS staff and were the main method of testing during a mass pilot scheme in Liverpool, but some experts have questioned their accuracy. Dr Hopkins was asked at a Downing Street press briefing on Monday about the availability of the devices for teachers and supermarket workers who are yet to receive the Covid-19 vaccine. She said: “We are rolling out lateral flow devices throughout the country through community testing sites and also in workplaces to allow people to get tested where they are asymptomatic to reduce the spread of disease. “We’ve detected more than 37,000 individuals through lateral flow tests over the last number of weeks and we will continue to roll them out rapidly as an additional tool to help get this virus under control.” A new variant of the coronavirus first identified in  South Africa  is more contagious than earlier versions, experts said, but there is no evidence that it is more deadly. The new variant is 50% more contagious, said epidemiologist Prof Salim Abdool Karim, co-chair of the health ministry’s scientific committee. “There is no evidence the new Covid variant is more severe than the original variant,” he added. The experts drew their conclusions about the variant – now the dominant strain in South  Africa  – from an analysis of data collected from the main infection clusters across the country. With more than 1.3 million people infected, South Africa has recorded more cases than any other country on the continent and has also suffered more deaths, with 37,105 registered. The second wave of the virus has stretched South Africa’s health system to its limits. Health minister Zweli Mkhize on Monday said there had been a 23% fall in infections, but that the number of hospital admissions was up by 18.3% on the previous week. Dr Waasila Jassat, another member of the expert panel, said that even though admissions were up, the death rate from the virus in hospitals had not changed from the first wave of the virus. Brazil  on Monday reported 23,671 new cases of coronavirus, bringing the new total to 8,511,770, the country’s health ministry said. Deaths rose by 452 to 210,299 in Brazil, which has the world’s highest death toll from the pandemic outside the US.  Mexican  president Andrés Manuel López Obrador said the government aimed to compensate for a reduction in deliveries of Covid-19 vaccine doses from Pfizer Inc with those from other providers. The World Health Organization (WHO) said it was in advanced talks with Pfizer about including its vaccine in the agency’s portfolio of shots to be shared with poorer countries. Mexico had been expecting weekly deliveries of some 400,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine developed with Germany’s BioNTech SE. As a result of the US drugmaker’s WHO agreements, Mexico would for now only be receiving half that, López Obrador told a news conference. It was not clear how long the reduction would last. The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine is currently the only one being administered in Mexico, which has reported the fourth-highest death toll from the pandemic worldwide. Mexico has also signed deals to acquire vaccines from Britain’s AstraZeneca Plc and China’s CanSino Biologics. The country has approved the Oxford/AstraZeneca shot and expects to have it by March. It is still reviewing the CanSino vaccine. It is due to make the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, and foreign minister Marcelo Ebrard said on Twitter that the active ingredient would on Monday be sent to Mexico from Argentina, allowing manufacturers to start the final packaging process. Mexico said it also expects to approve the Sputnik V vaccine for use soon, though it is likely to acquire fewer doses than it had previously suggested. Brazil’s  health minister Eduardo Pazuello said a sharp rise in Covid-19 cases in the Amazonian city of Manaus was not tied to a new variant of the virus, and was instead the same coronavirus that caused the first wave of the disease.  Manaus has made headlines in recent days for its high death rate and a shortage of oxygen tanks for patients who develop severe cases of Covid-19. 
