Photographer Deanna Templeton: ‘Everything gets mixed up when you're a teenager’:	F or around 20 years, American photographer  Deanna Templeton  has shot street portraits of young women who caught her eye, filing them under the heading “Female” in her expansive digital archive. “I’ve always photographed what interests me,” she says, “but it never occurred to me until I began looking closely at them that they all had a vaguely similar look. They reminded me of my younger self – or, at least, what I wished I’d looked like back then.” Many of the young women in her photos have a hybrid style that sits somewhere between punk, metal and goth: dyed hair, dark eyeliner, torn jeans and T-shirts that profess allegiance to a favourite group – Sex Pistols, Black Flag, Subhumans, Suicidal Tendencies. Some are more chic in head-to-toe black and matching cropped hair; pale, stylish goths who proliferate even in the California sun. “I’d often just run up to them and say, ‘I’ve seen that band on your shirt’, and we’d get talking,” says Templeton. “I noticed that they mostly tended to be more happy and contented and confident than I was at their age.” In her new book,  What She Said , its title taken from a characteristically maudlin song by the Smiths, Templeton has contrasted these portraits with journal entries from her own disaffected adolescence in the 1980s. Back then, surrounded by images of idealised female beauty, she began, as she writes in her introduction, “to resent my reality”. Megan, Huntington Beach, California, 2016. Shot through with the heightened intensity of adolescent self-absorption, her diary entries veer from the melodramatic – “Hate Life, hate me, hate you!! Wanna die when I’m 18” – to the deeply unsettling – “I want to be anorexic!! I’ll never be truly happy till I’m skinny.” Her weight, her height and her skin are the main sources of her frustration and simmering self-loathing. “I’m on the shorter side,” she says, “and, as a teenager, all the supermodels on my wall then were tall and skinny. I realise now it’s an impossible ideal for most, but, back then, it was hard to accept that I wasn’t getting any taller no matter how much I wanted to. My thinking was that I could at least control my weight. I could make myself thinner. It was an intense few years.” Was it hard to revisit that troubled time, that troubled self? “Well, I experienced a lot of different emotions when I reread what I’d written,” she says, quietly. “I’m in such a better place now, so it really caught me off guard, just the intensity of it. As you get older, you tend to block out the bad times. I guess I forgot how depressed I was back then. I was really sad.” Huntington Beach, California, 2013. Amid the abiding sadness, though, there are moments of high adolescent melodrama, including a hand-written page entitled “My Will”. It begins: “I leave all my records and single [sic] to Joey, my brother. All my dolls to orphan children.” An accompanying note addressed to her family and “anyone else that matters” ends thus: “PS Can I please have a big funeral, with all my friends and stuff, and let everyone no [sic] it was a suicide, otherwise this dying was a waste.” It was equally brave of her, I suggest, to include these more exaggerated and almost comically self-absorbed entries. “Oh my goodness, the will!” she says, laughing, “and the fact that I left instructions! But, you know, that goes along with the darker stuff, it all gets mixed up when you’re that age. There were definitely some dramatics, but there was the real stuff too. I still have some of the scars on my skin.” I ask her about one image in the book that caught my eye: the torso of a skinny young girl in skimpy pants and the words “Feed me” written on her bare stomach. Its power resides in its provocative and unsettlingly ambiguous message. “That’s southern California right there,” she says, “Seeing those words on that body hit me to my core. Even though it strikes me now that the girl might simply have had no money and needed a free lunch, for me it had a deep resonance.” Greta, Huntington Beach, California, 2004. Growing up in the anonymous sprawl of suburban Huntington Beach in California, Templeton writes in her introduction that she was ignored by her parents on weekends, but soon realised that her “invisibility equalled freedom”. She escaped headlong into music and, at 15 and with “no curfew”, began hitchhiking regularly into Los Angeles, often sneaking into gigs or using fake ID. In California, the dark energy of post-punk and hardcore drew kids who were alienated above all by the superficiality of their relatively privileged upbringings. The flyers she includes in the book are testament to her dedication: Meat Puppets and Bad Brains at the Roxy; Butthole Surfers and the Jesus and Mary Chain at Santa Monica Civic Auditorium. “I leaned heavily towards goth and punk,” she says, “but I also absorbed a whole range of music from my older brother, who liked it all. I remember going up to a sales clerk at the local record store with records by the Damned, Motörhead and Madonna and he just looked at me and shook his head.” Throughout, the banal and the intense sit side by side in her journals, of equal importance to her adolescent imagination. She composes her own punk anthems, including Snow White’s a Whore, the lyrics neatly handwritten in schoolgirl script: “Lay out the needles, fix the spoon/ Watch out veins, I’m flying to the moon.” Ed and Deanna, Huntington Beach, California, 1988. The entries change in tone towards the end of the book, around the time she first meets  Ed Templeton,  a skateboarder who has since become a street photographer. A snapshot shows them embracing in front of a wall of neatly arranged skate ephemera. She looks inordinately happy. “We’ve been together for 30 years, but I was still so nervous with the idea of him looking at the book,” she says. “He was incredibly supportive, of course, but with this work there’s an element of laying your life bare.” Having done just that, what advice would she give her younger self? “Oh, I’d just tell her: ‘Go easy on yourself. Give it some time and you will get through this.’ That is what the book is about in a way. Maybe someone who is struggling like I did to find themselves will look at the work and take some hope from it.” What She Said by Deanna Templeton  is published by  Mack on 27 January (£40) In the UK,  Samaritans  can be contacted on 116 123 and the  domestic abuse helpline  is 0808 2000 247. In Australia, the crisis support service  Lifeline  is on 13 11 14 and the  national family violence counselling service  is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the  suicide prevention lifeline  is 1-800-273-8255 and the  domestic violence hotline  is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines can be found via  befrienders.org
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Starwatch: Orion's treats for the naked-eye star watcher:	The mighty constellation of Orion the hunter is one of the greatest sights in the night sky. To those of us in the northern hemisphere, it is currently bolt upright in the south during the late evening. Orion’s right shoulder is marked by the red star of Betelgeuse, and his left foot is signified by the white star of Rigel. Fainter stars, Bellatrix and Saiph, mark out the opposite shoulder and foot. The three stars of Orion’s belt, Alnitak, Alnilam and Mintaka, are easy to spot. The real prize for naked-eye starwatchers is located below this trio of stars. Orion’s sword consists of a further three stars, considerably fainter than the belt. Find the darkest site you can and allow your eyes to get accustomed to the dark. The second star in the sword should appear fuzzy to you, and pinkish. That’s because it isn’t a star at all – it’s the Orion nebula, a star-forming cloud 1,300 light years away. Thousands of stars are forming there. From Sydney, Australia, look north and remember that everything described here will appear upside down.
Carbon capture is vital to meeting climate goals, scientists tell green critics:	Engineers and geologists have strongly criticised green groups who last week claimed that carbon capture and storage schemes – for reducing fossil fuel emissions – are costly mistakes. The scientists insisted that such schemes are vital weapons in the battle against global heating and warn that failure to set up ways to trap carbon dioxide and store it underground would make it almost impossible to hold net emissions to below zero by 2050. “ Carbon capture and storage  is going to be the only effective way we have in the short term to prevent our steel industry, cement manufacture and many other processes from continuing to pour emissions into the atmosphere,” said Professor Stuart Haszeldine, of Edinburgh University. “If we are to have any hope of keeping global temperature [increases] down below 2 degrees C then we desperately need to develop ways to capture and store carbon dioxide.” Carbon capture and storage involves the extraction of emissions from power plants and factories, condensing them and then pumping the resulting carbon dioxide into underground stores. Britain is considered to be well placed to develop and operate such technology given its many depleted North Sea oil fields where this sequestrated carbon dioxide could be stored. Several CCS development programmes have been launched over the past 20 years but have been cancelled as governments have vacillated over funding. However, Boris Johnson – as part of his commitment to fight climate change – has pledged £1bn of public funds to help develop  four major CCS schemes  in Britain by 2030 as part of his plan for a “green industrial revolution”. The aim is to make the UK a “world leader” in the technology and create thousands of jobs. But campaigners at Global Witness and  Friends of the Earth  Scotland said last week that a reliance on CCS was not a reliable way to decarbonise the energy system, and published a paper last Monday from the Tyndall Manchester climate change research centre that they said proved that CCS has a “history of over-promising and under-delivering”. Both groups claimed CCS would not make “a meaningful contribution to 2030 climate targets” despite the investment, and instead urged the construction of more renewable energy plants to be given priority. But the claims were last week dismissed by engineers and geologists. “These claims are quite unfair,” said Michael Stephenson, director of science and technology at the British Geological Survey. “The science behind carbon capture and storage is extremely good. It offers us a genuine solution to some of the problems we face in trying to tackle global warming.” At present, most successes in reducing UK carbon emissions have come from the power industry where renewable energy sources have taken over electricity generation from coal, gas and oil plants. However, some industries – such as steel and cement industries – emit vast amounts of carbon dioxide on top of those produced by generating the power they consume. It will be much more difficult to bring down carbon emissions from these plants even though these industries are vital to the UK’s economic strength. This point was stressed by Haszeldine. “When CCS was first touted, it was seen as a way of cleaning up electricity generated by fossil fuels, in particular those burning coal. But now it is clear it can play a key role in cleaning up other industries. “We just need to push ahead with its development so that Britain can find ways of removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The longer we delay then the worst things are going to be and claims that CCS will not work do not help.” Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, was also critical of the green groups’ claims. “The opposition to CCS technology from some campaigners seems driven by a hatred of fossil fuel companies that is preventing a level-headed understanding of how we can stop climate change,” he told the  Observer . “Together with dithering policymakers, they share responsibility for stopping the UK from leading a global effort to develop this technology.”
China's economic recovery picks up speed after Covid-19 shock –business live:	China’s forecast-beating growth hasn’t stirred much excitement in Europe’s stock markets. The Europe-wide Stoxx 600 is flat this morning, with anxiety over the Covid-19 pandemic tempering optimism about the prospect of an economic revival. In Germany, health minister Jens Spahn warned that more needs to be done to bring it permanently under control. Spahn told broadcaster ARD that:  “The (infection) numbers seem to be decreasing, which is good, but we are still a long way from where we want to be.”  Mihir Kapadia,  CEO of  Sun Global Investments , says: “The very strong rally enjoyed across the global stock markets now appears to be running out of steam as rising Covid-19 infections have hit sentiment hard on Monday. In addition to the higher infection rates, with more lockdown restrictions in place, stocks have been hit by other factors such as lowered consumer spending and is unlikely to improve during the first quarter of this year. However, we could expect markets to pick up again soon following the positive developments from  China , with the country’s economy defying forecasts by recording growth of 6.5% at the end of 2020. This is higher than the predicted 6.1%. This will certainly help sentiment if its growth rates remain strong as it is a sign that the economic recovery is on track, however it is important to consider that Chinese exports are now more expensive, while its continued trade tensions with the US are unlikely to ease anytime soon, meaning that we could expect gains to remain capped until we see similar positive economic data take place elsewhere.” Music news: British songwriter and producer Ian Levine has sold his rights to a string of smash hits by pop group  Take That . The deal covers producer royalties to tracks from the group’s 1992 debut album Take That & Party – which was certified platinum twice in the UK – including A Million Love Songs, Could It Be Magic and I Found Heaven. Music publisher  One Media iP Group  has also snapped up Levine’s rights to two other recorded Take That tracks that have never been released. One Media iP did not disclose the cost, saying only that it had acquired the rights for a “modest consideration”. Levine is the latest musician to sell his rights to investors who are on the hunt for hits that can bring in extra revenue in the new streaming era. Artists including Shakira and  Fleetwood Mac members Mick Fleetwood  and Stevie Nicks have also cashed in on their back catalogues, selling rights to companies including Primary Wave, Hipgnosis and BMG. More here: Shares in supermarket giant Carrefour have dropped 6% after the French government firmly rebuffed a takeover offer from Canada’s Alimentation Couche-Tard. Paris has traditionally taken a firmer line on takeover bids than the UK (where a series of leading companies have been sold off over the years - from chemicals giant  ICI  and glassmaker  Pilkington  to chipmaker  ARM  and chocolate firm  Cadbury ). And the prospect of Carrefour’s bulging wine racks and comptoir de fromages falling into foreign hands has prompted a firm “Non” from the French government, saying it would threaten food security. Couche-Tard had promised fresh investment and no job cuts for at least two years. But France’s finance minister Bruno Le Maire was unwavering, and declared on Friday that: “My answer is extremely clear: we are not in favour of the deal The no is polite but it’s a clear and final no.”  The two sides have now broken off merger talks, although they hope to “examine opportunities for operational partnerships”. Shares in Carrefour have dropped from €16.70 to €15.60, roughly their level before Couche-Tard made its approach last week. Shares in telecoms operator BT have dropped by over 2% this morning after it was hit by a £600m compensation claim. A consumer campaign group argues that BT has failed to compensate customers (often elderly or vulnerable people) who overpaid for landlines for several years. BT denies the claim. Reuters has the details: British telecoms operator BT is facing a claim for almost £600m lodged by a consumer campaign group, which says the company failed to compensate fixed-line customers, many of them elderly, for overcharging. The group, Collective Action on Land Lines (CALL), says the former monopoly failed to make up for increasing prices for customers over several years even though costs for providing the service were falling. In 2017, telecoms regulator Ofcom raised concerns about the price BT had charged landline-only customers, and the company agreed to reduce its landline prices by 7 pounds a month. However, CALL said BT had not properly addressed past overcharging. Its £589m claim, filed with the Competition Appeal Tribunal, sought payments of up to £500 for each of 2.3 million BT customers. The group said it was also seeking compensation for customers who took both a broadband service and a BT landline, but not as a package, and were excluded from BT’s 2017 price cut. BT said it strongly disagreed with the claim. “We take our responsibilities to older and more vulnerable customers very seriously and will defend ourselves against any claim that suggests otherwise,” it said in a statement. The claim went back as far as 2015, the earliest starting point under legal rules, CALL said. In the City, the  FTSE  100 index has made a very subdued start - down 12 points or 0.2% at 6722. UK property companies and builders are rallying, with  British Land  up 2.5% and  Persimmon  gaining 2.1%. They should benefit if the UK’s vaccination rollout allows the economy to reopen later this year, with the government hoping to offer all adults a first dose by September. But travel companies are weaker this morning, after the UK shut its travel corridors. Under new tighter rules, international arrivals must quarantine and show they have had a negative Covid test.  British Airways parent company,  IAG , has dropped by 2.3%, while  easyJet  shares are down over 3%. Oil companies  BP  (-2.2%) and  Royal Dutch Shell  (-1.8%) are in the fallers too, with crude oil prices weaker today. Richard Hunter , Head of Markets at  interactive investor , says a fall in US retail sales late last week has dampened the mood. Worries that Joe Biden’s proposed stimulus package could be watered down, are also weighing on investor sentiment. The FTSE100 remains up by just over 4% in the year to date, but vaccine rollout optimism and hopes of economic recovery have switched to the back burner for the moment given these other considerations.” China’s stock market has rallied after  today’s growth figures were released , with the CSI 300 closing 1.1% higher, at 5518. That lifts the index back towards the 13-year high set last week. An upbeat  China  Q4 GDP reading sent mainland and HK stocks higher, but failed to lift stocks in the rest of Asia: - CSI 300 (+1.20%) - Shanghai Composite (+0.91%) - Hang Seng (+0.65%)  - Nikkei 225 (-1.01%) - ASX 200 (-0.78%) - Straits Times (-0.80%) Julian Evans-Pritchard , senior China economist at  Capital Economics , says: “Despite the latest dip in retail sales, we see plenty of upside to consumption as households run down the excess savings they accumulated last year.  “Meanwhile, the tailwinds from last year’s stimulus should keep industry and construction strong for a while longer.” Meanwhile in the UK, house price have dropped as the temporary freeze in stamp duty nears its end -- meaning some buyers could face an unwelcome tax bill. Average property prices fell by 0.9%, or nearly £3,000, in January, according to Rightmove as sellers tried to find a buyer before the stamp duty holiday ends on 31st March. That holiday means buyers don’t pay stamp duty on the first £500,000 of a house purchase, saving them up to £15,000. But Rightmove warns that anyone moving now could be hit with an unexpected tax bill of up to £15,000 if they can’t complete the deal in time. Its latest analysis showed that it was taking 126 days – or just over four months – from the time an offer was accepted until legal completion. It estimates that 613,000 property sales agreed in 2020 are   “stuck in the processing logjam” and awaiting legal completion. Here’s the full story: Several analysts are concerned that China’s economy remains unbalanced, as last year’s recovery was driven by factory growth rather than consumption. Robert Ward of the International Institute for Strategic Studies tweets: China’s Q4 GDP up 6.5% YoY —>full-year 2020 growth to 2.3%. Optics good for Xi in run-up to July’s CCP 100th anniversary: CN only major economy to grow in 2020, Q4 gives strong statistical hand-off to Q1 print. But structural problems remain, not least reliance on debt for growth Lee Hardman  of  MUFG Bank  is concerned by the slowdown in retail sales, which take the shine off the strong recovery in the last quarter: Real GDP expanded by a stronger than expected annual rate of 6.5% in Q4 up from 4.9% in Q3. It meant that for the year as whole, China’s economy was one of the few global economies which recorded positive growth of 2.3%. It was also encouraging industrial production growth accelerated to an annual rate of 7.3% in December. Consensus forecasts had been looking for a marginal slowdown in the pace of IP growth. However, it was not all good news for China’s economy. The pace of retail sales growth notably undershot expectations slowing to an annual rate of 4.6% in December from 5.0% in December. It was well below the consensus forecasts for growth of 5.5%. For the year as a whole retail sales contracted by 3.9%. The pockets of weakness remain a concern and question the sustainability of the strong recovery. Iikka Korhonen , head of the  Bank of Finland Institute for Economies in Transition , says these economic imbalances ‘continue to worsen’. 🇨🇳 #China  Q4/20 GDP +6.5% yoy (+4.9% in Q3) In December industrial production +7.0% yoy, real retail sales +3.1% (our own estimate). Recovery continues, but imbalances continue to worsen. This year should see clear clampdown on indebtedness, real estate investment etc. Hopefully.  pic.twitter.com/WFeb0OVxa8 China’s economy is now growing faster than before the pandemic,  points out the Financial Times : The Chinese economy grew 6.5 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2020, a faster rate than before the coronavirus pandemic that easily outpaced the expected performance of other big countries. Gross domestic product growth for the final quarter beat expectations, according to official data released on Monday, with the Chinese economy expanding 2.3 per cent for the full year as industrial production continued to drive the country’s recovery. The new data underline a rapid turnround in the world’s second-largest economy, which declined in early 2020 for the first time in more than four decades after authorities imposed an extensive lockdown to stem the pandemic’s initial outbreak. In the fourth quarter of 2019,  China  grew 6 per cent. Bloomberg explains  that China’s growth beat forecasts, and will aid the global economic recovery this year: “China has more than returned to trend growth,” said Raymond Yeung, chief economist for Greater China at Australia and New Zealand Banking Group. The strong rebound means authorities can “prioritize structural reforms rather than economic reflation” in 2021, he said. The V-shaped recovery was based on successful control of Covid cases and fiscal and monetary stimulus which boosted investment in real estate and infrastructure. Growth was further spurred by overseas consumer demand for medical equipment and work-from-home devices, with exports expanding 3.6% in 2020 compared to the previous year. China’s state tabloid, the Global Times, says  the country enjoyed a ‘strong recovery’ in the second half of 2020: That made the country the only major economy in the world to eke out an expansion, while others, facing a voracious virus onslaught, contracted.   China’s accelerating economic rebound, largely owing to the government’s drastic measures to contain the virus, will help boost the confidence of all other economies where a resurgence of infection cases is still taking tolls.  China's  #GDP  topped 100 tln yuan for first time, reaching 101.59 tln yuan with 2.3% y-o-y expansion in 2020, said NBS official on Mon. It is estimated to account for 17% of global total for the year, with  #China  expected to become only major economy with positive growth in 2020.  pic.twitter.com/hKVeXNXo8N Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. China’s economy has picked up speed, as the world’s second-largest economy continues to outpace international rivals - led by strong factory growth. Chinese GDP grew by 6.5% per year in the last three months of 2020, new official figures show. That’s an acceleration on the previous quarter, when GDP rose by 4.9%, and better than economists expected.  Quarterly growth in October-December was clocked at 2.6%. China’s factory base led the recovery.  Industrial production rose by 7.3% in December compared with a year ago, as Chinese manufacturers were lifted by Beijing’s stimulus measures and a pick-up in global demand. But... consumers were more cautious, with retail sales growing by 4.6% per year in December, down from 5%. China's economy continues to recover with 2.6% QoQ GDP growth in Q4 and 6.5% annual growth. China is only major country to report positive growth rate in 2020; industrial production has exceeded expectations, while consumption has been a bit slower to recover  #macrobond   pic.twitter.com/FULzQCI0yG Overall, Chinese consumers remained reluctant to spend, as retail sales contracted 3.9% during 2020.  Today’s GDP report shows that China’s economy grew by 2.3% during 2020 as a whole, having  contracted sharply early last year during the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan . That’s the weakest since 1976, the final year of the decade-long Cultural Revolution. But it’s still ahead of, for example, Germany which shrank 5% last year. China’s National Bureau of Statistics  said the country had faced a “grave and complex environment both at home and abroad”, but that Beijing had taken “solid steps” to stabilize employment, finance, foreign trade, foreign investment, domestic investment and market expectations. The national economy recovered steadily, employment and living standards were ensured forcefully, and the main goals and tasks of economic and social development were accomplished better than expectation.  Jeffrey Halley , senior Asia Pacific market analyst at  OANDA,  Industrial Production rose by an impressive 7.30% as the rest of the world’s insatiable demand for Made in  China  showed no signs of slowing down. By contrast, domestic data still showed the caution that has been prevalent throughout the year. Retail Sales for December rose 4.60% versus 5.50% expected, a cause for joy in any other country but China. That likely reflects the Covid-19 restrictions in parts of the country and the freezing weather that has sent energy prices soaring. Unemployment, though, held steady at 5.20%, and this metric will leave Chinese authorities still in their comfort zone.  More reaction to follow.... Despite this recovery, European stock markets are expected to open lower -- while Wall Street is closed for Martin Luther King day. European Opening Calls: #FTSE  6725 -0.16% #DAX  13749 -0.28% #CAC  5592 -0.36% #AEX  650 -0.21% #MIB  22214 -0.75% #IBEX  8223 -0.10% #OMX  1951 -0.21% #STOXX  3587 -0.35% #IGOpeningCall 11am BST: Germany’s Bundesbank’s monthly economic report
Australia v India: fourth Test, day four – as it happened:	This series simply refuses to provide any clarity and once again a day that could have proven decisive ended up teasing us further. The Border-Gavaskar Trophy will now come down to one day’s play at the Gabba. India have 98 overs to survive. Australia have to dodge the showers and take 10 wickets.  We’ll be here for every ball, so join us back here bright and early for what promises to be an enthralling climax to a gripping series.  There we go. The inevitable has been called. The rain is strengthening over the Gabba. The umpires have taken a quick stroll under the umbrellas but they didn’t linger. They will call the day off imminently. Nikhil Nayak has emailed through an Indian XI that could also have featured today if fit/selected. It’s remarkable how Rahane’s side has fought so deep into the series despite being so undermanned.  Dhawan Shaw Kohli KL Rahul Murali Vijay Vihari Saha Jadeja Ashwin Bumrah Ishant This rain is forecast to linger on and off until the early hours of the morning. Thereafter showers would not be a surprise until 8am, and they continue to be around a 30% possibility until the close. 98 overs sounds optimistic.  It’s still raining at the Gabba, the full square is covered, and the skies still look full to burst. Hardly any chance of play resuming tonight. We’re just waiting for the official sign off.  And India’s averages, from the battalion of bowlers they were forced to call upon.  Jadeja 15.00 Thakur 22.14 Ashwin 28.83 Bumrah 29.36 Siraj 29.53 Yadav 33.25 Natarajan 39.66 Sundar 42.25 Saini 43.00 Plus Rohit and Shami, who also rolled their arms over for no reward. So, Australia’s series with the bat ends. Here are the unusually skinny averages: Labuschagne 53.25 Smith 44.71 Paine 40.80 Pucovski 36.00 Green 33.71 Wade 21.62 Harris 21.50 Burns 21.00 Head 20.66 Starc 20.25 Warner 16.75 Cummins 12.20 Lyon 11.66 Hazlewood 10.75 We’re on radar watch for the next 45 minutes then, unless the deluge is so significant it forces a decision sooner.  UPDATE: 5.30pm is the latest possible time for play to resume on Day 4 - that's in 45 minutes time  #AUSvIND If we don’t see any more play today, the destination of the Border-Gavaskar Trophy will be determined by 98 overs (rain permitting) tomorrow. It’s safe to say the extra time taken out of the game this evening ends whatever slim incentive India had to chase the win. It also begs the question why Australia chose to bat so long in their second innings. The groundstaff are once again on in a flash. The skies are the colour of menace. I’d be amazed if we got back on again today.  1.5 over: India 4-0 (Rohit 4, Gill 0) (Target 328)  First innings destroyer Josh Hazlewood shares the new ball, but he’s too short and wide to cause Gill many issues. And here comes the rain... 1st over: India 4-0 (Rohit 4, Gill 0) (Target 328)  Starc is short of a length for his opening couple of deliveries, one of which raps Rohit on his gloves. Then he’s full and wide for a few, but there’s no swing, and Rohit can lean into a sumptuous cover drive that races away for four. Starc does not look happy with the footmarks.  Quite how we’ve had so much play today is incredible. There is rain blanketing southern Queensland but  the Gabba remains inches to the north  of the front as it slips by into the ocean.  The floodlights are in full effect. Dark clouds are massed around the perimeter of the Gabba like a pathetic fallacy backdrop to a Lord of the Rings fight scene. This is not when you want to bat, but bat India must. Mitchell Starc has the new ball, here we go... 123 overs remain in the match - weather permitting. If the rain holds off this is beautifully poised.  Siraj outstanding with maiden five-for, while Shardul Thakur becomes the first player since Dale Steyn (2008) to take seven-plus wickets and score a half-century in a Test v the Aussies in their own backyard  #AUSvIND For what it’s worth, Cricviz still has the draw favoured at 52%, then Australia at 45% and India at 3%. With all the weather around, who knows how much time there remains in this game? As things stand all four results remain alive approaching the fourth innings. It’s a fitting end to a compelling series. I’m confused about what’s going on now. Australia are refusing singles to keep Cummins on strike, then they’re running like headless chooks to avoid Hazlewood facing anything. Despite their best intentions the No.11 does face Siraj, and he smacks him nonchalantly through the covers for four. But then he falls into the trap, angling his bat and guiding the ball to the catcher at shortish third-man like it was slips practice.  Siraj celebrates his maiden five-for in Tests. Australia lead by a very hand 327.  75th over: Australia 289-9 (Cummins 27, Hazlewood 5) (lead of 322)  Thakur continues to bowl short and it almost works when Hazlewood aims a glide towards the man placed for the catch at short third-man. He then deceives Cummins with a T20-style knuckle ball but the mistimed shot does not find a fielder.  This is now Pat Cummins' highest score in a Test since the 2018 Boxing Day Test against India, when he made 63.  #AUSvIND 74th over: Australia 286-9 (Cummins 26, Hazlewood 4) (lead of 319)  Siraj goes full and straight and Cummins does well to dig it out. The bowler then slips in a slower ball and the batsman is ready, hanging back in his crease and lofting a six straight down the ground! He goes straight again with a bludgeon of a stroke that earns him a couple more before failing to pierce the field for the remainder of the over. Could this be the cameo that reignites Cummins’ batting career?  The latest weather radar from Brisbane  #AUSvIND   pic.twitter.com/v7vIqZwhDv 73rd over: Australia 278-9 (Cummins 18, Hazlewood 4) (lead of 311)  Lyon’s cameo may be over but the left-handed fun doesn’t stop. Hazlewood is gifted a wide half-volley from Thakur and it is treated with disdain by Australia’s No.11 and crunched through the covers.  Never declare. That’s the game, yo.  Nathan Lyon has a swipe at a short and wide one from Thakur and slaps it straight to Agarwal at cover.  72nd over: Australia 274-8 (Cummins 18, Lyon 13) (lead of 307)  India continue to go upstairs, Siraj this time, and Lyon swivel-hooks a top-edged six! Australia are in full on slog mode now with Cummins even clearing his front leg, but to no avail, with one hoick to midwicket and another fresh air swing.  “Must say that NZ getting a shot at the World Test Championship at Lord’s, of all places, is one of the most pleasing outcomes cricket has to offer at present,” emails Abhinav Dutta, correctly. Then he expands with great flow. “If it goes to a tie, we can say without doubt that Time is Illmatic indeed. Given how Nas often disses new rappers for failing to quote Big Daddy Kane (Williamson) verses off the top of their head, expect some OG bangers if NZ were to win.”  71st over: Australia 266-8 (Cummins 17, Lyon 6) (lead of 299)  Thakur is dealing mainly in bouncers, so much so Bruce Oxenford makes all manner of arm gestures after the third in a row. I’m not sure if the wide or no-ball takes precedence? Cummins responds with a nice pull for three. The groundstaff are massed on the boundary edge once more. We may be in for another drenching.  70th over: Australia 261-8 (Cummins 14, Lyon 5) (lead of 294)  Good lord, Siraj has found the edge of a crack miles short and miles wide of Cummins’ off stump and the ball has hit it and seamed about five yards, like a missile, towards the batsman’s personal pipe. With Cummins bent double the ball ricochets down to the fine-leg fence for four.  Keith Johnson has done sterling work  identifying a slab of cricket lasting 24 hours.  “March 13, 2013 offered close to 24 hours of cricket,” he emails helpfully.  “Starts with Day 1 of New Zealand v England - 2nd test of a three test series, from the Basin Reserve, eventually drawn, Compton and Trott with 1st inning centuries, Broad getting a six-fer. Over to Chandigarh as India host Australia in the 3rd of a four test series. Day 1 in a test match India wins with Vijay and Dhawan picking up centuries. Peter Siddle has a five-fear in the first innings for Oz. India wins this match. There is a three and half hour break until Bridgetown brings the final day of the first test of the Clive Lloyd Trophy - obviously played between West Indies and Zimbabwe. West Indies require 12 In their 2nd innings, or 1/3rd of what India scored in their 2nd innings of the first match of this current series, to defeat Zimbabwe and they duly respond, 12-1. Shane Shillingford, yes, THAT Shane Shillingford taking six in 16 overs for the Windies in the 2nd innings to help complete the match in three days. No matches in SA that week; West Indies & SA hosting test matches the same days would get we, The  Cricket  Nation, to 24 hours of test cricket!” Lovely stuff. 69th over: Australia 254-8 (Cummins 9, Lyon 4) (lead of 287)  One to Lyon, three to Cummins, from Thakur’s over.  I reckon that rain from the west is going to spoil this party soon enough.  Australia's chance of victory according to WinViz is now 43%, the highest it's been since the beginning of Washington Sundar and Shardul Thakur's partnership.  #AUSvIND 68th over: Australia 250-8 (Cummins 6, Lyon 3)  Out comes the GOAT and the GOAT goes munch! Siraj bowls full and he is met with the full blade of Lyon’s bat striking a textbook straight drive that would ordinarily be worth four glorious runs, but the rain reduces the tariff to three. Cummins is less comfortable on strike is fortunate a thick edge bounces in front of third slip.  Mitchell Starc aims the same shot to every delivery of Siraj’s over; a handsome 3-iron swing of the bat aiming for the hospitality boxes behind the sightscreen. He misses with his first swipe, then mistimes his second straight to mid-off. Win some, lose some.  67th over: Australia 247-7 (Cummins 6, Starc 1)  Thakur resumes his abbreviated over and Cummins is immediately in the runs, slashing a rank long hop for four over the cordon. The bowler exacts some revenge by clipping the back of the batsman’s helmet after a bouncer failed to get up, despite Cummins’ best efforts to avoid contact. That was a very slight glancing blow.  It remains very dark at the Gabba, despite the floodlights. The radar indicates more rain is approaching from the west, it remains to be seen if the ground is in the flightpath or whether it will again escape relatively unscathed.  Out come the players, ready for a session that may last two-and-a-half hours. It may last a fraction of that if it rains again. Either way, what action we see is sure to be entertaining with Australia desperate for quick runs. And there we have it,  play will restart in ten minutes.  Thanks to the early Tea break and the addition of the extra time, the day’s play may only lose one over! Play will resume in 10 minutes!  #AUSvIND The situation is looking up. Remarkably, despite southern Queensland getting a serious drenching today, most of the rain has slid past just to the south of the Gabba. There’s the chance the tail end of the front could become a factor soon, but for now we might have a break long enough to resume play.  The big cover has come off at the Gabba. We await the official inspection from the umpires. #AUSvIND “Could you explain what Australia and India need in the context of WTC finals?” emails Arul Kanhere.  I shall hand you over to Ric Finlay, Australian cricket’s numbers guy. WTC rankings - now: 73.8 Aus 70.2 Ind 70.0 NZ If Aus win: 73.3 Aus 70.0 NZ 66.7 Ind If Ind win: 71.6 Ind 70.0 NZ 69.2 Aus If drawn: 71.3 Aus 70.0 NZ 68.3 Ind Regardless, NZ will move up to second by not playing! Aus 4-point penalty for slow over-rate at MCG could be crucial. Channel Seven are not convinced we’ll have play anytime soon. They’re showing replays of last summer’s series against Pakistan.  “Greetings from Slovakia,” is the kind of introduction that piques my interest. Welcome, Vincent Barreto. “It’s a country that doesn’t really play cricket. There’s a few Subcontinent expats who play cricket with a tennis ball in a park in Bratislava during the summer which bemuses and intrigues the locals who wonder what this strange game is! There is a weekly game in Austria where lots of teams turn up.  Was hoping for a bit of cricket to go with my early meeting for plant startup at JLR in Nitra but alas it is not to be. India will need to keep the Aussies below 300 but without someone like Sehwag to smash a quick few I think they will be eyeing a draw. It’s all they need. Here’s to the rain going away and an interesting 4th day! -12 here btw!” India will be delighted with a draw. Undermanned, on the backfoot from the toss, and at Australia’s fortress, India will celebrate a draw like a win.  Seven have rolled out a package in honour of Nathan Lyon accompanied by this well chosen banger. Clearly they missed a trick. The covers are still on but the rain is not too heavy.  The radar  indicates showers nearby, but the massive blanket of rain appears to have skirted by.  ‘Morning Jonathan,” buongiorno Finbar Anslow! “5.30am over here. Why up at this hour? Well the vagaries of Italian bureaucracy demand that I’m online at six to get a web ticket as part of the long and winding road towards citizenship; oh and there are also two Test matches on. Which brings me to the burning question; has there ever been/could there ever be, a situation where test cricket is being played 24/7? Home matches in New Zealand, South Africa and the Windies for example? 5 days in a row of non stop high level cricket. Wow!” Excellent question Finbar. Can anybody out there help him out with the answer of the longest consecutive spell of play? Off the top of my head I would suggest NZ>Australia>SA on or around Boxing Day must have happened a few times, giving us 18ish continuous hours of Test cricket.  Back when Geoff and I were part of the esteemed White Line Wireless crew  we workshopped a movie featuring Shane Watson  as a superhero chasing the sun, playing cricket 24/7. We cast Owen Wilson in the lead role. It was very late at night. We may have been drunk.  Be like Abhi Saxena and send me emails. “Just a bit of perspective from a young Indian,” he opens. “One thing that seems to have surprised the Australian media is the grit shown by the Indians. The guys coming in this game for their first /second game are the same age as me, and what they are showing on the pitch, I think accurately reflects where India is as a country at this moment. What people don’t seem to realise in the West from my own experience of doing graduate school in the US is how young and ambitious India is. They have seen how life is in the West thanks to growing technology and friendly relations, and want the same for themselves.  Largely gone are the days when people in India just want to settle outside, they want to build their own now. India is growing as a country though the Indian media shows a very inaccurate reflection of the youth and doesn’t really capture it. But on the Test wicket it comes out, and that is why I love this game. Starting from the feisty Ashes to the colonial rebellion of West Indies, followed by the Asian colonies, Test cricket has served as a far better reflection of society than most other media. Cheers! In the meantime, feel free to follow England’s pursuit of victory in Sri Lanka. On come the covers, off go the players, and we’ll have an early Tea. The radar indicates it’s just a shower, but there are a few lurking nearby, and some of them look nasty. We’ll just have to wait and see. 37.5 overs remain in the day.  66.1 over: Australia 243-7 (Cummins 2, Starc 1)  Starc gets off the mark with a single but then the groundstaff race on as the light drizzle firms into persistent rain.  66th over: Australia 242-7 (Cummins 2, Starc 0)  Natarajan gets another spell and his first delivery from around the wicket induces a regulation edge from Cummins, but it fails to carry to Pujara, who is standing a mile back at first slip. Another black mark on India’s fielding in what has been a wretched tour on that score. The impressive left-armer continues to toil and has the better of Cummins later in a maiden over when he flings one beyond a weak prod outside off stump.  Ten minutes before Tea, rain has started to fall. It’s only light for now, and play is continuing, but the groundstaff are ready to intervene.  Paine gallops like an AFL draftee attempting the beep test to turn a sharp single into a mightily impressive two. He’s then tested by some lovely full swinging deliveries from Thakur until the bowler gets his man! Eager to avoid a single to farm the strike Thakur drops in a slippery bouncer, Paine chases after it and feathers an edge behind from his attempted pull.  65th over: Australia 242-7 (Cummins 2, Starc 0)  This is now Paine's 2nd highest Test series aggregate and only the 2nd where he has topped 200 runs. 215 in 4 Tests in SAfrica in 2018 his best  #AusvInd 64th over: Australia 240-6 (Paine 25, Cummins 2)  The scoreboard has not been rattling on recently but Paine gets the scorer’s attention with a delicate glance for four, then a beautifully struck reverse sweep for four more. Those runs come despite Sundar getting plenty of encouragement out of this increasingly capricious surface.  The floodlights are now on at the Gabba. The thundery showers have skirted around the Gabba all afternoon but they are inching ever closer.  63rd over: Australia 231-6 (Paine 16, Cummins 2)  Paine continues the pattern of accepting a single early in the over. Thakur then holds Cummins scoreless with a nice line outside off, with some away swing, and forces some hasty defence with a well directed yorker.  62nd over: Australia 230-6 (Paine 15, Cummins 2)  Cummins arriving in the middle ahead of Starc and Lyon is a little mystifying. Washington Sundar replacing Navdeep Saini in the attack is not. Sundar approaches from around the wicket and is clipped for one by Paine then two by Cummins. He is then all over the Australian bowler, getting one to rip and probe the inside edge, then slant across with the arm beyond the outside edge. Nathan Lyon will have enjoyed the natural variation.  Green 236 runs @ 33.71 and a strike rate of 40.68 for his debut series. A bit to work on, but a lot to work with  #AusvInd Shardul Thakur (which sometimes rolls through my head as a Sponnerism for Tupac Shakur) returns to the attack. Paine soon rotates the strike with a sharp single but then Green perishes! A nice delivery hits a length hard, lifts, clips the shoulder of the bat and is nicely caught in the cordon by the safe hands of Rohit. An excellent wicket for India, but the latest in a number of deliveries this afternoon that do not bode well for them batting long spells to win or draw when Australia’s attack gets to exploit this deteriorating surface. Green’s innings could be cut anyway you want. Did he dig deep for a valuable 37? Or did he waste time scratching around when the situation demanded more urgency? 61st over: Australia 227-6 (Paine 14, Cummins 0) 60th over: Australia 226-5 (Green 37, Paine 13)  A lovely on drive for three from Green is bettered by an even lovelier on drive for four from Paine. I’m afraid the valiant Saini is not at the races.  The lead is now 259. I reckon Australia have reached a big enough total should they be forced into an emergency declaration. That emergency may be sooner than hoped with groundstaff entering their golf carts.  59th over: Australia 217-5 (Green 34, Paine 7)  Just the single from a Siraj over full of deliveries that hit the deck hard. Cameron Green is starting to find touch, but he’s had to grind it out to remain in the middle.  Cameron Green has had to fight to stay out there. 19% of the balls bowled to him have brought edges or misses, the most of any batsman to face 10+ deliveries today.  #AUSvIND 58th over: Australia 216-5 (Green 34, Paine 6)  Navdeep Saini is considered fit enough for a spell, but he starts full on Green’s pads and concedes two, then he’s short and wide outside off stump and is cut effortlessly for four. A sharp single and then a neatly clipped three from Paine continues the momentum of this partnership.  Rowan Sweeney extends  this conversation  from earlier. “Hopefully the Australian media and public can embrace India’s ascension, if and when, it comes. India is cricket mad, and if young players are finally being given the opportunity and support they need to reach the very apex of their talent and realise their dreams, that’s something to be celebrated across the world. If that creates an arms race, where the older “powers” of cricket need to make similar levels of investment into young men and women, this too is only a good thing. I’d infinitely prefer that situation than the heartbreaking decline of West Indies Cricket.” 57th over: Australia 206-5 (Green 27, Paine 3)  Australia respond after the drinks break with some tip-and-run cricket to keep the scoreboard moving. Green is now batting with much more intent, looking to drive forcefully through the offside and allowing his skipper to call him though for aggressive singles. It should be an industrious hour until the Tea interval.  Don’t forget to join in throughout the day. If/when the rain comes, I’m going to need your company. Send your emails to  jonathan.howcroft.casual@theguardian.com  and tweets  @JPHowcroft .  Speaking of the rain, the day’s forecast has improved continually over the past 24 hours or so. Early indications prepared us for interruptions around lunchtime, but it now looks as though we’ll at least get to Tea unscathed. Like yesterday, anything after the final break is in the lap of the Gods with storms anticipated some time after 4pm local. There are big ugly splodges over southern Queensland on the BOM radar but mercifully they have not converged on top of the Gabba.  Moreover, the forecast for tomorrow isn’t as horrendous as appeared earlier in the week. Showers are possible during the hours of play, but by no means guaranteed. There could be a victor in this series after all.  Thank you very much Geoffrey for handballing to me my final OBO session of this captivating series. It has been a feast of cricket for four Tests. I just hope the rain holds off long enough to fit in a little more pud.  56th over: Australia 202-5 (Green 25, Paine 1)  The captain gets off the mark with a clipped run. He tends to score fairly briskly. Interesting how things get played from here. Green gives some indication by sweeping another boundary to raise Australia’s 200. The lead is 235, and my day is done. I shall return to you one more time in Border-Gavaskar mode, tomorrow morning to see what is to be seen of the fifth day. For the rest of the fourth, your guide through the catacombs shall be Jonathan Plumage Howcroft. 
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Arrivals in UK could be asked to stay in quarantine hotels, Raab says:	People arriving in the UK could be asked to stay in quarantine hotels under plans being considered by ministers to try to deal with the spread of the pandemic, the foreign secretary,  Dominic Raab , has said. Raab said the government had “considered all of the possibilities” when asked about reports in the Sunday Times that ministers have ordered plans to be drawn up for the creation of quarantine hotels for arrivals in Britain. The report says the quarantine hotels, modelled on  New Zealand’s policy  of “directed isolation”, could use GPS and facial-recognition technology to ensure that people are staying isolated. Raab told Sky’s Sophy Ridge on Sunday: “We will consider all the measures in the round. In terms of enforcement, we are going to be strengthening the checks at the border – so when people come in, to make sure that they have filled out the passenger location form, that they have got that negative test that they have to vouch for before they get on the flight. “Also, because the effect of abolishing or suspending the travel corridors is that people go into quarantine and self-isolation for 10 days, we’re making sure that Public Health England checks to make sure people are adhering to those rules. “As well as changing the rules, we are also making sure that we beef up the capacity to make those checks.” Raab dismissed claims that the government had been too slow in setting up border measures to prevent the importation of new coronavirus variants. He told the Andrew Marr show: “I don’t accept that we have been too slow in this – we are broadly the same pace in terms of Canada and Germany.” Raab said the government target was to have delivered the first dose of the vaccine to 17 million people by spring, when restrictions could be lifted. However, he said that the English lockdown was unlikely to be lifted for the whole country at once, with a return to the tier system. “I think it’s right to say that we won’t do it all in one big bang as we phase out the national lockdown and people end up phasing through the tiered approach. We want to make sure that we can do it in a safe and simple way.” He said the government would take advice on the easing of restrictions and publish its “exit plan” in due course. Raab would not be drawn on a Sunday Telegraph article reporting that civil servants believed the vaccination rollout could be speeded up to vaccinate all over-18s in Britain by the end of June, but said he was “quietly confident” that the government would meet this target by September. “When I look at the numbers, I think people just want to hear what the real facts are with this. We’ve vaccinated now over 3 million. If you take the UK compared to other countries around Europe, we’ve got double the vaccination rate of the next leading country, Denmark.” He refused to guarantee that all those who had received the first dose would receive the second within 12 weeks, amid concerns about vaccine supplies. “I think if we follow the roadmap and the supply chains that we have set out, along with the backup that we’ve got because we’ve got the volume of doses – 360 million – and we’ve also got seven suppliers, we ought to be able to deliver on that. “But of course right the way through this pandemic, we’ve had to adapt to all sorts of different things. So we are just focused on making sure we deliver on the roadmap that we’ve got,” Raab said, adding that people get a “very high” level of protection after receiving one dose of a vaccine. The foreign secretary said people should not go on holiday as he warned that the NHS is “on the cusp”. “I think right now people should be staying at home unless it is absolutely necessary, so, no, they shouldn’t be going on holiday – I don’t think that is appropriate,” he told Sky. Jonathan Reynolds, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said he would “look at” the option of quarantine hotels for passengers returning from abroad. Reynolds told Sky’s Ridge on Sunday: “If that is the most effective way to tackle that, I’d look at that. I’m not sure necessarily it is the case.”
Shed parties and illegal races: UK police crack down on Covid-19 rulebreakers:	Police  have issued fines to coronavirus rule breakers including those who held a party in a garden shed and a group of more than 40 people who gathered for illegal car racing. In the 10th month of the pandemic, police have clamped down on those clearly breaking the rules, with forces being asked by government to increase enforcement as the  death toll  from the virus mounts. Police in  Swansea  issued fines after finding eight people partying in a garden shed in Sketty that housed a bar. In Romford, east  London , which has one of the highest infection rates in the country, 49 people face fines after allegedly turning up to an illegal car meeting. Police were called to reports of 50 cars gathered just before midnight on Saturday, speeding around a roundabout as drivers stood around and mingled. DCS Stephen Clayman of the Metropolitan police said: “It is unacceptable that people are still  breaking the rules  at a time when there is so much pressure on the NHS. It is more important than ever before that people follow the regulations. “The restrictions are clear enough and there is no excuse for this sort of selfish behaviour that puts lives at risk and causes a nuisance for nearby residents who are doing the right thing by staying at home. “We understand that this is a very difficult time for everyone, but our top priority as police officers is keeping people safe. If that means moving quicker to enforcement action for more wilful breaches, then we will do.” Elsewhere, police caught a man in Devizes, Wiltshire, who said he had driven all the way from Luton, Bedfordshire, to buy a McDonald’s takeaway. It was bad luck for him on three fronts: he faces a £200 fine, Devizes does not have a branch of the fast food chain, and his car was seized because it was uninsured. Police in Manchester hit out at a “minority who think they are above the law” after they were called out to house parties and other gatherings at the weekend, with 110 fixed penalty notices issued across the  Greater Manchester  region. Fines were issued after a house party with 30 people was held in Hulme, Manchester, and after police were called to a party of 40 people at a flat in Cheetham Hill. Four people in a car on Friday evening received fines after travelling from Bolton to Preston for a takeaway. Police happened across them after their car broke down. Ch Insp Carol Martin of Greater Manchester police said: “The majority of people across Greater Manchester are following the government’s guidance – we would like to thank them for doing their bit throughout the pandemic. However, there is a minority who think they are above the law. It is incredibly frustrating to those abiding by the rules that some people are showing such a blatant disregard for the current regulations. “Not only are they putting their own lives and those of their loves ones at stake, they also risk undoing the hard work of everyone else continuing to make the necessary sacrifices at this time. “We would like to reassure people that dedicated teams of officers are responding to reports of non-compliance and are continuing to follow the national lead by engaging with members of the public, explaining the law and encouraging compliance, but our officers will not hesitate to take enforcement action if people are found to be flouting the rules.”
London to start trialling first 24-hour Covid vaccination centres in January:	The first  24-hour vaccination centres  will be piloted in London before the end of January, the UK’s vaccines minister has said. Nadhim Zahawi said that by the beginning of February the scheme would be under way in hospitals in the capital and also pledged that 50 large vaccination centres would be open. He said that at present about 140 people a minute were being vaccinated against Covid-19. Zahawi, who later said he had a “big worry” about  vaccination rates among BAME communities , said that from Monday “in some areas where they’ve done the majority of over-80s, letters are going out to the over-70s and those who are clinically extremely vulnerable”. But he argued that for the most vulnerable cohort of over-80s, 24-hour centres were not the most important component of the government’s programme. He told Sky News: “If you just want to chase volume, chase speed, and not accuracy, 24 hours works really well. But if you want to chase both accuracy, protecting the most vulnerable and of course speed, then you want to do what we’re doing, which is primary care networks, hospitals, large vaccination centres, and of course pharmacies last week.” Due to limited supply, the vaccine “needs to get into the arms of the most vulnerable” first, Zahawi said. Describing the vaccination programme as a “race against death”, Zahawi said supply “remains challenging” and is the limiting factor in the rollout of coronavirus jabs. “We now have built a deployment infrastructure that can deploy as much vaccine as it comes through. And so it’s the vaccine supply – which remains lumpy, it remains challenging, you may have read over the weekend probably some of the challenges around Pfizer and of course Oxford/AstraZeneca – but I’m confident we can meet our target mid-Feb, [for] those top four cohorts,” he told BBC News. He later told the BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that on Monday the proportion of care home residents vaccinated so far would go past 50%. Asked if people should be allowed to work in care homes without having been vaccinated, he said: “We’re not the sort of country that forces people to take vaccines, we want to do it by persuasion.” He said he disagreed with the owner of a plumbing company who said he would not employ anyone who had not had a vaccine, calling it a “discriminatory” approach. He added that he was concerned about whether minority groups would be vaccinated at high enough rates. As well as being disproportionately likely to die of the virus, polls have found that black, Asian and minority ethnic people are less likely to want the vaccine. Fifty seven per cent of BAME respondents to a  Royal Society for Public Health survey  in December said they were likely to accept a vaccine, against 79% of white respondents. “My big worry is if 85% of the adult population gets vaccinated, if the 15% skews heavily to the BAME community the virus will very quickly infect that community,” Zahawi told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “People have some hesitancy … we are there to answer their questions.” Zahawi’s update on progress with the government’s coronavirus vaccination programme comes as letters offering appointments to about 4.6 million people over 70 and 1 million extremely vulnerable people are sent out this week. He repeated the government’s target,  made on Sunday by the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab , of offering all adults a first dose by September. He said that once the most vulnerable cohorts had been vaccinated in phase one, in phase two his “very strong instinct” was to prioritise other groups likely to come into contact with the virus more often than others. “Those who their work, through their profession, may come into contact with the virus – police men and women, shop workers, teachers, incredibly important because we want to make sure schools reopen fully … should be prioritised,” he said. Meanwhile, the national medical director for the NHS in England, Prof Stephen Powis, said he was confident that everyone who had had their first dose of the Pfizer vaccine would get their second. He told ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “We’ve been planning this, this change, this extension in the time of the second dose [to] 12 weeks, and I’m confident that those supplies will be there so that everybody who’s had their first dose gets their second dose.” He said the UK had the guaranteed supplies of both the Pfizer and the AstraZeneca vaccines to fulfil that pledge. The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, told Today that Wales’s supply of the Pfizer vaccine had to last until February and therefore was not being used all at once. “There will be no point, and certainly it will be logistically very damaging to try to use all of that in the first week and then to have all our vaccinators standing around with nothing to do for another month,” said Drakeford, whose stance has been heavily criticised for meaning that some vaccinations will be deliberately delayed. He said: “We will vaccinate all four priority groups by the middle of February, alongside everywhere else in the UK.”
Australia's anguish: the Indigenous kids trapped behind bars:	On an average night in 2019, there were 949 children behind bars in Australia – more than half of them were Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. Of all 10-year-olds incarcerated, 80% were Aboriginal children. Aboriginal kids make up only 6% of all 10- to 17-year-olds in Australia but they are 54% of the juvenile detention population. They are  jailed at 22 times the rate  of non-Indigenous young people. And  they are jailed younger . In 2019 nearly   65% of children under 14 in detention were Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander. Study after study has shown that contact with the criminal justice system at a young age can do lasting damage to children, their families and communities. The younger a child is the first time they’re sentenced, the more likely they are to reoffend violently, to continue offending and to end up in an adult prison before their 22nd birthday. According to a 2016  report by the Sentencing Advisory Council , 94% of children in detention aged 10 to 12 returned to prison before they were 18. The collective anguish about Aboriginal children trapped in the juvenile justice system is expressed in the  Uluru statement from the heart : Proportionally, we are the most incarcerated people on the planet. We are not an innately criminal people. Our children are alienated from their families at unprecedented rates. This cannot be because we have no love for them. And our youth languish in detention in obscene numbers. They should be our hope for the future. Guardian Australia today launches Childhood in custody, a series about how juvenile justice operates in Australia, as told by those who live and work in the system. A Noongar boy, homeless since the age of 14, talks about the terror of his first night in jail, but how it was better than sleeping on the streets. A stolen generations parent who has experienced police violence watches his son face similar treatment. Police in two states talk about wanting to move beyond a culture of targeting Aboriginal kids. A youth worker tries to stem the tide of children going from foster care to jail, with little funding, while a magistrate expresses frustration at the limited options he has to help kids out of the system. They all talk about what they have seen and what they would like to see change. A psychologist and Nyamal woman, Dr Tracy Westerman, says prison doesn’t teach 10-year-old children anything but can make existing problems worse. “Kids don’t have the internal ability to weigh out moral reasoning at that age,” she says. “You lack the ability to regulate thoughts, behaviours and emotions. Quite often, you can be highly impulsive, you can have impulse control issues. “Imagine putting that kind of person in an environment with hundreds of other kids that are the same.” Many Aboriginal children in detention have at least one neurological impairment. In Westerman’s home state of Western Australia, a  2018 study  found that almost every child in detention was “severely impaired” in at least one brain function, be it memory, language, attention or executive function – which limited their ability to plan and understand consequences. The study of 99 children in Banskia Hill detention centre found nine out of 10 kids had some cognitive impairment, and one in three had foetal alcohol spectrum disorder – the highest known rate in the world of FASD among any population in the justice system. Seventy-four per cent of the children in the study were Aboriginal. “Impairments may come across in behaviours with young people appearing wilfully naughty, defiant, or lazy, when in reality they may been be struggling to remember, understand or comprehend what is required of them,”  the researchers wrote . In his 14 years as president of the children’s court of  Western Australia , Denis Reynolds says he regularly saw Aboriginal children aged 10 to 13 who were so small “they could hardly see over the dock” and who had “serious neuro-developmental impairment”. “We’re saying they’re bad kids,” says the judge, who is now retired. “What we should be saying is these kids are crying out for support and we need to be providing it.” Studies show a strong link between the time children spend in out-of-home care and juvenile detention. From 2014 to 2019  more than half  of the young people who had been in the justice system had also received child protection services. Aboriginal and Islander children  are overrepresented in the out-of-home care system  in every jurisdiction in Australia. Aboriginal children are also disproportionately targeted by punitive policing. In New South Wales, for example, Indigenous kids are  significantly overrepresented  in the number of strip-searches conducted by police. NSW police have also been operating a  secretive blacklist  known as the suspect target management plan, or STMP, largely made up of Indigenous children – 72% – deemed to be at risk of committing crimes. The NSW Law Enforcement Conduct Commission  found that many of the children, some as young as nine, had not been charged with a crime and were not aware they were a target. Between 2017 and 2019 the state’s highest concentration of kids subject to the STMP were in the western  Sydney  suburb of Mount Druitt. At 13 Isaiah Sines was strip-searched by police on his way to the shops in the suburb. Isaiah says he was told to strip down to his underpants on the side of a busy road. “It was embarrassing,” he says. “I didn’t know what to do so I just complied.” Isaiah doesn’t know if he was on the STMP but says there were periods when police stopped him almost daily. One day he was stopped twice, by the same officers. The first time he was strip-searched. The second time he was questioned. Increasing the minimum age of criminal responsibility from 10 to 14 could lead to a decrease of about 15% in the number of young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in detention, according to the  2020 Productivity Commission report , Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage. But governments – with the exception of the Australian Capital Territory’s – are reluctant to act, citing community safety concerns. In November 2018 the Council of Attorneys-General agreed to consider raising the age. But when the council met again last July it decided that further work was needed “on adequate processes and services for children who exhibit offending behaviour”. “There is a significant risk that a simple increase to the minimum age of criminal responsibility would leave this cohort of children without proper support services,” said South Australia’s attorney general, Vickie Chapman. Her NSW counterpart, Mark Speakman, said any reforms “would need to be in the best interests of the NSW community, with the safety of the community a key consideration”. It’s a view shared by many states. But Queensland’s attorney general, Sharon Fentiman, said bluntly: “There are no plans to raise the age of criminal responsibility in Queensland.” The Northern Territory government said it was considering how to raise the age from 10 to 12 years, as recommended by the  royal commission into the protection and detention of children in the NT . All but one of the 32 kids   now   in juvenile detention in the NT are Aboriginal boys. There have been numerous times over the past decade when  every single child  in detention in the territory is Aboriginal. The NT is building a $55m replacement for the much-maligned  Don Dale youth detention centre , which is due to open in 2022, and spending $13m on the Alice Springs youth detention centre. In August the ACT became the first and only jurisdiction to commit to raising the age to 14, by promising to amend legislation in the next parliamentary term. “Locking up kids fails the children themselves and it also fails to protect our community,” said the ACT’s attorney general, Shane Rattenbury. “If we want to reduce future offending, expanded support and diversion is the way.” Circle sentencing  works, according to the NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research. The restorative justice program is available in 12 NSW local courts. The magistrate works with Aboriginal elders, victims and the offender’s family to determine an appropriate sentence. In April Bocsar found that Aboriginal people who take part have lower rates of imprisonment and recidivism than those who are sentenced in the usual way. Some states also have their version of the NSW  youth Koori court,  which was established in 2015. Elders, lawyers and police meet to discuss the issues that may lie behind a young person’s offending. They develop plans for each offender. Participants have up to 12 months to complete the program and their performance is taken into account during the sentencing process. Both these options are for sentencing. But the youth worker Daniel Daylight says waiting for kids to come to court and plead guilty is starting way too late. “I want to stop people from ever going to court. I want to stop us focusing on having culturally safe courts, when really we need to have culturally safe communities and cities.” Tracy Westerman says therapeutic approaches are needed, to diagnose and manage children’s developmental issues, to divert them away from the justice system. Ultimately, jailing 10-year-olds puts Australia behind international human rights standards. “When do we lose our compassion for a child who is being abused or traumatised in their home?” she asks. “Well, effectively Australia says we lose that compassion at 10.”
Questions will be asked over timing of closing UK travel corridors:	The announced  closure of all international travel corridors  to the UK marks the end of another week of changing policy, with the timing and implementation dismaying many. Travel corridors will be axed in effect from Monday morning. The corridors, which exempted inbound travellers from the requirement to quarantine for 10 days, may make little practical difference to the airline and travel industry in the current context. Schedules have been slashed and comparatively few people are likely to have travelled to or from the majority of the few dozen destinations remaining on the corridor list: some obscure, some no longer linked by flights to the UK, others barring British travellers. Holidays are banned; a few Caribbean destinations with longer-staying visitors are the most likely to have affected travellers, with the likes of Dubai already recently removed from the list. The industry has said it accepts the overwhelming public health case for the move. The suspension of all corridors will coincide with the requirement for pre-departure testing for all arrivals – a policy that many airports and airlines had called for months ago, if globally coordinated, as an enabler of safer travel. Both the UKinbound tourism body and Airlines UK, which represents UK carriers, have urged the government to make it clear the measure is temporary and, until it is lifted, to provide  more financial support  to a sector that is in effect in the deep freeze. While the government will point to the emergence of new variants, questions will again be asked on the timing, coherence and implementation of the rules. Boris Johnson imposed a ban  on flights from Brazil this week  – almost three weeks after UK flights were barred by Brazil. Enforcement of negative Covid tests for travellers arriving in England  had to be delayed  from 4am on Friday after the government only published the requirements late on Wednesday evening – a matter of hours before affected flights could have departed, leaving passengers perplexed and some paying hundreds of pounds for unnecessary paperwork. Even now, the Business Travel Association is warning the government has yet to issue detailed information on where those travelling for work can get acceptable tests. Essential workers – medical researchers, energy suppliers and humanitarians – must, it suggests, be able to travel with confidence in procedures and in the knowledge they can return home. There is a sense of deja vu after the similarly botched introduction of the  “test to release” scheme  – which still allows people arriving in the UK to apply to exit quarantine early after five days with a further negative Covid test. That scheme also had a lengthy period between announcement and implementation – and then arrived with a list of suppliers that could not deliver, to the cost and frustration of many who ended up out of pocket and in isolation. The bigger question may yet prove to be why public health measures at the borders first promised by ministers a fortnight ago have taken two weeks to introduce, should new variants from abroad be discovered in the UK. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, joked on Friday he was the last person to give advice on whether people should book travel – a reference, no doubt, to the travel corridor to Spain  he axed while on holiday  there last year. Unfortunately, no one is better placed to answer than Shapps.
Up to 1m Hindus gather in India as festival goes ahead amid Covid fears:	Up to a million Hindu pilgrims have gathered on the banks of the River Ganges in northern  India , marking the start of a major religious festival that is taking place despite the risks of Covid infection. Millions more are expected to descend on Haridwar in the coming weeks for  Kumbh Mela , one of the world’s biggest religious gatherings. Pilgrims bathe in the Ganges in the belief that the sacred waters will cleanse them of their sins. Officials have said measures to prevent a surge in Covid infections include pre-booking to control numbers, strict social distancing and colour-coded bathing areas. “The pandemic is a bit of a worry, but we are taking all precautions,” said one of the organisers, Siddharth Chakrapani. Most of those walking into the freezing river on Thursday morning were not wearing masks and social distancing was hard to maintain. Senthil Avoodai K Raj, a senior police official, said thousands of security forces were present and fines could be imposed for breaching Covid regulations. India has recorded more than 10m Covid cases – the second highest number in the world after the US – and has recorded more than 150,000 deaths. On Saturday, the government will launch a  vaccination drive , aiming to inoculate 300 million people by early August. Healthcare and frontline workers will be vaccinated first, followed by people over 50 and those with underlying health conditions. Some pilgrims in Haridwar dismissed the threat from the virus. “India is not like Europe … when it comes to immunity we are better,” said 50-year-old Sanjay Sharma. “It’s really sad to see people not gathering at Kumbh in the same numbers as they would earlier … The greatest truth on Earth is death. What’s the point of living with fear?” Unesco has recognised  Kumbh Mela  as intangible cultural heritage. According to Hindu mythology, gods and demons fought a war over a sacred pitcher containing the nectar of immortality. Drops fell at four different locations, which now alternate as hosts. Several other religious festivals are taking place in India this week, including the Gangasagar Mela in Kolkata, where officials expect about 15,000 people. Madurai in the southern state of Tamil Nadu is due to host a bull-chasing carnival known as  Jallikattu , where revellers grab hold of the beasts’ horns as they run through crowds of people. Many religious gatherings across the world have been cancelled or scaled back because of Covid. Only a few thousand Muslims took part in  last year’s hajj , the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, compared with more than 2 million in normal years. The pope celebrated midnight mass on Christmas Eve with fewer than 100 participants instead of the usual 10,000. In nearly all countries, Christians, Muslims, Jews and those of other faiths have curtailed or cancelled events marking religious festivals in the past 10 months.
I can't help being cynical when my future is in the hands of uncontrollable forces:	Name:  Michelle Lim Age:  23 Dreams of:  Being a social worker Last month, I sat in my course’s “town hall” forum on Zoom. It was just an open forum hosted by social work faculty staff about 2021 and the arrangements for this year. I was really only interested in one section of information: placements. Even before starting my semester at the end of August last year, I’d already heard about reduced work placements for social work students. The Australian Association of Social Workers (AASW) sets the industry standard for placement hours for students to be accredited as a social worker. A thousand hours is the standard but because of Covid-19, they’ve lowered it to 800 hours. But I’ve heard some students are struggling to meet even this because agencies won’t accept students anymore. I’ve also found out that some students do their placements online, which I’m not sure is the same as doing a placement physically. Semester one in 2021 is going to be online. This means all the induction and pre-placement work that I’m supposed to complete will be done online. The open forum and placement information materials online say that I may not be guaranteed a placement because of priority for graduating students and that I may have to defer. I can’t afford to defer. Deferring means that I would graduate by 2023, and that’s assuming I can get a full-time placement. I don’t want to have to rely on Centrelink when I’m in my mid 20s or live at home without a steady income. What drew me to social work was the possibility of a full-time job at the end of the degree. I’ve heard that social work and services is a growing industry and that there’s always work in this field. Now with reduced placement hours, it feels like the attraction – and security – is fading. I went to a social work end-of-year drinks with a bunch of graduating students in mid-December, and I asked them how job hunting was. Some got offers, some were still looking. They told me the job market wasn’t looking good; one told me she had secured a job but was on probation for six months. My biggest fear is that when I do get my first job, I’ll screw up because of my lack of experience. This wouldn’t be just a project deadline that I missed, or a typo on a document. I would be dealing with people’s lives, and their problems and wellbeing. What if I misjudged or incorrectly assessed someone and I led them to a worse-off place? What if my inexperience is because of a lack of a meaningful placement opportunity? With the new degree costs kicking in this year, I worry what it’d be like for the future pool of graduates and myself. The government is discouraging those to enter degrees that are considered “irrelevant” and noncompetitive for the future job market. If I started university in 2021 or 2022, I wouldn’t be able to afford the arts degree in international relations that I have. I have no interest in Stem or anything of the like, nor am I good at it. The federal government is making decisions they think is best for the future, but they’re stifling opportunities for young people. This series is called  Dreams interrupted , and I’m telling you dreams will be interrupted when this policy is enacted. Instead of making tertiary education accessible for everyone, it’s only available to the few who can afford it. There’s a tinge of fatalism that jobs will be difficult to come by for those with just an arts degree. But we don’t do an arts degree for a job, we do it because we’re passionate about what we’re studying. I’m lucky that I enjoy my social work degree, and even luckier that it offers work placement. Being able to pivot to a different field is a luxury that not many young people can afford. Since the last time I wrote, I’ve applied for a number of jobs in social services. I fit the selection criteria, but my resume is only filled with volunteering and leadership experience. Nothing paid. They say volunteering is best when you can’t find paid work, but it doesn’t feel like that. Stacking shelves at a supermarket seems more impressive than volunteering at Red Cross to employers. I sound cynical, but I guess one can’t help being cynical when your future lies in the hands of others and uncontrollable forces. So far my optimism about securing a job depletes when I open a dreaded email of rejection. It’s difficult to find solace in an email which says you were incompatible with the requirements when you had thought that you were the perfect fit. Just like a steam engine, it’ll take a bit time to recover from the wounds of rejection but when I do, it’ll be full steam ahead.
Australia’s state by state Covid restrictions and coronavirus lockdown rules explained:	Australian states and territories have different levels of restrictions to contain Covid-19. Here we answer some common questions about restrictions in each state, based on the information available as of 18 January. This article should not be treated as legal advice. It will be updated as restrictions are announced, implemented or repealed. Here are the official state and territory restriction guides for  New South Wales ,  Queensland ,  Victoria ,  Tasmania ,  Western Australia ,  South Australia , the  Northern Territory  and the  ACT . The  Queensland  government lifted a lockdown for greater Brisbane on 11 January, but some restrictions remain in place for anyone who has visited the area since 2 January. Those restrictions include wearing masks in indoor places like shopping centres and supermarkets, gyms and places of worship and libraries. Indoor venues are restricted to one person per four square metres and outdoor venues are restricted to one person per two square metres. Up to 20 people will be allowed in homes and public spaces and up to 100 guests at weddings and funerals. These restrictions will be in place until 22 January. Full details are on the  Queensland Health website . New South Wales:  residences in greater Sydney, Central Coast and Wollongong are allowed a maximum of five visitors.   In the rest of the state, people are allowed a maximum of 50 visitors in their homes at a time. However NSW Health strongly recommends having no more than 30 visitors at a time if the residence has no outdoor area. If there are more than 50 visitors at a home, every person can be held individually responsible for  a breach of the public health order . Victoria:  you can have up to 15 visitors to your home each day. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane you can have 20 people in a home, including those who live there. Everyone else in Queensland can have up to 50 people inside their home. Tasmania:  a maximum of 100 people are allowed to gather at residential premises (including shacks) whether inside or outside. Western Australia:  there is no limit to the number of guests you are allowed as long as there is no more than one person per 2 sq metres. South Australia:  gatherings in private homes are limited to 50 people.   All gatherings must observe the density requirements of one person per 2 sq metres. Northern Territory:  there is no limit on how many people can gather indoors or outdoors, but physical distancing is required. Gatherings of more than 100 require the completion of a  Covid-19 checklist . ACT:  there is no limit on visitors. States and territories have agreed that anyone catching domestic or international flights must wear a mask on the plane and in the airport. Some states have additional mask-wearing requirements to control outbreaks. New South Wales:  in the greater Sydney area, it is mandatory to wear masks in  many indoor settings , including shops, public transport and places of worship. You must also wear a mask at the SCG for the third Test and A-league games. Victoria:  from 18 January, masks no long need to be worn in all public indoor settings. They must still be worn on public transport, in a taxi or ride sharing vehicle, in shopping centres and large retail stores. Queensland:  for anyone who has visited greater Brisbane since 2 January, masks must be worn in indoor places including shopping centres, gyms and on public transport until 22 January. .  New South Wales:  public gatherings in greater Sydney, Central Coast and Wollongong of up to 30 people are allowed. In regional NSW, public gatherings of 100 people are allowed. This limit does not apply if the group of people are all from the same household or if it is a controlled outdoor event. Victoria:  up to 100 people from any number of households can gather outside. 1.5 metres should be maintained between yourself and others not from your household. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, the same restrictions on indoor gatherings apply to outdoor settings which means a maximum of 20 people, including those who live with you. Everywhere else in the state public gatherings are restricted to a maximum of 100; this does not apply to businesses operating with a Covid-safe plan. Tasmania:  up to 250 people are allowed in an undivided indoor space and up to 1,000 in an outdoor space, as long as there is at least 2 sq metres of space per person. Western Australia:  there is no limit on the number allowed at public gatherings as long as there is at least 2 sq metres of space per person. South Australia:  gatherings at public places are capped at 50, with density requirements of one person every 4 sq metres. Northern Territory:  there are no limits but you should maintain physical distancing. Gatherings of more than 100 will require completion of a  Covid-19 checklist . ACT:  up to 500 people   can gather together outdoors as long as 2 sq metres of space per person is maintained. If people wish to hold gatherings of greater than 500 people, they must seek an exemption in accordance with the  COVID Safe Event Protocol . Visitors cannot enter an aged care facility in any state if they have recently been overseas, been in recent contact with a confirmed case of Covid-19, or feel unwell. New South Wales:  NSW Health  provides guidelines  for residential aged care facilities. No visitors are allowed at greater Sydney aged care facilities, except for visitors performing essential care functions, until 11.59pm on Wednesday 6 January. People from greater Sydney also cannot visit regional aged care facilities. There are no restrictions on people from regional areas visiting regional aged care facilities, unless they have been in a Covid hotspot, have Covid symptoms or are a close contact of someone who has Covid. Victoria:  there are no longer any restrictions on visits to care facilities in  Victoria . People of any age can visit residents for as long as desired, as long as the rules set by the facility are followed. Face masks must still be worn. Queensland:  no visitors are allowed to aged care facilities and hospitals in the greater Brisbane area. In the rest of the state, residents can have as many visitors as the facility allows, but people who have been in Victoria on or after 21 December 2020 are not allowed to enter residential aged care facilities unless 14 days have passed since they were in Victoria. Employees, contractors, students, volunteers and support persons who have been in Victoria on or after 21 December 2020 may enter a residential aged care facility if the individual obtains a negative Covid-19 test in Queensland after returning from Victoria. Tasmania:  residents can have up to two visitors at one time. There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. Residents are allowed to go outside on trips, and hairdressers can be allowed in. Additional visitors are allowed for end of life support, or if needed to reduce distress and confusion given a resident’s medical condition. Western Australia:  each resident can have one care and support visit a day, with  up to two visitors  at a time. Only immediate social supports, such as family and close friends, professional help or advocacy services can attend. South Australia:  people from NSW and people who have been in Covid hotspots are not permitted to visit SA aged care facilities. Aside from that, up to two people can visit at the same time for care and support. There is no limit to the length of each visit. Workers must wear a mask where physical distancing isn’t possible, and they can work at only one site. Northern Territory:  residents can have up to  two visitors at a time . There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. ACT:  residents can be visited  by up to two people at a time.  There is no limit on the number of visits in a day or the length of each visit. New South Wales:  yes, as long as venues observe the 4 sq metre per person rule up to a   cap of 300 for each separate area   at any time. All diners must provide name and contact details, including a phone number or email address, for contact tracing. Food courts have reopened. Victoria:  there are specific directions for differently sized indoor venues. Venues are capped subject to a density rule of one person per 2 sq metres, with no other cap. There are no longer any group booking limitations. Queensland:  Restaurants and cafes in greater Brisbane can reopen with one person per 4 sq metres, except for businesses with a floor space less than 200 sq metres which can have one person per 2 sq metres, up to 50 at a time. Diners must remain seated. Elsewhere in the state, restaurants, cafes, pubs, registered clubs, RSL clubs and hotels with a Covid-safe checklist can seat   any number of patrons as long as the 2 sq metre per person limit is observed. Tasmania:  up to 250 are allowed in an undivided space as long as there is no more than one person every 2 sq metres. Up to 1,000 people are allowed in an undivided outdoor space, density requirements permitting. Western Australia:  cafes and restaurants (including in pubs, bars, hotels, casinos, clubs) can open to up to seated diners, with one person every 2 sq metres. There is no requirement for businesses to maintain a patron register, but they must display a COVID Safety Plan Certificate in a prominent location visible to patrons. South Australia:  restaurants, cafes, pubs, food courts, nightclubs and casinos have density requirements of one person per 2 sq metres. Northern Territory:  all businesses can reopen as long as they have a Covid plan. ACT:  restaurants, cafes and other hospitality venues offering seated dining can host up to one person per 4 sq metres. Venues can register to host one person per 2 sq metres. The only restrictions on travel within states are in  Western Australia  and  South Australia  where there are restrictions on visiting some remote Aboriginal communities. New South Wales:  anyone can enter NSW.  Victoria:  a  permit system is in place for travel to Victoria  from all parts of Australia. It is based on a traffic light system where different areas are classified red, orange and green. From 6pm Monday 18 January most of greater Sydney, plus Wollongong and the Blue Mountains, will be downgraded to orange which means people in these areas will be able to travel to Victoria. They’ll need to get a test on arrival and self-isolate until receiving a negative result. Ten NSW local government areas remain in the red zone. They are: Blacktown, Burwood, Canada Bay, Canterbury-Bankstown, Cumberland, Fairfield, Inner West, Liverpool, Parramatta and Strathfield. People in these areas cannot travel to Victoria without an exemption. Queensland:  the Queensland border is open to all states and territories, unless you have been in a Covid hotspot in the last 14 days or since the hotspot was declared (whichever is shorter). Currently 35 local government areas covering Sydney, Wollongong and the Blue Mountains. Anyone travelling to Queensland who has been in NSW at any time since 1am Friday 11 December must complete a  Queensland Border Declaration Pass  before they enter Queensland.  Tasmania:  Travellers who have been in  high risk locations , which currently includes greater Brisbane and greater Sydney, are required to quarantine for 14 days either at a suitable premises or in government-designated quarantine (fees can apply). You can apply for an exemption as an  essential traveller  for critical work, health, compassionate or other reasons.  There are no restrictions on Tasmanians travelling to other states and territories. Western Australia:  travellers from  medium risk states  are not permitted to enter without an exemption through  G2G PASS . If permitted entry, you must self-quarantine at a suitable premises for 14 days. If a suitable premises is not available, you will be directed to a government-approved quarantine facility at your own expense. Travellers from low risk states are allowed to enter with a G2G PASS, but must quarantine for 14 days as above. Travellers from very low risk states are allowed to enter with a G2G PASS without the need to quarantine. South Australia:  anyone travelling to SA must complete a  cross-border travel registration . People arriving from greater Brisbane will need have a coronavirus test but will no longer have to quarantine. People from greater Sydney, Wollongong and the Central Coast are not allowed to enter, but people from the rest of NSW can go to SA. They must have a coronavirus test on days one, five and 12 after arrival.  Northern Territory:  you can enter provided you fill out a border entry form up to 72 hours before arrival and present it upon entry. You will be required to legally declare you have not been in an area the state considers  a Covid-19 hotspot in the past 28 days . Parts of Sydney are currently deemed a hotspot, although the greater Brisbane area is no longer considered one. Penalties of up to $5,000 and up to three years in prison apply for providing misleading information. Arrivals from a hotspot area must go into 14 days supervised quarantine at the traveller’s expense. ACT:  travellers who have been in Covid-affected areas of greater Sydney , Central Coast or Wollongong areas are not permitted to enter ACT without an  exemption . If you a returning ACT resident who has been in a Covid-affected area you must self-quarantine for 14 days. There are no restrictions on travel to other states and territories. New South Wales:  up to  100 can attend a wedding , subject to the 4 sq metre rule indoors and 2 sq metre rule outdoors. For weddings, up to 20 people in the wedding party are permitted on the dance floor. This applies only to members of the official wedding party and dancers cannot be rotated or substituted throughout the celebration. Funerals can be attended by up to 100 providing there is at least 4 sq metre per person. This applies to indoor and outdoor ceremonies.   Those attending will have to provide name and contact details. In greater Sydney – which includes the Central Coast and the Blue Mountains – singing and chanting is not allowed at any indoor venue. Victoria:  Weddings and funerals are subject to a one person per two square metres density rule, with no other caps.   A wedding or funeral held at a private residence is limited to up to 15 people. The four-square metre rule must be applied to limit the number of people on the dance floor and there can only be up to 50 people on the dance floor at one time, if space allows. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, weddings and funerals are limited to 100 guests. Outside of the affected area, up to 200 can attend weddings and funerals at a professional venue or private residence as long as a Covidsafe plan is in place. Private wedding services in public areas or private homes can have up to 100 people in outdoor public spaces and 50 people in private properties. A record of names and contact details of each guest must be kept for 56 days. Tasmania:  in commercial spaces, up to 250 can gather in an undivided indoor space, and up to 1,000 in an undivided outdoor space. In both cases, the number present must also not exceed one person per 2 sq metres. Up to 100 people can gather at private residences. Rules apply to the number of people allowed to consume alcohol while standing. Western Australia:  there is no limit as long as there is no more than one person every 2 sq m. South Australia:  weddings are capped at 200 for commercial premises, 50 for private residences, and all attendees must register with SA Health. Funerals are capped at 50. Density limits of one person every 2 sq metres apply to both. Northern Territory:  there is no limit but gatherings of more than 100 will be required to complete a Covid-19 checklist. ACT:  there is no cap on the number of people who can attend weddings or funerals, as long as there is no more than one person every 4 sq metres. However organisers for events for between 201 and 500 people are required to notify ACT Health and submit their COVID Safe plan (via the  online form ), and events over 500 will need an exemption in accordance with the  COVID Safe Event Protocol . Dancing at weddings is permitted. New South Wales:  the number of people in a public place of worship must not exceed 100, and the 4 sq metre physical distancing rule must be observed. An outdoor religious service is subject to the one person per 2 sq metre rule. Victoria:  religious gatherings are subject to a one person per 2 sq metres density rule, with no other caps. Queensland:  in greater Brisbane, places of worship can have one person per 4 sq metres and visitors must wear a mask indoors. In other parts of the state, places of worship can have one person per 2 sq metres. Tasmania:  up to 250 can gather in an undivided indoor space, as long as there are 2 sq metres per person. Western Australia:  attendance is limited only by the 2 sq metre rule. South Australia:  capped at 200. Attendance is limited only by the 4 sq metre rule. Northern Territory:  there is no limit on how many can attend at the same time but social distancing should be observed. ACT:  capped at 25 people across the entire venue. If a venue wants to have more than 25 people, it can have one person per two square metres of usable space in each indoor and outdoor space (excluding staff) provided they are using the  Check In CBR app . Students in all states and territories are currently on holidays so restrictions are not current. Yes, hairdressers, barbers, nail waxing, tanning and beauty salons, tattoo and massage parlours have reopened across the country. Businesses must meet density limits, and, in  South Australia , service providers must wear a mask. In Victoria, masks are strongly recommended for both the client and the person providing the service. New South Wales:  museums, galleries and libraries, National Trust and Historic Houses Trust properties are   open to guests, as long as 4 sq m is allowed per person and they have a Covid-19 safety plan. For large venues attendance to a ticketed event with allocated seating must not exceed 50% of capacity.   The total number of people in a major recreational facility hosting a non-ticketed or non-seated event must not exceed one person per 4 square m (excluding staff) with no maximum capacity. Victoria:  entertainment and cultural venues such as music venues, museums, indoor and outdoor cinemas, and the casino are open, subject to capacity restrictions. Night clubs are also able to reopen.   Brothels and strip clubs have reopened, but must have Covid-safe plans in place and follow strict patron limits. Queensland:  libraries, museums, art galleries, historic sites, indoor cinemas, concert venues, theatres, arenas, auditoriums, stadiums, nightclubs, outdoor amusement parks, zoos and arcades can reopen with a Covidsafe plan.  Tasmania:  up to 250 can attend each undivided space in indoor recreational facilities, such as libraries, arcades, play centres, cinemas, museums, national institutions, historic sites and galleries, the 2 sq metre rule permitting. Up to 1,000 are allowed in each undivided outdoor space. Western Australia:  community facilities, libraries, galleries, museums, theatres, auditoriums, cinemas and concert venues can reopen, as can Perth zoo, wildlife and amusement parks, arcades, skate rinks and indoor play centres. All venues can have as many people as the one person per 2 sq metre rule allows. There is a 50% capacity cap on major sport and entertainment venues, such as the Optus Stadium, HBF Park and RAC Arena. All events are allowed, except for large scale, multi-stage music festivals. Unseated performances can go ahead at concert halls, live music venues, bars, pubs and nightclubs, and the casino gaming floor can reopen under temporary restrictions. South Australia:  venues are open, but   density requirements must be observed, with a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres allowed at cinemas, theatres, concert venues, zoos, galleries, museums and historic sites. Northern Territory:  public libraries, art galleries, museums, zoos, cinemas and theatres, music halls, nightclubs, amusement parks, community centres, stadiums, sporting facility and similar entertainment venues are open. ACT:  movie theatres, indoor amusement centres, arcades, outdoor and indoor play centres, betting agencies, outdoor amusements and attractions, community and youth centres, galleries, museums, national institutions, libraries historic sites and zoos can sell seated (when applicable) tickets at no more than 50% of capacity of each venue. There can only be one person per 2 sq metres throughout the venue as long as the venue has the  Check In CBR app . New South Wales:  gyms, fitness centres and studios (such as dance studios) may open for up to 30 a class. The total in a facility must not exceed one person in 4 sq metres, excluding staff. Indoor pools and saunas have also reopened subject to the one person per 4 sq metre rule in greater Sydney and one person per 2 sq metre rule in regional NSW. Community sporting competitions and training can go ahead as long as the number in a facility does not exceed one person every 4 sq metres, excluding staff, to a maximum of 500. You can use outdoor gym equipment in public, with caution, and enjoy activities such as fishing, hunting and boating. Victoria:  Personal training is allowed  and exercise in a group of up to 100 in a public place is permitted. For indoor exercise classes, the cap is 50 people. In general, gyms are subject to the one per 4 sq metre density rule when staffed and the one per 8 sq metres when unstaffed. Outdoor sport recreational facilities, such as tennis courts, golf courses or bowling greens, are open with some restrictions. Outdoor and indoor pools have opened, with restrictions on capacity. Queensland:  Gyms, health clubs, yoga studios and community sports clubs can open for up to one person per 2 sq metres. People can gather outside (capped at 20 people in greater Brisbane), play non-contact sport and participate in outdoor group training and boot camps with physical distancing. Parks, playgrounds, skateparks and pools are open with physical distancing rules. Tasmania:  gatherings are limited to 1,000 people in the outdoors of a premises for community sport and 250 for an undivided space in an indoor premises, or a maximum of one person per  2 sq metres . Indoor pools are limited to 250 people in each single undivided space, or a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres. Outdoor pools are limited to a maximum of 1,000 people in the whole outdoor area of premises, or a maximum of one person per 2 sq metres. Western Australia:  gyms, health clubs, and indoor sports centres can reopen for up to one person per 2 sq metres. Gyms can operate unstaffed but must undergo regular cleaning. Contact sport and training has recommenced, and playgrounds, outdoor gym equipment and skate parks can be used. South Australia:  sport (including sports training), fitness and recreation activities are all subject to the  one person per 2 sq metres rule . Northern Territory:  gyms, fitness studios and indoor training activities such as Cross Fit are allowed. You can also officiate, participate and support team sports, such as football, basketball, soccer and netball. ACT:  gyms and fitness centres are open to up to 500 people, subject to the one person per 2 sq m if they have the  Check In CBR app  and 4 sq metres per person if they don’t. Full contact training for sport, dance and martial arts, as well as circuit training, is allowed. Generally, enforcement is left up to the discretion of police officers. States have taken different approaches. For example, the ACT   says it will issue a warning while Victoria has adopted a more hardline attitude to those breaking social distancing rules. The NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller said he would review all physical-distancing fines. “If I think it’s unreasonable, it will be withdrawn immediately and we’ll make personal contact with the individual,” he said. Not all states have specified this but it appears fines can be appealed using the same process as other fines issued by police. Information on how to lodge an appeal should be available on your state or territory’s government website. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will continue to be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales  health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the  NSW Health website . NSW  Health  is asking anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed below to get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received. If symptoms appear, please isolate and get tested again. Auburn:  Monday 28 – Tuesday 29 December, 6pm Monday – 4am Tuesday Auburn:  Thursday 7 – Friday 8 January, 6pm Thursday – 4am Friday Auburn:  Wednesday 13 – Thursday 14 January, 6pm Wednesday – 4am Thursday Auburn:  Tuesday 12 January,   6pm – close Berala:  Berala Hotel, Wednesday 30 December, 6pm – close If you have been to the Auburn Central shopping centre or the Auburn shops along Queen St and South Terrace at any time since 1 January 2021, and have had symptoms, you should get tested and isolate until you receive a negative result.  All previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Victoria opens border to most of Sydney; tournament tennis player tests positive – as it happened:	That is where I will leave you for today. Thanks as always for reading. Here’s what we learned: Authorities in Queensland have just provided an update on tropical cyclone Kimi, which is currently located off the coast of Innisfail in far north  Queensland . It was upgraded to a category two system at 2pm. Kimi is expected to move south and weaken over the next 12 hours while remaining off the coast, coming almost level with Townsville, which is 260km south of Innisfail, before looping around to head back up north.  Laura Boekel  from the Bureau of Meteorology said Kimi was particularly unpredictable.  The uncertainty is high with tropical cyclone Kimi. That is because it’s a really small system and the environmental winds are quite light. So, while we have that we have the uncertainty that is high. There still remains a distinct possibility of Kimi crossing the coast as a category two system. That’s in the warning areas.  The most likely scenario is what we have  on our track maps , however, we’re not ruling out a crossing of category two because there is a high degree of uncertainty with the system. So the bureau is closely monitoring the system. Kimi intensifies to category 2 as it moves south. Cyclone Watch declared to Bowen.  #CycloneKimi   https://t.co/rVLE6inkt8   pic.twitter.com/cTsdWDDyKh Bokel said that even if it did not make landfall, the cyclone could potentially bring heavy rainfall over the next few days with potential flash flooding, adding that the catchments in that area were “already wet and are likely to respond rapidly to any further rainfall”.  The cyclone is also expected to bring destructive winds with gusts or up to 130km/h and gales with gusts of up to 120km/h predicted for communities from Innisfail and Ayr, which includes Lucinda, Palm Island and Townsville.  Queensland’s emergency services minister,  Mark Ryan , urged anyone who was in the cyclone watch zone to get their preparations underway.  He said: Please, prepare. There are a number of things to do. People who are Queenslanders know that when cyclones are coming, you need to get ready. Prepare, be ready, plan ahead. A cyclone is on its way. Prepare as if it’s coming towards your community and be ready. There are also severe thunderstorms with large hail, destructive winds and heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding forecast for Queensland’s south-east, around Brisbane, the Sunshine Coast and the Gold Coast.  WARNING UPDATE: Severe thunderstorms are progressing eastwards across  #SEQld . Heavy rainfall and damaging wind gusts are likely. 53mm was recorded at Palen Creek in 1 hour to 3:15pm. Warnings at:  https://t.co/GW35jfwzGL   pic.twitter.com/ZMvYFjj6RP The  Queensland  premier,  Annastacia Palaszczuk , is addressing the media about the approach of Cyclone Kimi in the state’s north. She says she is “very comfortable with the preparations” that are in place, but warns the situation is “unpredictable”. All of the preparations are in place. There is going to be a lot of rainfall. Of course, the key message here is if it’s flooded, forget it. If you don’t need to be on the roads tonight, don’t go on the roads tonight. And similarly, down here in the south-east, there’s also going to be storms this evening, the next couple of hours. There is going to be a lot of rainfall, anywhere between 50 to 100mm. So once again, a lot of rainfall in the south-east as well. And please, if you don’t need to be on the roads, don’t during this time. New South Wales  Health has just released a new list of venues linked to a recently confirmed case of Covid-19. The department says it is “still investigating” the source. Anyone who attended the following venues at the times listed below is asked to get tested immediately and self-isolate until a negative result is received. If symptoms appear, please isolate and get tested again. Auburn  Village Tavern , corner of Queen Street and Harrow Road, Auburn: Monday Tuesday 28-29 December –  6pm Monday to 4am Tuesday    Thursday Friday 7-8 January –  6pm Thursday to 4am Friday Wednesday Thursday 13-14 January –  6pm Wednesday to 4am Thursday Berala Hotel , 159 Woodburn Road, Berala Wednesday 30 December –  6pm to close Auburn Hotel , 43 Queen Street, Auburn Tuesday 12 January –  6pm to close NSW  Health  has also requested that anyone who attended the  Auburn Central shopping centre or the Auburn shops along Queen St and South Terrace  at any time since  1 January 2021 , and has had symptoms, should get tested and isolate until they receive a negative result. Victoria  police deputy commissioner  Rick Nugent  says there are no plans to drop the 32,000 unpaid fines for Covid-19 breaches in favour of cautions, blaming a poorly worded police document for causing confusion. The Age  reported on Monday a document given to officers late last year indicated unpaid fines from Covid-19 rule breaches would be dropped in favour of cautions, but in a press conference on Monday afternoon, Nugent said people would still be expected to pay the fines if they weren’t challenging the decision in court. Of the 40,000 fines issued to Victorians so far during the pandemic,  just around 3,000 have been paid in full , with another approximately 5,500 being paid on a payment plan. Just 2,400 people who have been fined are challenging the fines in court, with the remaining still unpaid. Nugent  said the guidance would be rewritten and was developed due to questions around the processing of fines. He said people could take the matter to court and seek a court diversion which would mean they would not get the fine, but that was the only way people would avoid paying fines, once the fine had been initially reviewed by Operation Sentinel.  He said: There have been a lot of questions with respect to prosecution of these matters, and the intent was to provide a consistent approach, through the process right across the state which I fully support. The problem associated with that was the way in which it was worded. Good news everyone!  AAP reports  that the Covid-19 pandemic has been a boon for Australia’s second-hand car market, with prices jumping 35% last year. According to AAP,  Moody’s Analytics  says the increase was fuelled by limited supplies of new vehicles, fewer trade-ins and increased demand. Australian used vehicle prices experienced a year unlike any before. This incredible jump in prices is made more improbable because it happened as the nation endured numerous lockdown orders, devastating job losses and the first recession in a generation. The company said the pandemic’s impact on prices threw out relationships between traditional economic indicators, including unemployment. It said fears about the virus also caused people to shun public transport while the number of vehicles available for sale was reduced with lease contracts on many vehicles pushed out as people drove less. Scott Morrison  has downplayed the significance of recent deaths of elderly people who had taken the Pfizer vaccine in Norway in terms of Australia’s vaccine rollout. He told 2GB Radio:  These cases in Norway, they’re distressing. But in terms of the total volume of vaccinations that have been provided and those who have been provided with them who have sadly passed away – they’re very aged people, they were in the last phases of life and very frail. And this can happen with vaccinations – we know that.  And that’s why it’s important we’re very careful ... safety first, health first. Let’s make sure they’re right, all the i’s are dotted and the t’s crossed then we can give the tick and then people can safely get the jab. Morrison also criticised events in the US – coming closer to direct criticism of Trump without quite getting there, due to the heroic use of the passive tense. He said that it was:  Very disappointing that things were allowed to get to that stage ... The things that were said that encouraged people to come to the Capitol were very disappointing; and the outcomes were terrible. And that’s all from the PM on his first day back from holidays. My colleague  Paul Karp  will write up a more exhaustive account of the interview which I will share here soon.  Morrison is asked about the inauguration of US president-elect  Joe Biden . The prime minister says he hasn’t spoken to Biden since immediately following the election.  Wilson then pushes him on  Donald Trump , and his actions in the lead up to the march on the US Capitol a fortnight ago. He wants to know what the prime minister thinks about Trump’s behaviour. Morrison repeats his previous comment that the actions at the Capitol were “deeply distressing” and that the “actions” have been “very disappointing”. To his credit, Wilson asks whether Morrison is referring to Trump’s actions specifically. We get a bit more passive language – Morrison says he has “echoed the comments of other leaders” – then he says it was “very disappointing” that “things were allowed to get to that stage” including “things that were said” which “encouraged people to come to the Capitol and behave in that [manner]”. But, he concludes: “It’s not for me to be providing lectures to anybody.” Morrison  isn’t too keen to discuss the  Australian Open , and criticism that the Victorian government is hosting about 1,200 participants in hotel quarantine while some 40,000 Australians are still stranded overseas. No one is being prevented from coming home from overseas because of the  Australian Open . On the complaints from some of the players themselves over the quarantine conditions Morrison says: “Follow the rules, do the quarantine, play tennis.” He notes he’s sure the players will be “well paid” for participating in the tournament.  On that subject,  Morrison  says he “strongly supported” the  Queensland  government’s decision to enforce a lockdown after cases of a more contagious strain of the virus was discovered. I strongly supported that because we were dealing with a new [strain] of the virus [and] we didn’t know how it was going to operate and how quickly it was going to move.
NHS in most precarious position in its history, says chief executive:	Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the NHS in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. The over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable, who number more than 5.5 million nationwide, will be invited to receive the vaccine from Monday in areas where most of the first priority groups of care home residents and the over-80s have now had the jab.  Stevens said on Sunday that the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. Stevens said: “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure. “Since Christmas Day we’ve seen another 15,000  increase in the inpatients in hospitals  across England. That’s the equivalent of filling 30 hospitals full of coronavirus patients and, staggeringly, every 30 seconds across England another patient is being admitted to hospital with coronavirus.” Asked by the BBC’s  Andrew Marr  if the NHS had ever been in a more precarious position, he said: “No. I think this is a unique event in our 72-year history. It’s sort of become glib to talk about this as the worst pandemic in a century but that is clearly correct.” He also conceded that a “small number” of patients are having to be transferred from one region to another when beds are not available for them. However, Stevens also highlighted the rapid pace of the vaccination programme. Official figures published on Sunday showed that more than 3.8 million people have now received their first dose of a Covid vaccine in the UK. “This is a huge team effort. This is bringing together the NHS, the St John’s Ambulance volunteers, the Royal Voluntary Society, we are vaccinating not just in health centres and hospitals, but in village halls and rugby clubs and cathedrals and shopping centres and race courses, so everybody is coming together to get this done and I think we’re off to a very strong start,” he said. Ten mass vaccination centres will open from Monday at venues including St Helen’s rugby ground, the Bournemouth International Centre and Taunton racecourse. Commenting on the expansion of the vaccine programme to new cohorts, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, said: “Where an area has already reached the vast majority of groups one to two, they can now start opening up the programme to groups three to four. “We are working day and night to make sure everyone who is 70 and over, our health and social care workers and the clinically extremely vulnerable are offered the vaccine by the middle of February, and our NHS heroes are making huge strides in making this happen.”  The foreign secretary,  Dominic Raab , said on Sunday that the government hoped to inoculate all adults by September, the first time the government has set a deadline. “The plan is to get  the first 15 million  most vulnerable people vaccinated with the first dose by the middle of February,” he told Marr. “We then want to get, by early spring, another 17 million. At that point we’ll have 99% of those most at risk of dying of coronavirus administered their first jab, and then the entire adult population we want being offered a first jab by September. That’s the roadmap.” He added: “Obviously if it can be done more swiftly than that, then that’s a bonus.” In a separate interview with Sophy Ridge on Sky News, Raab was unable to guarantee that all of those who have already received a first dose of vaccine would get their second within the recommended 12-week timescale – though he said he was “quietly confident” it could be done. “If we follow the roadmap and the supply chains … we ought to be able to deliver on that,” he said. “But right the way through this pandemic we’ve had to adapt to all sorts of different things. We’re just focused on making sure we deliver on the roadmap we’ve got.” The government had already stretched the  gap between the two doses  on advice from the independent Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation to give protection to as many people as possible, as soon as possible. The latest data suggests that the lockdown has begun to turn the tide, with the number of new cases in the week to Sunday at 323,614, down 22.5% on the previous week. But with hospital admissions and deaths still extremely high, experts have stressed the importance of sticking to lockdown restrictions. Another 671 deaths were reported on Sunday to have taken place within 28 days of a positive test, and 4,179 people were admitted to hospitals with Covid. Robust new border restrictions will come into effect at 4am on Monday morning, aimed at preventing new variants of the disease finding their way into the UK. New arrivals will have to show they have had a negative test within 72 hours of travelling, and to quarantine for 10 days – unless they pay to take a test after five days, which yields a negative result. The government has repeatedly been criticised throughout the pandemic for failing to control the UK’s borders, but ministers had become particularly concerned about the Brazilian variant of the virus. It is unclear yet whether this strain may be vaccine resistant. Stevens said the appearance of virus mutations was one of the factors that would determine when lockdown restrictions can be lifted. “It’s not going to be the case that on Valentine’s Day, or on 15 February, with one bound we are free. But equally I don’t think that we will be having to wait until the autumn. I think somewhere between those two,” he said, when asked when the rules could shift. “Subject of course to this uncertainty about new variants of the coronavirus. And it will be very important that we don’t see those taking off in a way that undermines the effectiveness of vaccines that we currently have.”
UK bans arrivals from South America over Brazilian Covid strain:	The UK government has been accused of putting lives at risk with a botched border policy after it banned arrivals from South America and  Portugal  several days after concerns emerged about a new Brazilian variant of Covid. The transport secretary,  Grant Shapps , announced that arrivals from more than a dozen countries including Argentina, Venezuela, Bolivia and Peru would be halted. He said Portugal had also been included because of its close travel links with Brazil. It is unclear as yet whether the Brazilian strain may be vaccine-resistant. UK citizens and permanent residents will be exempt from the travel ban but they and their families will have to self-isolate for 10 days on arrival. The shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, welcomed the measures as necessary but criticised the government’s failure to implement more systematic checks on arrivals. “This is yet another example of government incompetence, lurching from one crisis and rushed announcement to another. The failure to put in place an effective policy on testing before entry and a quarantine system that is checking only one in 100 people is putting lives at risk,” he said. The new measures came 24 hours after Boris Johnson was pressed by Labour’s Yvette Cooper about why he had not taken more urgent action in response to reports about the Brazilian strain of the virus. Cooper welcomed the travel ban on Thursday but warned: “We know from the first wave of the Covid crisis that focusing just on direct flights isn’t sufficient. We still need a proper testing and quarantine system for airports and ports as other countries have.” She called the government “irresponsible” for delaying its new testing regime for all arrivals to the UK at the last minute, pointing out that the Brazilian strain had been identified in Japan by testing of passengers in airport quarantine. The new testing system, which will require travellers to have a negative Covid test before coming to the UK, has been pushed back from Friday morning to Monday after a backlash from travel companies and tourists who complained the government had failed to provide enough guidance to operate the scheme effectively. The prime minister’s spokesperson defended the last-minute delay, calling it a “grace period”. “We always said we would introduce the regulations on Friday, and the laws still come into force on Friday, but we’ve implemented a grace period over the weekend so that passengers can have a little bit more time to get access to the tests they need that meet our requirements,” he said. The safeguarding minister, Victoria Atkins, had earlier suggested the delay had been made for business reasons. Speaking to Sky News, she said: “There’s a very delicate balancing act here between controlling the virus but also ensuring that we are not putting too much of a burden on the economy.” Travellers will need to present proof of a negative test result to their carrier upon boarding, and UK Border Force will conduct spot checks on arrivals. Arrivals who flout the rules will face a minimum £500 fine, and the operator who transported them will also be fined. Passengers will still have to quarantine for 10 days regardless of their test results. The guidance specifying the type of tests and documentation that would be required was not published on the government’s website until late on Wednesday, making it almost impossible for potential inbound travellers abroad to arrange tests in time for the original deadline. The decision on the travel ban was made at a meeting of the ministerial Covid-O committee on Thursday morning on the basis of evidence from experts on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) on new viruses. Government sources said devolved administrations supported Shapps’s decision, with Wales and Scotland poised to announce similar action. Johnson had hinted at fresh restrictions on Wednesday when he was grilled by MPs about the issue, telling Cooper: “We’re putting in extra measures to ensure that people coming from Brazil are checked: and indeed stopping people coming from  Brazil .” Direct flights between Brazil and the UK were banned last month as the Brazilian government tried to prevent the highly transmissible English variant of the virus arriving on its shores. The UK government has been criticised throughout the pandemic for failing to act rapidly enough to control the borders.
Portugal's health system 'very close to limit' – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  Brazil  had 33,040 new confirmed coronavirus cases in the past 24 hours and 551 fatalities, the first day in six the death toll has been below 1,000, the health ministry said on Sunday. The South American country has now registered 8,488,099 cases since the pandemic began, and the official death toll has risen to 209,847, according to ministry data. It is the world’s third worst outbreak behind the United States and India. Dealing with the deadly second wave of Covid has left the  NHS  in the most precarious position in its 72-year history, chief executive Sir  Simon Stevens  has warned, as ministers said they were aiming to get all adults in the UK vaccinated by September. Stevens said the  NHS  was now giving 140 jabs a minute, as the race to vaccinate the public picks up, but warned of the stress the service was under. “The facts are very clear and I’m not going to sugar coat them. Hospitals are  under extreme pressure  and staff are under extreme pressure,” Stevens said on Sunday. Over-70s and clinically extremely vulnerable people will begin receiving invitations for coronavirus jabs this week in a “significant milestone” for the vaccination programme, the  UK  government has announced. More than 3.8 million people – including over-80s, care home residents and NHS and social care staff – have already received their first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine, but from Monday it will begin to be offered to the next two priority groups. The government said it would remain the priority to vaccinate those in the first two groups but sites that have enough supply, and capacity to vaccinate more people, will be allowed to offer jabs to the next two cohorts. Ghana ’s Covid-19 infection rates are skyrocketing and include strains of the virus not previously seen in the country, threatening to overwhelm the health system, President Nana Akufo-Addo said on Sunday. Since 5 January, the number of active cases has risen to 1,924 from about 900 , Akufo-Addo said in a speech. There are now  120 severe cases, up from 18 a week ago . The president said that some people arriving from abroad had tested positive for “new variants” of the virus. Last week, Gambia recorded its first two cases of the highly infectious UK variant, in what appears to be the first confirmation of its presence in Africa. Ghana is not yet close to the peak seen during the first wave of infections in the middle of last year, but could quickly reach that level if cases keep rising at the current rate. If they do, the president said he would impose another partial lockdown, despite worries about what that would do to one of west Africa’s largest economies. “Our Covid-19 treatment centres have gone from having zero patients to now being full because of the upsurge in infections,” the president said. “At this current rate ... our healthcare infrastructure will be overwhelmed.” Across Africa, a second coronavirus wave is infecting twice as many people per day than at the height of last year’s first wave  and has yet to peak, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. The rise has raised concern across the continent where, unlike in  Europe  and the United States, cash-strapped governments have been unable to secure supply deals with vaccine manufacturers, putting the onus for now on containment. Akufo-Addo said details about access to vaccines and a rollout plan would be announced “very soon”. Schools in  Malawi  will be shut for at least 15 days while bars have been given an 8pm closing time under new coronavirus restrictions announced by President Lazarus Chakwera in a television address on Sunday. After reporting no positive cases for almost two months, the country has seen a sudden resurgence in coronavirus cases since the middle of last month. The country of 19 million people has reported 12,470 cases of Covid-19 and 314 deaths since the pandemic began last year. Chakwera said  a third of those deaths were reported in the past 16 days , forcing the government to seek additional funding to contain the pandemic at a time when the country is in 4.1tn kwacha ($5.37bn) of debt. The new measures concerning schools and bars will take effect from Monday. Chakwera also said the government has allocated an additional 1.6bn kwacha ($2.1m) in funds to be spent on recruiting frontline healthcare workers, 1,000 intensive care unit beds and 1,000 oxygen cylinders among other requirements. Last week the government reported that two senior cabinet ministers and two other high-profile members of the government had died from Covid-19. Workers in  Melbourne  are expected to return to city offices in large numbers on Monday, with research indicating most feel safe and ready to return after nine months of remote working. Private workplaces in  Victoria  are able to return to 50% capacity from Monday, with public service offices permitted to ramp up to 25%. A Roy Morgan survey of 503 city workers from late November to mid-December shows almost two-thirds were either willing to return to their central  Melbourne  workplaces (44%) or had already (15%). The most commonly cited factors making workers feel safe to return were Covid-safe plans and adherence to health measures. France  reported a further 141 deaths from coronavirus on Sunday, taking the cumulative toll since March to 70,283, the public health authority said. It also reported 16,642 new infections within the previous 24 hours. The infection figures on Sundays are usually lower because fewer tests are taken. The number of daily cases has been hovering around 20,000 for the last week. The health ministry said in a separate statement that 422,127 people had now been vaccinated, up from about 413,000 on Saturday. Eurostar  has said it is facing an existential threat, as business leaders pleaded with the government to step in and save the “vital link” with Europe. A 95% drop in passenger numbers  has brought the cross-Channel train service to its knees, and the company reiterated on Sunday that while government loans had been extended to aviation, international high-speed rail had also been severely affected by the pandemic. Here’s a graphic showing the number of vaccine doses US states have administered, courtesy of ourworldindata.org  Portugal ’s public health system is on the verge of collapsing as hospitals in the areas worst-affected by a worrying surge in coronavirus cases are quickly running out of intensive care beds to treat Covid-19 patients. “Our health system is under a situation of extreme pressure,”  Health  Minister Marta Temido told reporters on Sunday afternoon after a visit to a struggling hospital. “There is a limit and we are very close to it.” The health system, which prior to the pandemic had the  lowest number of critical care beds per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe , can accommodate a maximum of 672 COVID-19 patients in intensive care units (ICUs), according to health ministry data. The number of people in ICUs with COVID-19 reached 647 on Sunday, according to health authority DGS. The Portuguese Association of Hospital Administrators said the number of coronavirus patients needing hospitalisation was likely to dramatically increase over the next week. Three days into a nationwide lockdown, the country of just 10 million people reported 10,385 new cases and 152 fatalities on Sunday, bringing the total number of infections to 549,801, with the death toll increasing to 8,861. According to  ourworldindata.org , supported by Oxford University,  Portugal had the highest number of coronavirus cases in Europe per capita over the last seven days . Most new cases were concentrated in Lisbon, where many patients at the city’s public hospitals have already been transferred elsewhere, including to health units in the country’s second biggest city Porto. The  UK  variant of the coronavirus has killed three residents at a retirement home in northwestern  Belgium  and infected 111 people including 39 staff members, its director Jurgen Duyck told AFP on Sunday. The cluster represents two-thirds of the residents of the De Groene Verte home in the  western Flanders city of  Houthulst  near the border with France. Belgium has suffered one of the worst per capita death rates in the world during the epidemic with its nursing homes representing more than half of overall deaths from the disease, according to the Public  Health  Institute. Mayor Joris Hindryckx said the outbreak prompted a halt to “all social and sporting activities” in the town of around 10,000 people. The source of the contamination is unknown, but the mayor said the infection must have been “indirect” as none of those testing positive was known to have travelled to Britain. Brazil ’s health regulator, Anvisa, has approved the emergency use of two coronavirus vaccines during a politically-charged televised meeting that Brazilians watched with bated-breath. The vaccines produced by Oxford/AstraZeneca and China’s Sinovac will both now be permitted in South America’s biggest country, which has the world’s second highest Covid death toll with more than 209,000 deaths. The decision was taken on Sunday afternoon after three of Anvisa’s five directors voted for the move. The ruling is a major victory for Brazil’s 212 million citizens - reeling from one of the worst epidemics in the world - but a stinging political defeat for the Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro. Bolsonaro has failed to acquire any doses of the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine and as a result vaccination with Sinovac’s CoronaVac is likely to begin on Sunday in São Paulo state. São Paulo is governed by one of the president’s biggest political rivals, João Doria, who has championed the Chinese vaccine. Doria will reportedly offer the first shot to a local intensive care nurse called Mônica Calazans on Sunday, making a high-profile pronouncement he hopes will cement his image as Brazil’s Covid saviour in the public imagination. “Brazil is in a rush to save lives,” Doria tweeted on Sunday afternoon. Bolsonaro’s Twitter account remained silent.
Tense calm in Washington as small pro-Trump groups gather at state capitols across US – as it happened:	The  FBI  announced that authorities had arrested the guitarist of heavy metal band  Iced Earth  in connection to the  Capitol riot .  Jon Schaffer  was allegedly among those who sprayed Capitol police with bear spray.  Jon Schaffer, Columbus, IN, has been arrested in connection to Jan 6 incident at the U.S. Capitol. Schaffer faces 6 charges including engaging in an act of physical violence in a Capitol building. Schaffer was allegedly among rioters who sprayed Capitol police with "bear spray." “We absolutely DO NOT condone nor do we support riots or the acts of violence that the rioters were involved in on January 6th at the US Capitol building,” his bandmates wrote  in a statement  on their Instagram pages. “We hope that all those involved that day are brought to justice to be investigated and answer for their actions.”  Jason Kenney , the premier of Alberta, Canada, has responded to the report that  Joe Biden  will cancel the  Keystone XL   pipeline  permit via executive action on his  first day in office .  “The Keystone XL pipeline represents tens of thousands of good paying jobs that the American economy needs right now,” he wrote.  I am deeply concerned by reports that the incoming administration of President-elect Joe Biden may repeal the Presidential permit for the Keystone XL border crossing next week. My full statement:  pic.twitter.com/vZjun1IdMH Critics of the project have long said that the creation of these jobs come  at the expense  of the environment and Native communities. Projects like Keystone XL are  directly linked  to violence against and trafficking of Native women and girls, due to the installation of “man camps”, temporary housing for mostly male pipeline workers.  The website for popular rightwing social media platform  Parler  is back online, but the app is still not in stores.  The  conservative hub , which virtually vanished after the violence at  the Capitol , posted a message on its website from its chief executive,  John Matze , dated from Saturday: “Hello world, is this thing on?” the message read.  The message came with a note from the company saying that Parler would “resolve any challenge before us and plan to welcome all of you back soon”. “We believe privacy is paramount and free speech essential, especially on social media,” the note read. “Our aim has always been to provide a nonpartisan public square where individuals can enjoy and exercise their rights to both.”  A little over a week ago, Apple Inc suspended the Parler from its App Store, shortly after Alphabet-owned Google banned it from Google Play. The app is still unavailable for download on both platforms. Amazon then suspended Parler from its  web hosting service , effectively taking the site offline unless it can find a new company to host its services. A small group of heavily masked men have gathered outside the boarded-up state capitol in  Salem, Oregon .  Calm so far at the Oregon State Capitol this afternoon after local and state police said to be prepared for possible violence at protests through President-elect Joe Biden’s inauguration. Several members of the press are present.  pic.twitter.com/jX3tWMGzAT In  Sacramento, California , another state where the  national guard  had mobilized in case of violence, few protesters actually showed up:  Update: It’s a balmy Sunday afternoon in front of the CA Capitol. I count 2 Trump supporters, 1 counter-protester. Far more roller bladers and people on scooters.  https://t.co/dHGMct2uNW   pic.twitter.com/UV2JYjZqtO Protests seemed quiet and all but wrapped up by the afternoon in  Lansing, Michigan.  I’m here in Lansing with the Lansing Police, watching the protest going on in front of the Capitol. There are ~200 protestors right now, some armed. The Capitol is protected by overlapping layers of security & I feel confident that they are working together to keep people safe.  pic.twitter.com/siyLCl7V1w Lansing has seen its share of  armed protesters  in just this past year alone.  Gretchen Whitmer , the state’s governor, became the target of a  foiled kidnapping plot  by a group of rightwing domestic terrorists so tensions were understandably high.  FYI:  @GovWhitmer  did make her way to the Capitol to thank the National Guard today. Most media missed this.  pic.twitter.com/dry9yK0Dc6 Police said there were no incidents or arrests.  Final Update: 20 - 25 protesters during peak attendance. There were no incidents or arrests. Outgoing US Secretary of State  Mike Pompeo  has released a statement responding to the  arrest  of  Alexei Navalny  earlier on Sunday. The Russian opposition politician was been detained at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport on his return from treatment abroad after a suspected poisoning attempt on his life by Russia’s FSB spy agency.  “Confident political leaders do not fear competing voices, nor commit violence against or wrongfully detain political opponents,” the statement interestingly read.  Pompeo on Navalny's arrest: "Confident political leaders do not fear competing voices, nor commit violence against or wrongfully detain political opponents."  pic.twitter.com/GOPMVp2lkH One of the first acts of President-elect  Joe Biden  in office will be to cancel the  Keystone XL  pipeline permit via executive action, sources tell  CBC News .  Keystone XL is a controversial 1,179-mile pipeline which would transport around 830,000 barrels of oil a day from the tar sands in Alberta, Canada, to Montana, South Dakota and Nebraska.  The pipeline was approved in 2010, suspended in 2015 after  Barack Obama  refused to grant the required presidential permits and then  revived by  Donald Trump  shortly after his inauguration in 2017. Opponents of Keystone XL have warned about the environmental and cultural impact of the project on sacred Native American land – concerns that became realized after the existing Keystone pipeline, which follows a similar route,  leaked 383,000 gallons of tar sands into a swath of North Dakota wetlands  in 2019.  Hey all,  Vivian Ho  taking over the blog.  It appears that the  FBI  has arrested a  New Mexico county commissioner  in connection with the violence at  the Capitol .  NEW: Feds have arrested a New Mexico county commissioner wanted in connection with Jan 6 US Capitol chaos. Arrest TODAY just north of Capitol grounds. Court docs say man planned to return with firearm  pic.twitter.com/IGk10Kk4g1  Couy Griffin , who represents district two in Otero county, was arrested near  Capitol Hill  today.  Arrest TODAY of New Mexico county commissioner suspected of playing role in US Capitol chaos. He was back near Capitol Hill today, per law enforcement  pic.twitter.com/O9xciGlrAC Griffin said in a county commission meeting this week that he was going to Washington with guns for the  inauguration . Griffin said in a council meeting this week he was leaving "tonight or tomorrow" for DC with at least two guns in the car with him.  "My vehicle is an extension of my home in regards to the constitutional law and I’ve got a right to keep those firearms in my car” he said Thurs. There is a  tense tranquility  in a  tightly-locked-down downtown Washington,  DC, and  troops on alert at state legislatures across the country,  where small, largely inconsequential pockets of right-wingers have popped up here and there. As the  calm continues , we will keep readers abreast of developments on this and any other US political stories over the coming few hours. My Guardian colleague  Vivian Ho, in California,  will take the live blog reins now and bring you more news. Here are the main events of the last few hours:
Trump saw the economy was his ticket to a second term – then Covid struck:	No time to waste. That was the message from Joe Biden as he announced plans for a $1.9tn (£1.4tn)  stimulus package  only days before his inauguration as US president next week. Combatting the health and economic crises he will inherit from Donald Trump will be top of the agenda for his administration. The latest jobs figures highlight the problem. In the latest week, the number of  new unemployment claims  rose by 181,000 to 965,000, the highest weekly figure since August. Record Covid-19 infection rates during the winter months have led to curbs on activity being strengthened, partly as a result of action by individual states and partly because individuals have become more cautious. As a result, growth has slowed and the improvement in the labour market that followed the initial pandemic shock last spring has gone into reverse. Biden has some experience of this sort of situation because the economy was in similarly poor shape when he became Barack Obama’s vice-president in 2009. Certainly, the economy Trump bequeaths to Biden bears no comparison to the one left to him by Obama. Trump had seen the economy as his ticket to a second term. At last year’s  World Economic Forum  in Davos he told assembled members of the global elite: “America is thriving, America is flourishing, and yes, America is winning again like never before.” Most incumbents tend to be re-elected. Before Trump, the only presidents since the the second world war to have won one election but not a second term were Jimmy Carter and George Bush senior. Sitting presidents who preside over even a moderately well-performing economy tend to win with some ease. And that’s the way it looked like panning out for Trump when he pitched up in Davos. At that point, with unemployment at its lowest since the US was first putting men on the moon in the late 1960s, few would have put much money on Biden capping a long political career with the presidency. Trump’s determination to focus on the economy meant he downplayed the seriousness of the virus and action to prevent its spread was delayed. But by March, businesses were closing, unemployment was threatening to return to the levels of the 1930s and the markets were crashing. As a result, the economy under Trump was divided into two parts: the generally successful first three years followed by a disastrous 2020. By the time he lost to Biden in early November, the US had actually recovered most of the ground lost during the early stages of the pandemic but by then it was too late. In Trump’s first three years in office, growth averaged 2.5% – a solid if by no means exceptional performance. Despite Trump’s assertions, the  US economy  had been growing steadily under Obama from the middle of 2009 onwards, with an average annual expansion of 2.25% a year. If the big boost to defence spending under Trump is put to one side, the growth rates under the last two presidents would be pretty much identical – up to the end of 2019 at least. Figures are not yet in for 2020 but the US looks to have contracted by about 4.5%. The jobs picture looks similar. Under Obama, the jobless rate had more than halved and it was assumed by the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve, America’s central bank, that it could go no lower without inflation picking up. Trump was sceptical about this view and was proved right. Unemployment continued to fall, reaching 3.5% by the end of 2019. The number of jobs created each year was slightly slower than in Obama’s second term, but a tighter labour market meant firms had to pay higher wages and offer jobs to those who had previously found it hard to find work, such as those with poor skills or disabilities. The black unemployment rate fell below 6% for the first time since modern records began in the early 1970s. Real household median income – one guide to living standards – rose by $6,000 in the first three years of Trump’s presidency. In the previous decade and a half it had gone up by little more than $250. These trends ended abruptly with the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate surged to 14.7% and while the trend is once again downwards, at 6.7%, the jobless rate is still almost double its pre-crisis level. There are about 5 million more people unemployed than when Trump came to office. All of which opens up a new chapter in the “what if” school of history. What if the election last November had been held a year earlier? What if the battle for the presidency had been put back a year to November 2021? Would the result have been different? The fact that the election was so close suggests it might well have been. Trump secured almost 47% of the vote and would be on course for a second term had a few thousand members of the public in a handful of swing states switched their votes to him. But he could not prevent Covid-19 from causing serious damage to the economy and he could not delay polling day. Had he accepted defeat gracefully, Trump might have been viewed as a president who, with the benefit of vaccines and the expected strong recovery in 2021, could have turned things round for an autumn election. He might have been seen as an unlucky president rather than a bad loser.
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
UK records 1,248 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  The hospital system in the Amazon city of Manaus is collapsing from a second wave of Covid-19 and it is running out of oxygen , Brazilian health minister Eduardo Pazuello has said. Speaking on a webcast with president  Jair Bolsonaro  at his side, Pazuello said the city’s hospitals were short of medical staff as deaths surge again.  Amazonas state has appealed to the United States to send a military transport plane with oxygen cylinders. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Britain reported 1,248 new deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test on Thursday, down from a record high of more than 1,500 the previous day.  The number of people in the UK to have been given a first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine as of 13 January is 2,918,252, according to Public Health England, a rise of 278,943 from the figures published on Wednesday. A total of 437,977 people have received a second dose in the UK as of January 13, a rise of 9,745 from the previous day, PHE added. Earlier in the day, a number of NHS staff gathered outside Downing Street to protest over the government’s handling of the pandemic. Wearing PPE and carrying a sign which read “You failed the public, you failed the NHS, Boris must go”, the five campaigners arrived at 8pm, the scheduled start time of the Clap For Heroes. Nobody was heard clapping along Whitehall in the heart of Westminster as one nurse told reporters: “The situation in hospitals is so severe, we are stretched across all ICUs.” ICU nurse Ameera Sheikh told reporters: “It’s been very difficult, very challenging. “We’re stressed out and very anxious, there’s a lot of PTSD amongst staff, staff are going off sick ... leaving nurses very short, which increases the risk of patients deteriorating and ultimately patients dying. “This is the government’s fault, they need to take responsibility, they need to provide us with better pay and better working conditions.” As the first groups from Central America reached the Guatemalan border as part of a caravan aiming to reach the United States , regional governments are using coronavirus measures as the latest tool to curtail migration. Small groups of migrants arrived in the  Honduran  border town of   Corinto  on Thursday afternoon, where they were stopped by police demanding negative coronavirus tests, according to local media. Hundreds more have amassed outside the bus terminal in San Pedro Sula in advance of the caravan’s formal departure on Friday morning, according to footage from local television outlets. Guatemala ,  Honduras ,  El Salvador  and  Mexico  issued a joint declaration earlier this week imposing coordinated health measures to deter migration, including requirements to produce negative coronavirus tests at border checkpoints. The tightening by Mexican and Central American authorities, coupled with pandemic-linked US border restrictions in place since March, represent a sweeping effort to use public health regulations to deter movement along one of the world’s busiest migration routes at a time when a fierce second wave of coronavirus is sweeping the region. In Mexico, the pandemic has killed nearly 137,000 people and the capital’s hospitals are spiking with Covid-19 cases. This week’s caravan, slated to depart  Honduras  on Friday, would be the first of the year and comes six days before US president-elect Joe Biden takes office. Yet, Central American and Mexican authorities are stepping up efforts to stop migrants well before the US border, which will likely be a relief for Biden, whose aides have privately expressed concerns about the prospect of growing numbers of migrants seeking to enter the US in the early days of his administration. On Thursday,  Guatemala  cited the pandemic in order to declare emergency powers in seven Guatemalan border provinces migrants frequently transit through en route to the Mexican border. The measures limit public demonstrations and allow authorities to disperse any public meeting, group or demonstration by force. Honduras and Guatemala have announced they will deploy thousands of soldiers to preemptively stop caravan members not complying with health regulations, while Mexico deployed agents to the border with Guatemala. In online forums, migrants hoping to join the caravan expressed concern on Thursday about the crackdown, with some suggesting searching for “blind points” where they could cross the borders undetected by authorities. Central America is reeling from economic crises, high rates of violence, and the devastating fallout of two major hurricanes that battered the region in November. “We barely have food to eat, how do they think we are going to pay for these (coronavirus) tests?” said 29-year-old Ulises Santos from El Salvador, who is hoping to join the caravan. Migration experts say the public health measures are part of a broader effort by Central American and Mexican authorities, under pressure from Washington, to stop migrants before they reach US territory. “The US border is moving further and further south,” said renowned Honduran human rights activist  Ismael Moreno . “The goal (of local police) is to stop migrants, whether through repression, threats, extortion, or requirements to present a Covid-19 test.”  The Gambia has registered two cases of a British-identified coronavirus mutation which is likely more infectious , the tiny West African state’s government said. Gambian health minister  Ahmadou Samateh  told lawmakers the strain was detected in two people entering the country - both of whom were asymptomatic. “People coming from 20 hot-spot countries, like the UK, Spain, France and Sweden must face another test because we have detected the new variant,” he said. “This one transmits faster”. Coronavirus  variant B117 likely emerged in southeastern England in September, according to  Imperial College London . The  World Health Organization  says it has already spread to 50 countries worldwide. This strain is believed to be more easily transmissible because of a mutation of the spike protein, the part of the virus which latches on to human cells. A former British colony of some two million people, The Gambia is the smallest country on mainland  Africa . Health officials in the poor nation have registered 3,890 coronavirus cases to date, with over 125 fatalities. Samateh said the government was engaged in “initial talks” to procure a consignment of Covid-19 vaccines, which it expects to acquire in several months. Turkey has vaccinated more than 285,000 people  as it began administering Covid-19 shots developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech to health workers on Thursday.  President  Tayyip Erdoğan  also received his first dose of the vaccine in Ankara. He urged political leaders and lawmakers to endorse the inoculation process and called on Turks not to heed criticism of the vaccine. Health minister  Fahrettin Koca  also urged citizens to get vaccinated as soon as their turn came, saying it was the “most important way” to beat the pandemic. At a research hospital in Istanbul, 30 clinics were set up to administer the vaccine. Health workers were given a first dose, with a second to be given 28 days later. Surgeon general  Nurettin Yiyit  said the hospital could vaccinate around 1,800 people a day and that its 3,500 staff, including nurses and janitors, could be vaccinated in two days. As of 8.32pm, Turkey had vaccinated 285,940 people, according to health ministry data. Asked about the rapid pace of the vaccinations, Turkey’s health ministry said vaccines had been distributed across the country at the start of the week and distribution from provincial storage centres had taken place overnight, after emergency authorisation for the vaccinations was granted. Seriously ill Covid patients are being transferred from overstretched UK capital London hospitals to intensive care units almost 300 miles away in Newcastle , the Guardian can reveal. The crisis engulfing the capital’s hospitals is so severe that in recent days patients have also been moved 67 miles to  Northampton , 125 miles to  Birmingham  and 167 miles to  Sheffield . NHS England has told hospitals in the north of England, the Midlands and other areas to open up hundreds of extra ICU beds to take patients from London, the south-east and east, where the new variant has pushed Covid hospital admissions to new levels. It is the latest dramatic illustration of the increasingly difficult situation confronting the health service. Hospitals across the UK are battling to provide care for 36,489 people with Covid, an increase of 5,872 in seven days. There were a further 48,682 confirmed cases reported on Thursday but Public Health England said that UK deaths data had been delayed due to a “processing issue”. The number of people who have received a Covid-19 vaccine in Israel has passed the two million threshold, with the prime minister saying there was “light at the end of the tunnel”. Israel “will become the first country to emerge from the corona crisis,” prime minister  Benjamin Netanyahu  said. “I am the second millionth,” to be vaccinated in Israel, read a sign held by 22-year-old Margaret Alsoso as she received her first dose of the vaccine in the city of  Ramla near Tel Aviv . Netanyahu - who faces yet another re-election contest and a corruption trial over the coming weeks - has sought to highlight his personal role in the inoculation campaign. The prime minister was the first to get the jab on 19 December, when Israel launched its inoculation campaign with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. In early January authorities said two million people would receive a two-dose Covid-19 vaccine by the end of the month. As of Thursday only 150,000 people had received their two doses. But as Israel pushes ahead aggressively with its vaccination drive, it is also witnessing a surge in the pandemic with some 9,000 coronavirus cases registered daily. The country, currently in its third national lockdown, has recorded more than 523,000 cases, including around 3,850 deaths, according to the health ministry. On Thursday, Netanyahu urged Israelis to respect lockdown restrictions. Amnesty International has called on Israel to provide coronavirus vaccine doses to Palestinians in the occupied  West Bank  and  Gaza , saying the Jewish state is obliged to do so under international law. As coronavirus continues to tear across the US without any sign of slowing down, officials have warned there is a “full resurgence” in most major population centres – and that the country could see an additional 92,000 deaths in less than a month. There have been more than 23m confirmed Covid-19 cases in the US and 385,503 deaths, Johns Hopkins University’s most recent data  revealed . White House coronavirus taskforce reports from 10 January, obtained by  CNN , said they were seeing a “full resurgence” of the virus in “nearly all metro areas” and advocated for “aggressive action”. The report, which is sent to states, suggested measures such as using “two or three-ply and well-fitting” masks, enforcing “strict” social distancing” and more aggressively testing young adults. Officials worried that there was “significant, continued deterioration from  California  across the Sunbelt and up into the south-east, mid-Atlantic and north-east”. These regions effectively comprise all of the continental US. The reports were quoted as stating that there was a “clear continuation of the pre-holiday high rate of spread as measured by rising test positivity, increased cases, increased hospitalization rates and rising fatalities”. Additional date compiled by the New York Times indicate that a record number of deaths almost daily in the US largely stems from skyrocketing cases in California and  Arizona . In  Los Angeles  county, there is a Covid-19 death every eight minutes. Chilean authorities remain confident in a vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac despite jitters elsewhere , after researchers in Brazil said its efficacy was lower than initially suggested. Rodrigo Yañez , the Chilean trade undersecretary tasked with procuring Covid vaccines for the country, said Chile’s health regulator was assessing all the available data and would announce its decision on an emergency roll-out for the inoculation soon. He said vaccines would serve their critical purpose if they helped diminish severe symptoms, hospitalisations and deaths. This week, researchers in  Brazil  released late-stage trial clinical data showing the Sinovac vaccine was 50.4% effective at preventing symptomatic infections, including “very mild” cases. The previous week they said the vaccine, called CoronaVac, showed 78% efficacy against “mild-to-severe” cases. “The numbers in Brazil are good though they could be misleading in terms of focusing only on the 50% because the target is to avoid people filling the hospitals and fatalities,” he told Reuters. “It should be very effective with the more severe symptoms of the disease, provided that the clinical data supports what was announced this week.” Chile paid $3.5m to host a clinical trial of the vaccine and has also ordered 60m doses to be administered to its population of 18 million over three years. The country’s regulator sent two inspectors to the Sinovac factory in  Beijing  in November ahead of the expected arrival of the first doses in Chile in mid-January. Chile has already started vaccinating its health workers using a Pfizer developed shot and its regulator is also weighing approval of AstraZeneca’s for emergency use. The disappointing Brazilian efficacy news prompted  Malaysia  and  Singapore , which also have purchase agreements with Sinovac, to say on Wednesday that they would seek more data from the Chinese firm on efficacy rates before they approved and bought supplies. Sinovac vaccination campaigns are  already underway in  Indonesia  and  Turkey , with Turkish president  Tayyip Erdoğan  receiving the jab on Thursday. Yañez told Reuters the Chilean Public Health Institute would look at the data from Brazil as well as Turkey and Indonesia, which reported efficacy of 91.25% and 65.3% efficacy respectively based on interim trial data. He said Sinovac’s vaccine wasn’t the only one which has raised doubts, pointing to experts in Australia who had questioned whether herd immunity could be achieved from the 62% efficacy reported for the AstraZeneca vaccine. “The common flu vaccine is between 50% and 60% effective - we run massive vaccination campaigns with those levels of efficacy,” he said. “We are in a position where we need to put a stop to the more severe impact of Covid-19. No vaccine so far is capable of proving that it also stops infections spreading. At the end of the day all of them are more or less efficient in helping you avoid the impact.” The US tennis player Tennys Sandgren has arrived in Melbourne after Tennis Australia reportedly intervened so he could board a charter flight despite testing positive for coronavirus . In a series of tweets on Thursday, Australian time, Sandgren initially suggested he would not be able to board the flight for the  Australian Open , writing “Covid positive over thanksgiving” and “Covid positive on Monday”. Later, Sandgren, a quarter-finalist at last year’s open, added it appeared he would able to board the chartered flight before lauding the Tennis Australia chief executive,  Craig Tiley , as a “wizard”. “Wow I’m on the plane. Maybe I just held my breath too long,” he said in a tweet. He then explained his first positive test was in November and he was now “totally recovered”. “I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point.” A lot couch virologists out there. My two tests were less than 8 weeks a part. I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point. Totally recovered! The Australian Open suggested Victorian health authorities had given Sandgren the all-clear to fly. The tournament’s official Twitter account said people who had recovered and were “non-infectious can continue to shed the virus for several months”. “Victorian government public health experts assess each case based on additional detailed medical records to ensure they are not infectious before checking in to the charter flights,” the Australian Open said. “Players and their teams are tested every day from their arrival in Australia, a much stricter process than for anyone else in hotel quarantine.” A group representing major US airlines has backed president-elect Joe Biden’s plan to mandate facial coverings for all air passengers , but asked him to lift it once the coronavirus pandemic ends and give them flexibilities in enforcing it. Airlines for America , which represents American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and others, asked Biden in a letter seen by Reuters to “allow air carriers to maintain their existing policies and practices which are aimed at de-escalating conflict in-flight and allowing the aircraft to continue while providing a consequential enforcement backstop on the ground”. Twitter has lifted restrictions briefly imposed on the official account promoting the Russian Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine. The account was restricted for around an hour earlier in the day with a notice saying Twitter had seen “some unusual activity” on the page. “This account was temporarily locked in error by an automated spam filter. This action has been reversed and the account is now fully operational,” Twitter said in a statement. The Sputnik V account said that, according to an explanation from Twitter, the brief shut down was due to “a possible security breach from Virginia, USA”. The account did not provide any further details. 
Biden inauguration: Trump expected to issue flurry of pardons before leaving office – live:	For months,  Donald Trump  has refused to acknowledge Biden as the legitimate winner of the election – a belief shared by legions of his supporters. The inauguration ceremony will have a  heavy military presence  because of threats of violence. Trump  isn’t bothering attending . While Trump has accelerated this dangerous moment, it’s been shaped by a deliberate Republican strategy to undermine faith in elections to make it harder to vote. The myth of voter fraud and repeated allusions to elections being stolen have  moved from fringe theories to the center  of Republican ideology over the last several decades.  “Donald Trump was definitely the spark and he had many enablers and facilitators, but the kindling had all been laid,” said Wendy Weiser, director of the Democracy program at the Brennan Center for Justice. “The strategy has been to slowly, steadily, undermine Americans’ faith in the security of elections, increase their belief in the existence of widespread voter fraud so as to enable them to accept what would otherwise be perceived as a really illegitimate and anti-democratic agenda of restricting access to voting.” For years, Republicans  have used misleading  and faulty data to suggest that elections are at risk of fraud. By 2016, when Trump claimed that voter fraud cost him the popular vote, it fitted neatly into the narrative the Republican party was beginning to embrace. Two years later, there were signs that questioning election results were moving to Republican orthodoxy. Paul Ryan, then serving as speaker of the House, said it was  “bizarre”  and “weird” that Republicans fell behind in California races as more mail-in ballots were counted after election night. When Trump started  making similar claims last spring  and summer that mail-in ballots would lead to fraud and cost him the election, few Republicans objected. The party began to attack ballot drop boxes and mail-in voting, something Republicans long relied on. When Trump claimed there was something amiss as states continued to count ballots after election day, Republicans – with a few  exceptions  – supported him too. The rhetoric began to have real consequences, as supporters started protesting at vote counting sites and harassing workers trying to count ballots during November’s election. And by the time of electoral college certification, the effort to undermine faith in the vote had gone so far that it made it possible for two-thirds of the House Republican caucus and a dozen senators to back the idea of throwing out the election results entirely. Read more of Sam Levine’s report here:  How the Republican voter fraud lie paved the way for Trump to undermine Biden’s presidency  Overnight the Washington Post has reported  more details  of Donald Trump’s plans to issue pardons, which they say have come from people familiar with the discussion. They report: Trump met Sunday with his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, daughter Ivanka Trump and other aides for a significant amount of the day to review a long list of pardon requests and discuss lingering questions about their appeals. The president was personally engaged with the details of specific cases, one person said. Trump has been particularly consumed with the question of whether to issue preemptive pardons to his adult children, top aides and himself. But it remains unclear whether he will make such a move. Although he has mused about the possibility, no final decisions have been reached, and some advisers have warned against using his pardon power to benefit himself. Neither Trump nor his children have been charged with crimes, and they are not known to be under federal investigation. Some aides think Trump could face criminal liability for inciting the crowd that stormed the Capitol on 6 January. Others think a self-pardon, never before attempted by a president, would be of dubious constitutionality but could anger Senate Republicans preparing to serve as key jurors at Trump’s impeachment trial, and would amount to an admission of guilt that could be used against Trump in potential civil litigation related to the Capitol attack. Read more here:  Washington Post – Trump prepares to offer clemency to more than 100 people in his final hours in office One of the striking coincidences of the US pandemic year is that the first anniversary of the first case, 20 January 2021, falls on the day of Joe Biden’s presidential inauguration. That sets a sharp frame through which to view the year: the devastation that has befallen America as a result of the political mishandling of the crisis must wholly be owned, down to the day, by  Donald Trump . The numbers crudely tell the story. Nobody knew it then, but the initial confirmed case in Washington state was the opening drop in what was to become a  tsunami of infection . That first patient may have survived and is doing well. But he was followed by nearly 400,000   people who were not so fortunate.  Across the country, from coast to coast and through every nook and cranny of the heartlands, the virus is wreaking havoc, upturning lives as it shreds the global reputation of this once revered nation.  John Holdren has spent much of the year investigating what lies behind these horrifying features of the American pandemic and the human catastrophe they denote. What went wrong, and how could it be put right? The idea was to come up with practical tips that could help the US government extract itself from the current disaster, as well as provide advice for tackling any future pandemic. Their  findings  give a wealth of detail on the failings of the Trump administration’s response. Their  first inquiry , released in May, looked at how the national stockpile of emergency medical supplies had been allowed to wither under Trump. They warned that urgent action was needed to replenish the reserves to avoid drastic shortages of masks, ventilators and other PPE come the winter, but Trump ignored that advice too. Just as they predicted, an  alarming dearth  of masks and other equipment is once again putting frontline health workers in  mortal danger . “The federal government has to take leadership in the response to a national and global pandemic. Trump refused to do that, and that stance was an unmitigated disaster.” Read more of Ed Pilkington’s report:  ‘An unmitigated disaster’: America’s year of Covid According to the  numbers from Johns Hopkins university , yesterday the US recorded 174,513 new coronavirus cases, and 1,723 further deaths. Numbers are often reduced at the weekend because of different collection methodologies which means some numbers do not get reported over the weekend. Nevertheless,  the US is on course to exceed 24 million total cases and 400,000 total deaths before Joe Biden is inaugurated on Wednesday .  The  Covid Tracking Project  reports that yesterday there were 124,387 people in the US hospitalized with Covid. It is the 48th consecutive day that more than 100,000 people have been in hospital with the coronavirus.  Dr. Peter Hotez , dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine, told CNN last night that this is “a screaming level of transmission across the United States and people are scared, people are upset.” “The numbers are quite dire. There is an enormous amount of work that’s going to have to happen starting 20 January,” he added. Dr. Scott Gottlieb , the former Food and Drug Administration commissioner, has raised the spectre of the new variant of the coronavirus running rampant across the US. He told CBS’ Face the Nation: We could have persistently high levels of infection in the spring until we finally get enough people vaccinated. The only backstop against this new variant is the fact that we will have a lot of infection by then so there’ll be a lot of immunity in the population, and we will be vaccinating more people. But this really changes the equation and I think what we’re looking at is a relentless strike from this virus, heading into the spring. A secretive  billionaire supporter of Josh Hawley  and other rightwing lawmakers suggested he had been “deceived” by the Republican senator from Missouri, who led the effort to overturn the results of the 2020 election. Jeffrey Yass is a co-founder of Susquehanna International Group – headquartered in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, a critical swing state – who has donated tens of millions of dollars to hardline Republican groups who supported Donald Trump’s effort to invalidate his defeat at the polls by  Joe Biden . Yass privately told a longtime associate he had not foreseen how his contributions would lead to attempts to overturn US democracy. “Do you think anyone knew Hawley was going to do that?” Yass wrote to Laura Goldman, a former stockbroker who has known him for more than three decades. “Sometimes politicians deceive their donors.” Yass, who does not give interviews and generally avoids publicity, also told Goldman he did not believe the 2020 election had been “stolen”, even though he has directly and indirectly supported rightwing  Republicans  who have repeatedly – and falsely – sought to discredit the results. The latest fallout of the 6 January attempt to invalidate the election, in which 147 Republicans in Congress objected to electoral college results in the aftermath of the attack on the Capitol, comes as both Hawley and his donors face pressure and criticism for his role. Hawley has said he objected to the counting of electoral votes in order to instigate a “debate” on the issue of election integrity. He has denied that his actions helped to incite the violent outburst and breach of the Capitol in which five people died, including a police officer. Read more of Stephanie Kirchgaessner’s report here:  Billionaire backer feels ‘deceived’ by Josh Hawley over election objections As we build-up to the Biden-Harris administration taking power on Wednesday, we have an event today specifically looking at  what the future holds for  Kamala Harris . Harris is poised to become the first woman, the first Black and the first person of Asian descent to be inaugurated vice president of the US. As she steps into the White House, millions of voters responsible for her win are asking challenging questions: will she emerge as a brave and powerful voice for the nation’s most vulnerable? Or will her embrace of the political center limit her impact? While  voters of color turned out in record numbers  to support the Biden-Harris ticket, some progressives feel conflicted about Harris’s past. As a California prosecutor, she enforced the rules of a US criminal justice system that unfairly targets minority groups. Looking ahead to the next four years, the panel - including Pulitzer Prize-winning cultural critic  Margo Jefferson , Guardian columnist and lawyer  Malaika Jabali  and Guardian West Coast political reporter  Maanvi Singh  - will discuss the opportunities Harris will have to drive policy change and inspire a new generation of leadership, and the hopes, obstacles and anxieties that accompany her rise to vice president. You can join them. It is at 4pm ET (which is 9pm GMT if, like me, you are in London). There’s more details here:  Kamala Harris – How will America’s new vice president wield her power? One name that appears to be missing from Donald Trump’s proposed list of pardons is  Donald Trump . For some time there has been speculation that he would attempt to pardon himself, but that equation got more complicated with the assault on the Capitol on 6 January and moves in Congress to impeach him. Issuing himself a pardon under those circumstances would look self-incriminating. And talking of self-incriminating, one of the latest people to be arrested over the storming of the US Capitol was partly identified through their own social media posts. Associated Press report that Otero County Commissioner  Couy Griffin  has been arrested on charges of illegally entering the US Capitol. The New Mexico county official, and founder of the group Cowboys for Trump, who had vowed to return to Washington after last week’s riot to place a flag on House speaker Nancy Pelosi’s desk, was arrested Sunday by the FBI. According to court documents, Griffin told investigators that he was “caught up” in the crowd, but he said he did not enter the building and instead remained on the steps. A video posted to Griffin’s personal Facebook page shows Griffin in the restricted areas, according to the affidavit. On Thursday, Griffin had said he planned to travel with firearms to DC for Biden’s inauguration. “I’m gonna be there on 20 January and I’m gonna take a stand for our country and for our freedoms,” Griffin said during a meeting of the Otero County Board of Commissioners. “I’m gonna leave either tonight or tomorrow. I’ve got a .357 Henry Big Boy rifle lever action that I’ve got in the trunk of my car and I’ve got a .357 single action revolver, the Colt Ruger Vaquero that I’ll have underneath the front seat on my right side and I will embrace my Second Amendment,” he said. If Joe Biden’s aim is, as reported, to try and  undo a lot of Trump administration damage in the first weeks of his presidency via executive order , he’s still getting an increasing workload of things to reverse. Troy Farah reports for us this morning as part of our  This land is your land  series on an 11th-hour plan to strip California desert of its protections. The outgoing  Trump administration  is proposing to strip away protections for millions of acres of California desert, threatening damage to Joshua trees, desert tortoises and landmarks. The plan would open up California’s desert areas to mining projects, eliminate up to 2.2m acres of conservation lands, as well as remove 1.8m acres designated as  Areas of Critical Environmental Concern  (Acecs). Acecs are regions given special protections because of extra sensitive and culturally important features. The spires of eroded volcanic rock known as  Turtle Mountain , for example, is one of the Acecs considered for the chopping block, and has an extremely dense population of endangered desert tortoise, as well as many indigenous homestead sites and historic mining camps. “It’s a bit baffling at the 11th hour that something like this would hit the street,” said Geary Hund, the executive director for the Mojave Desert Land Trust, a non-profit conservation group that has purchased nearly 90,000 acres of desert over 15 years in order to protect it. “It doesn’t make sense. Any changes to this plan should really be within the purview of the new administration. “I’m not saying that there should be no renewable energy development out here,” Hund said. “But I think it needs to be thoughtful, smart and avoid impacts to important conservation lands.” Other areas that would be affected by the rule changes include wildlife corridors near beloved desert landscapes, such as Death Valley national park, Mojave Trails national monument and Joshua Tree national park. The amendment would also change or eliminate 68 existing conservation rules. The changes would allow for greater impacts in recreation areas used by hikers, birders and off-road vehicles. Read more of Troy Farah’s report here:  Trump administration proposes 11th-hour plan to strip California desert protections If that is how Trump is expected to end his time in office, we already have a clue as to how Joe Biden will start his time in office – by  cancelling the $9bn Keystone XL pipeline . The words “rescind Keystone XL pipeline permit” appear on a list of executive actions likely to be scheduled for the first day of Biden’s presidency, according to an  earlier report  by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Biden had previously vowed to scrap the oil pipeline’s presidential permit if he became president. The project, which would move oil from the Canadian province of Alberta to Nebraska, had been slowed by legal issues in the US. It also faced opposition  from environmentalists  seeking to check the expansion of Canada’s oil sands by opposing new pipelines to move its crude to refineries. TC Energy Corp, which operates the pipeline, said it would achieve net zero emissions by 2023 when it enters service. The company also pledged to use only renewable energy sources by 2030 in an attempt to win Biden’s support. Barack Obama  axed the project in 2015 , saying Canada would reap most of the economic benefits, while the project would add to greenhouse gas emissions. Trump reinistated it. In 2017, Oliver Laughland and Laurence Mathieu-Léger drove 1,200 miles along the route of the pipeline for us, visiting many Indigenous communities, ranchers & farmers - with very different political views - but all opposed to its construction. There’s some more details of what outgoing president  Donald Trump  plans to do with his final hours in power – hold a departure event at Joint Base Andrews. NEW: White House sends invitations for Trump’s departure event at Joint Base Andrews—starts at 8a Wednesday.  Guests must arrive between 6a and 7:15a; may bring up to five other people; and must wear mask, the invites say, according to one shared with me by an ex Trump official. “Must wear masks” on the invite marks a departure from the previous Covid  superspreader events  that the president has hosted. Jennifer Jacobs reports for Bloomberg that: Trump has decided to skip the inauguration of his successor becoming the first living US president in more than a century to choose not to attend the regular exchange of power. Trump will instead be at his Mar-a-Lago resort as the incoming president is sworn in at noon that day. Some White House aides will be on the South Lawn for the lift-off of the presidential helicopter with Trump aboard, though the attendance will be limited. Strict security measures throughout downtown Washington and especially near the White House will make it too difficult for outside guests to access the campus. Read more here:  Bloomberg – Trump farewell planned for Wednesday morning ahead of Biden oath Sources have told CNN  that yesterday there was a White House meeting where  Donald Trump ’s list of final pardons was confirmed. They report that the list includes “white collar criminals, high-profile rappers” but not the president himself. They report: The final batch of clemency actions is expected to include a mix of criminal justice reform-minded pardons and more controversial ones secured or doled out to political allies. Julian Assange is not currently believed to among the people receiving pardons, but the list is still fluid and that could change, too. It’s also not certain whether Trump’s former adviser Steve Bannon will receive a pardon. Trump is still receiving multiple streams of recommendations on pardons from those advisers who remain at the White House, as well as people outside the building who have been lobbying for months for themselves or their clients. The expectation among allies is that Trump will issue pardons that he could benefit from post presidency. “Everything is a transaction. He likes pardons because it is unilateral. And he likes doing favors for people he thinks will owe him,” one source familiar with the matter said. Read more here:  CNN – Trump to issue around 100 pardons and commutations Tuesday, sources say Welcome to our live coverage of US politics in the week that will see  Joe Biden  become the 46th president of the United States. Here’s a quick catch-up on where we are today…
Coronavirus live news: Germany 'a long way from where we want to be,' says minister; 22,857 new cases in Russia:	Norway ’s government will ease some Covid restrictions after extra measures imposed for the past two weeks appear to have had the desired effect, Prime Minister Erna Solberg said on Monday. “We still have control over the spread of infections, but the situation can change quickly,” Solberg told parliament.  The government will permit households to receive guests, but only up to a maximum of five visitors, while children and teenagers can resume sports activities.  Bars and restaurants, however, are still banned from serving alcohol until further notice.  Hello everyone, this is Yohannes Lowe. I’ll be taking over the running of the blog now. As always, feel free to get in touch on  Twitter  if you have any story tips.  That’s all from me,  Caroline Davies , for now. Thank you for your time. I am now handing over to my colleague Yohannes.   France  is on track to reach its target of vaccinating 1 million people against COVID-19 by the end of January and has enough doses to increase the total to 2.4 million by the end of February, health minister Olivier Veran said on Monday. During a visit to a vaccination centre in the eastern city of Grenoble, Veran told reporters that France had now set up about 800 such centres. “With the acceleration of the vaccination campaign in retirement homes, we will comfortably reach our goal of 1 million French people vaccinated by the end of this month,” he said. Austria, Greece  and  Denmark  will jointly pressure the European Medicines Agency to approve AstraZeneca’s COVID-19 vaccine as quickly as possible, Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz said on Monday, adding: “Every week counts.” Kurz was speaking before a European leaders’ virtual summit on Thursday, and a day after he said Austria’s lockdown was being extended until at least Feb. 7 as it tries to contain highly infectious new variants, Reuters reports.  EMA, the EU drugs regulator, said last week it would review the vaccine developed by AstraZeneca and Britain’s Oxford University this month under an accelerated timeline. Kurtz told a news conference: Every week counts. We expect that work be done day and night, that a decision be reached unbureaucratically and that  Europe  not fall behind. What is now needed is - based on all scientific facts, of course - an immediate and quick decision, because AstraZeneca can deliver up to two million doses in the first quarter for Austria alone, and that of course makes an enormous difference to our success in vaccinating the population. Austria has a population of just under nine million people. Kurz also said part of the already-approved vaccine doses being supplied by Pfizer would arrive late, after Pfizer said it was temporarily reducing deliveries to Europe. He said: Yes, there will now have to be a small adjustment here or there because it currently seems as though we will receive 20% less, which will then be caught up in February at the latest. The head of the  World Health Organisation  said on Monday that the world was on the brink of a “catastrophic moral failure” on distributing COVID-19 vaccines, urging countries and manufacturers to share doses more fairly around the world. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said the prospects for equitable distribution are at “serious risk” just as its vaccine-sharing scheme COVAX aims to start distributing inoculations next month. He noted 44 bilateral deals were signed last year and at least 12 have already been signed this year, Reuters reports. “This could delay COVAX deliveries and create exactly the scenario COVAX was designed to avoid, with hoarding, a chaotic market, an uncoordinated response, and continued social and economic disruption,” he said. Such a “me-first approach” left the world’s poorest and most vulnerable at risk, he said at the opening of the body’s annual Executive Board meeting in virtual format. “Ultimately these actions will only prolong the pandemic.” The global scramble for shots has intensified as more infectious virus variants circulate. Tedros cited as an example of inequality that more than 39 million doses of vaccine have been administered in 49 higher-income countries whereas just 25 doses had been given in one poor country. Singapore  has urged workers at its national airline to help make it the world’s first carrier with all staff vaccinated against Covid-19, with Singapore Airlines CEO Goh Phong Choon also encouraging employees to receive shots. Vaccinating Singapore’s 37,000 frontline aviation and maritime staff is seen as key to reopening borders of the island-state, which is preparing to host events such as the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting and the Shangri-La Dialogue Asian security summit in a few months’ time. “SIA (Singapore Airlines) can be the first vaccinated international airline of the world. Try to get that done,” transport minister Ong Ye Kung told aviation workers at a vaccination drive at the airport on Monday. Malawi  is set to roll out a first set of anti-coronavirus restrictions this week, the president said, after overruling a court ban on lockdown measures to tackle a surge in cases. Daily life had been unfolding normally in the southern African country since its High Court barred the government from confining citizens to limit the spread of Covid-19, AFP reports.  Judges ruled in April that insufficient measures were in place to cushion loss of livelihood in one of the world’s poorest countries, where most people work informally. Malawi, like many African states, is grappling with an infection rise after months of relatively low infection figures. President Lazarus Chakwera late on Sunday ordered a night-time curfew and said schools would be shut for three weeks. Gatherings have been capped and face masks will be mandatory in public for the first time since the start of the pandemic. “The time has come to enforce these things for the common good,” Chakwera said in an address to the nation, adding that the restrictions would come into effect from Monday. The death of two Covid-19 positive ministers last week prompted Chakwera to declare a state of emergency allowing him to side-step the court ruling.  Malawi has recorded 12,470 coronavirus cases and 314 deaths for a population of over 18 million. But more than 40% of infections were detected this month alone, with a record 685 new daily cases announced on Sunday. International borders were shut from August to October and then briefly again in December to avoid importing cases.  Germany’s  health minister said on Monday that although measures to contain coronavirus had started to have an effect, more needed to be done to bring it permanently under control. “The (infection) numbers seem to be decreasing, which is good, but we are still a long way from where we want to be,” Jens Spahn told broadcaster ARD. Chancellor Angela Merkel and Germany’s 16 state premiers will discuss what to do next on Tuesday, Reuters reports.  New infections have been decreasing in recent days and the occupancy of intensive care beds by Covid-19 patients has declined by 10-15%, according to Spahn. However, the state premiers are concerned about new variants that appear to be more contagious. The finance minister, Olaf Scholz, told the public broadcaster RBB on Monday he could imagine extending the current lockdown by two weeks until mid-February. Stricter requirements for companies to allow staff to work from home, compulsory wearing of heavy duty FFP2 masks in certain areas, restrictions on public transport and the introduction of curfews are being debated. The number of confirmed cases in Germany rose by 7,141 to 2,040,659, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed on Monday. That was more than 5,000 down from the week before. The reported death toll rose by 214 to 46,633. The foreign minister, Heiko Maas, fuelled discussion regarding privileges for people who had been vaccinated by saying they should be allowed to go to restaurants and cinemas sooner. Other ministers have opposed such special rights, fearing they could cause social inequalities at a time when not everyone has the opportunity to be inoculated. Maas’s proposal was “out of the question” as long as it is not proven that a vaccination stops people from transmitting the virus too, a justice ministry spokesman said on Sunday. Here’s a summary of what we have learned from  UK  vaccine minister Nadhim Zahawi this morning’ South Africa,  which has yet to receive its first coronavirus vaccine, has been promised 9m doses by Johnson & Johnson, the  Business Day  newspaper reported on Monday, citing a health ministry spokeswoman. Health workers and scientists have publicly criticised the government for not moving fast enough to inoculate its people, Reuters reports.  The country has recorded more than 1.3 million infections and more than 37,000 deaths related to the virus, the most in  Africa . Business Day said the 9m J&J doses took the total amount of doses South Africa had been promised to more than 30m. Roughly 12m doses are coming from the Covax global vaccine distribution scheme, around 12m from an African Union arrangement, and 1.5m from the Serum Institute of India, which is making AstraZeneca shots. Health ministry spokeswoman Lwazi Manzi did not respond to messages or a phone call seeking comment. J&J did not immediately respond to an email seeking comment, Reuters said.  Uzbekistan  plans to purchase 100,000 doses of Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid-19 vaccine, the Central Asian nation’s health ministry said on Monday. The country of 34 million is working on the deal together with vaccine alliance Gavi, the ministry said in a statement. Travel corridors allowing people to enter the  UK  without self-isolating have now closed. Arrivals must now take a negative coronavirus test up to 72 hours before departure, and self-isolate for up to 10 days. The corridors were a lifeline for the travel industry when they were introduced in summer 2020, as struggling firms saw a spike in bookings for destinations added to the list. But they were suspended from  4am on Monday  as the Uk government attempts to prevent new strains of Covid-19 from entering the UK. Karen Dee, the chief executive of trade body the Airport Operators Association, supported the decision but stressed the need for “a clear pathway out”. She told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We’ve had the worst year in the entire history of our industry so the sooner we can get flying again safer, the better.” EasyJet chief executive Johan Lundgren said the loss of travel corridors will not have a “significant impact” on his airline in the short term as flight numbers were already limited due to the pandemic. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the minimum number of days arrivals must wait to take a negative test releasing them from quarantine could be reduced from five days to three days. “We know that there’s a big difference between people’s willingness to sacrifice to go and travel if you have to quarantine for 10 days or 14 days, down to five days or even three days,” he said. “So it’s really, really important that, as part of the plan for recovery, the government also has the plan to unwind these restrictions that are in place.” The Department for Transport announced on Monday that high-value business travellers, performing arts professionals and journalists have lost their exemption from travel restrictions, PA Media reports. Other people who must now abide by the rules include those working in “high-end” television production and film, ornamental horticulture, advertising and the National Lottery. Aircraft crew, hauliers, offshore oil and gas workers and people involved in elite sport are among those whose exemptions remain. Still on vaccine rollout in the  UK , the vaccines minister Nadhim Zahawi said that an upgrade to the Pfizer manufacturing process to produce greater volume of vaccine could cause some delays. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “There’s bound to be delays because any new manufacturing process has challenges at the outset. It is lumpy, it begins to stabilise and get better and better week in, week out. “It could delay supply but I’m confident we can meet our target by mid-February of the top four cohorts.”  Russia  reported 22,857 new coronavirus cases on Monday, including 3,679 in Moscow, taking the national tally – the world’s fourth highest – to 3,591,066. Authorities said 471 people had died from the virus in the last 24 hours, pushing Russia’s official death toll to 66,037.
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
Journeys of hope: what will migration routes into Europe look like in 2021?:	I n 2020, tens of thousands of migrants crossed desert and sea, climbed mountains and walked through forests to reach what has become an increasingly inhospitable Europe. Many of them died, overwhelmed by the waves, or tortured in the  detention centres of Libya . More were displaced after the  flames of Moria refugee camp  in Greece burned everything they had. As a new year begins, so do the journeys of tens of thousands more people seeking a new life overseas. The Guardian has spoken to experts, charity workers and NGOs about the challenges and risks they face on the main migration routes into  Europe . Migrants walk in protest to the Serbian-Hungarian border near Kelebija, Serbia, in February 2020. They seek a passage to the EU. Photograph: Bernadett Szabo/Reuters In July last year, seven north African men climbed into a shipping container in a railway yard in Serbia, hoping to emerge a few days later in Milan. Three months later, on 23 October,  authorities in Paraguay found their badly decomposed bodies  inside a shipment of fertiliser.  Violence from security forces in the Balkan states  has pushed people to take even greater risks to reach Europe. After the Serbian border with EU countries became virtually impassable in 2018, refugees began trying to reach Croatia via Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) instead. The path usually begins in Turkey, from which migrants attempt to reach Bulgaria or Greece, then North Macedonia or Serbia, then Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia, from where they can finally reach Italy or Austria. The final leg of the Balkan route, which crosses mountains and snow-covered forests and lacks facilities for migrants, is one of the most perilous and gruelling, made worse by the  brutal pushbacks  carried out by squadrons of Croatian police who patrol the EU’s longest external border. Between January and November 2020, the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) recorded 15,672 pushbacks from Croatia to BiH.  More than 60% of cases reportedly involved violence . The humanitarian situation for those entering Bosnia and Herzegovina remains unacceptable and undignified “The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 has decreased migration flows along the western Balkan route,” says Nicola Bay, DRC country director for Bosnia. Last year, 15,053 people arrived in BiH, compared with 29,196 in 2019. “But in the absence of real solutions the humanitarian situation for those entering BiH remains unacceptable and undignified.” In December, a fire destroyed a migrant camp in Bosnia, which had been built to contain the spread of Covid-19 among the migrant population. The same day the International Organization for  Migration  declared the effective closure of the facility. The destruction of the camp, which was strongly criticised by rights groups as inadequate due to its lack of basic resources, has left thousands of asylum seekers stranded in snow-covered forests and subzero temperatures. When countries in the region begin to ease Covid-19 restrictions this year, Bay says it is highly likely there will be a surge of arrivals to BiH, which remains the main transit point for those wanting to reach Europe – a scenario for which the EU and the region remain unprepared. Carrying children and their few possessions, migrants flee in Moria camp on the island of Lesbos, Greece. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images On the night of 8 September, the Moria refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos, the biggest of its kind in Europe,  burst into flames . The government announced a four-month state of emergency on the island, as thousands of vulnerable asylum seekers were displaced. “This was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece,” says Stephan Oberreit, head of mission for Médecins Sans Frontières in Greece. “The combination of violence, Covid pandemic and the continued harmful policies of containment on the islands have led to several breaking points and eventually to the fires that have destroyed Moria.” 2020 was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece After the blaze,  the EU said there would be no more Morias . But more than 15,000 men, women and children are still trapped in miserable conditions on the Greek islands and the policy of containment continues. People using this route generally come by dinghy from the Turkish town of Ayvalik, aiming to reach Lesbos. Oberreit says that while arrivals have decreased this year, reports of illegal pushbacks have increased “in a concerning way”. “But let’s be realistic, people will continue to try to cross and risk their lives in the absence of other safer and legal options.” Oberreit says the pandemic “has been used by Greek authorities to accelerate their agenda to create closed centres on the Greek islands and to increase the border controls”. It’s hard to predict what will happen this year, “but the signs we have today give us little hope that the situation for the people who manage to arrive on the Greek islands will improve. Or that the EU will abandon its approach based on deterrence and containment,” he says. Migrants are rescued by members of the Spanish NGO Proactiva Open Arms after leaving Libya on an overcrowded dinghy in November. Photograph: Sergi Camara/AP In mid-November, four shipwrecks in the space of three days  claimed the lives of more than 110 people  in the Mediterranean, including at least 70 people whose bodies washed up on the beach of al-Khums, in western  Libya . Taking advantage of good autumn weather, people smugglers sent hundreds of migrants to sea. Many of the journeys ended in tragedy. Last year, at least 575 people died taking the central Mediterranean route. The  International Organization for Migration  (IOM) says the real number is considerably higher. People using this route usually depart from Tripoli or Zuwara in Libya, or from Sfax in Tunisia, and make for the Sicilian island of Lampedusa or Malta in small boats. At the start of the pandemic, Italy and Malta declared their ports closed. Rome established “quarantine boats” – ferries on which migrants are placed under quarantine for 14 days, which have been  criticised by human rights groups . There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries ... human rights are practically revoked “There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries that these people badly need and not even legal assistance,” says Oscar Camps, founder of Proactiva Open Arms. “In such a situation, human rights are practically revoked.” Open Arms is now the only NGO rescue boat operating along the central Mediterranean route. Many other rescue boats are blocked in Italian ports because officials refuse to  authorise their departure . Camps says he would like to see a planned civil or military rescue operation along the route this year, similar to  Operation Mare Nostrum , which Italy ran in 2013–2014. “It should be an operation aimed at dismantling Libyan armed groups, falsely called coastguards, financed by the EU, whose only mission is to intercept boats and bring them back to a country at war,” says Camps. “However, considering the way things are going, we would settle for them stopping the criminalisation of rescue operations carried out by humanitarian ships.” A migrant climbs into the back of a lorry bound for Britain at the entrance to the Channel tunnel in Calais, November 2020. Photograph: Denis Charlet/AFP/Getty Images Several thousand people attempted to cross the Channel to reach Britain last year. London has repeatedly pressed Paris to do more to prevent people leaving  France . In November, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, said they wanted to make the route unviable and signed a new agreement aimed at curbing the number of  migrants crossing the Channel  in small boats. More than  8,000 people  made the crossing in small boats last year, up from almost 1,900 in 2019. “The difficulties faced by women, men and children will in many ways remain the same as before,” says Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty’s refugee and migrant rights programme director. “Clearly, there is no will among the two governments – particularly not the UK – to directly address the needs and circumstances of these people to ensure they have access to asylum.” Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France on family reunification is uncertain According to experts, the future of the Channel migration route is linked to the continuing pandemic lockdowns and whether the UK participates in EU migration policies, specifically the EU family reunification programme. “Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France in relation to this particular matter is uncertain,” says Valdez-Symonds. “All that can be said, as things stand, is that almost the sole formally sanctioned option for at least unaccompanied children with family in the UK to seek asylum here is  about to close .” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
