One, two, tree: how AI helped find millions of trees in the Sahara:	W hen a team of international scientists set out to count every tree in a large swathe of west Africa using AI, satellite images and one of the world’s most powerful supercomputers, their expectations were modest. Previously, the area had registered as having little or no tree cover. The biggest surprise, says Martin Brandt, assistant professor of geography at the University of Copenhagen, is that the part of the Sahara that the study covered, roughly 10%, “where no one would expect to find many trees”, actually had “quite a few hundred million”. Trees are crucial to our long-term survival, as they absorb and store the carbon dioxide emissions that cause global heating. But we still do not know how many there are. Much of the Earth is inaccessible either because of war, ownership or geography. Now scientists, researchers and campaigners have a raft of more sophisticated resources to monitor the number of trees on the planet. Satellite imagery has become the biggest tool for counting the world’s trees, but while forested areas are relatively easy to spot from space, the trees that aren’t neatly gathered in thick green clumps are overlooked. Which is why assessments so far have been, says Brandt, “extremely far away from the real numbers. They were based on interpolations, estimations and projections.” The most recent attempt at a global tally of trees  was in 2015 , when researchers, using a combination of satellite data and ground measurements, estimated there were just over 3tn. This was a dramatic increase from the previous estimate of 400bn in 2009, which was based on satellite imagery alone. The research by Brandt and his colleagues in west Africa promises a more accurate picture in the future. In a collaboration with Nasa’s  Goddard Space Flight Center , they were able to use satellite images from  DigitalGlobe , previously available only to commercial entities, which were high enough resolution to make out individual trees and measure their crown size. Using AI deep learning, and one of the world’s most powerful supercomputers –  Blue Waters  at the University of Illinois – the team was able to count individual trees from space for the first time. They manually marked nearly 90,000 across a variety of terrain, so the computer could “learn” which shapes and shadows indicated the presence of trees. This enabled them to count every tree with a crown size of at least 3 sq metres in a 1.3m sq km area comprising mostly the Sahara but also the semi-arid Sahel area along the southern edge of the desert and a sliver of the sub-humid zone beneath that. Overall, they detected  more than 1.8bn trees . Trees play a significant role in producing the oxygen we breathe. But twice as many existed before the start of human civilisation.  The continued destruction of forests and trees is a significant contributor to the carbon dioxide emissions that are driving the climate crisis. Trees draw carbon dioxide back out of the atmosphere as they grow, and planting trees will need to play an important part in ending the climate emergency.  Forests are also a vital and rich habitat for wildlife. Earth is at the  start of a sixth mass extinction event  of species and the razing of forests and other ecosystems is the biggest contributor to the losses. Trees are also important in controlling regional rainfall, as they evaporate water from their leaves. In urban areas, the shade from trees has been shown to  cool city streets  and  reduce levels of air pollution . Trees can also boost people’s wellbeing as part of green spaces, with research showing a  two-hour “dose” of nature  a week significantly improves health. Those in the Sahara tended to be clustered around human settlements. Arid areas had on average 9.9 trees per hectare, rising to 30.1 in semi-arid zones and 47 in the southernmost sub-humid rim of the patch being studied. There were just 0.7 trees per hectare in areas classified as “super-arid”. “Most maps show these areas as basically empty,” says Brandt. “But they’re not empty. Our assessment suggests a way to monitor trees outside of forests globally, and to explore their role in mitigating degradation, climate change and poverty.” Keeping the planet’s arboreal accounts is key to understanding the impact trees are having on our planet’s health. If the number of trees can be mapped, so can the amount of carbon they store. The most high-profile existing world  tree map  is released annually by Global Forest Watch. Launched by the  World Resources Institute  (WRI) in 2014, it uses data from Nasa Landsat satellites (which don’t have as high resolution as commercial equivalents) to keep tabs on what it diplomatically calls “tree cover loss”. Previously, information on the changing shapes of forests was collated every five years or so by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, which had to take the numbers on trust from individual countries. The WRI’s aim was to make assessing deforestation data transparent. Weekly alerts are generated for reductions in forest size in the tropics. “Cambodia basically said they had no deforestation,” says  Fred Stolle , deputy director of WRI’s forest programme, “but there’s been so much. The car industry is getting bigger and bigger and we need tyres. Rubber grows well in the tropics and so Cambodia has an enormous amount of deforestation to plant new rubber trees.” Alerts have also appeared for Ghana, where  destruction of primary forests  jumped by 60% between 2017 and 2018 – the biggest rise anywhere in the tropics. However, there is one aspect of the WRI map that Stolle concedes means the picture is incomplete. While the satellites easily show where trees have been cut down, “new tree growth is much more difficult to see. So while Global Forest Watch sees a lot of the deforestation, it doesn’t see much of the reforestation.” Brandt expects that the higher resolution technology offered by the commercial satellites will become widely available in the coming years, helping to bridge this gap. Another organisation tracking deforestation is environmental non-profit Canopy, founded in 1999 by its now executive director, Nicole Rycroft. It traces back supply chains for companies because, Rycroft says, “there’s no need to cut down 100-year-old trees to make pizza boxes or T-shirts, or for the trees to come from land inhabited by indigenous communities”. Using information from a range of scientific sources, Canopy has packaged the raw data and satellite imagery into an interactive tool called  ForestMapper , to help companies switch to sustainable supply chains. They can scan the map, which includes information on forest carbon density, endangered species, tree loss so far and projected deforestation over the coming decade. “We’re the applied science side,” says Rycroft, “making the data user-friendly.” There’s no need to cut down 100-year-old trees to make pizza boxes or T-shirts As well as highlighting risky supply chains, Canopy helps manufacturers find more sustainable sources, including recycled fibres, “so we don’t just shift the problem from one backyard to somebody else’s”. “We work with 320-odd fashion brands,” Rycroft continues. “Including guys like H&M, Zara and Uniqlo, right down to luxury designers like Stella McCartney. And as you can imagine, there’s a wide range of motivations within those companies, but they’re all committed.” Seven years ago, she recalls, few in the industry even knew that “200m trees were disappearing into rayon and viscose every year, and some of it from orangutan and grizzly bear habitats, really high carbon forest ecosystems”. Now, she says, “52% of global viscose production is verified by ourselves as being at low risk of originating from high carbon or high biodiversity forests. There’s still 48% of the supply chain to go, but in a relatively short space of time we’ve seen the global supply chain fundamentally starting to transform how they source.” Hotspots on the map now include south-east Asia, Indonesia, Vietnam, Laos and Brazil. Working with local NGOs and campaigners, Canopy drills down into the regional detail. Some eucalyptus plantations in Indonesia, for example, are growing on high-carbon peatlands that need restoring. “And we’ve recently discovered that koala habitat in Australia has been logged for fabric production,” says Rycroft.  The same scrutiny applies to other supply chains, such as cardboard. “Which are the forests that provide the 3bn trees that disappear into food wrappings, pizza boxes or the packaging that lands on our doorsteps from e-retailers? Is it coming from a sustainably managed plantation? Is there recycled content? Or is it coming from a high-carbon value forest?” What is hardest to monitor is the illegal clearing of the vast, as yet unknown numbers of trees that exist outside forests. Brandt’s team is close to submitting another research paper for which they have scanned 10 times the area covered by their initial study. As well as forests, says Brandt, individual trees are “valuable in mitigating climate change, providing a variety of ecosystems and services to people, and until now, it was impossible to map them”. Find more  age of extinction coverage here , and follow biodiversity reporters  Phoebe Weston  and  Patrick Greenfield  on Twitter for all the latest news and features
100 days of warning: inside the Boogaloo killings of US security personnel:	One hundred days before Dave Patrick Underwood was murdered on 29 May, a group of analysts who monitor online extremism concluded that an attack like the one that killed him was coming. An anti-government movement intent on killing law enforcement officers had been growing rapidly on social media, the analysts at the Network Contagion Research Institute  warned . Building on the work of  other analysts , the   researchers had identified Facebook groups where thousands of members obsessed over the idea of an imminent American civil war called “the Boogaloo”, displaying photographs of rifles and combat equipment, sharing advice for making weapons and posting   memes about killing police and federal officials. The   Facebook groups were particularly dangerous, the researchers concluded, because they were helping to build local connections between nascent domestic extremists. The movement appeared to be successfully recruiting members of the US military. Facebook  responded  to findings that it was “studying trends” around the use of the word “Boogaloo” on its platforms, and that it would remove any content that violated its rules against inciting hatred or violence. Over the next few months, a spokesperson said, it would remove 800 individual Boogaloo-related posts that violated its policies. But it did not ban the Boogaloo movement from its platform, or take the majority of the Boogaloo groups down. Two months later, another  report  warned   of the Boogaloo movement’s “explicit threats of violence to government authorities”. There were now at least 125 Boogaloo groups on Facebook, the Tech Transparency Project said. The groups had added tens of thousands of members in the last 30 days alone, as coronavirus lockdown measures made some Americans furious about what they perceived as  government “tyranny”.  More than half of these Facebook groups had been created since February. This time, Facebook said it had removed some groups and pages that used Boogaloo-related terms for violating Facebook policies. But none of the Facebook groups explicitly mentioned in the Tech Transparency report had been taken down,  HuffPost reported , even though the online rhetoric was already translating into action: earlier in April, Texas police arrested Aaron Swenson, a man who had reportedly “liked” more than a dozen Boogaloo-related pages, and who police said had been livestreaming himself on Facebook as he  drove around looking for a cop to execute . It was just after 7am on 28 May, and Steven Carrillo, a US air force sergeant, was already awake, posting on  Facebook  about a “great opportunity” to attack federal agents, according to federal prosecutors. Carrillo, 32, was an active duty member of the air force, assigned to Travis air force base in California. Two years before, he had taken part in an intensive training session to become part of an elite air force security unit, the Phoenix Ravens, who were prepared to protect aircraft from attacks in volatile situations.  But three days after George Floyd was killed in Minneapolis, as protests against police violence spread across the country, prosecutors allege, Carrillo was preparing to put his military training to use not in protecting fellow service members, but in staging attacks against government officers. “It’s our coast now this needs to be nationwide. It’s a great opportunity to target the specialty soup bois. Keep that energy going,” Carrillo allegedly wrote on Facebook, sharing a link to a video of a crowd attacking California highway patrol officers, with two flame emojis. The “specialty soup bois”, according to the complaint,   was a phrase Boogaloo groups used to refer to federal law enforcement agents who work for agencies such as the ATF and the FBI – agencies with names that are an “alphabet soup” of acronyms. Less than 20 minutes later, another Facebook user responded. “Let’s boogie,” Robert Alvin Justus, a 30-year-old from Millbrae, California, wrote, according to prosecutors. The next morning, prosecutors allege, Carrillo posted more calls to action on Facebook. He was interested in the unfolding protests against killings of civilians by police, but he did not consider himself one of the protesters. “Go to the riots and support our own cause. Show them the real targets,” Carrillo allegedly wrote. “Use their anger to fuel our fire. Think outside the box. We have mobs of angry people to use to our advantage.” That night, 29 May, prosecutors allege, Justus met Carrillo at a Bay Area metro station, with the plan of driving together to an anti-police violence   protest in Oakland. The two men parked across from a guard post outside the federal courthouse downtown. Just two blocks away, thousands of protesters were marching and chanting on the street that led to Oakland’s police headquarters in a furious demonstration that would last until late in the night. But the guard outpost itself was modest, a nondescript structure next to a driveway in a neighborhood full of office buildings. Surveillance footage would later show Justus emerging from the van for a smoke break, then going back inside, prosecutors say. Dave Patrick Underwood was working as one of the security officers at the federal courthouse that night, as a contractor for the Department of Homeland Security. Underwood, 53, had grown up in the Bay Area. He was a former star high school athlete, with a corny sense of humor and a sharp sense of style. As an adult, he had moved in with his ageing parents to care for them. His older sister would later describe how Underwood had been with their mother as she was dying, and when she fell to the ground, he picked her up, and carried her to her bed, because he knew that was where she had wanted to die. “Patrick was a good man, who only wanted to help others and keep his community safe,” his sister, Angela Underwood Jacobs, said later. Just before 9.45pm, according to federal prosecutors, as the white van pulled away from the guard post, its side door opened, and Carrillo opened fire on the security officers   outside the courthouse. Underwood, shot multiple times, was killed. Another officer was seriously injured. Carrillo, Justus would allegedly tell investigators, had been thrilled by the shooting. “Did you see how they fucking fell?” Justus allegedly recalled him saying. The targeted attack on two federal officers in the middle of a protest against police violence sparked nationwide headlines. Underwood, who was black, was mourned. His death was also seized on as a political talking point: a black law enforcement officer had apparently become the victim of nationwide protests against law enforcement killings of black civilians. As politicians talked about Underwood’s murder and debated what it said about the Black Lives Matter movement, Justus went home, prosecutors allege. But Carrillo’s killing spree, prosecutors allege, was not finished. And he remained in contact with at least one other “Boogaloo boi”, sending him money and boasting about what he had already accomplished. Across the country, prosecutors allege, Boogaloo boys were plotting how to use the George Floyd protests to sow chaos, and posting on Facebook encouraging each other to take action. Prosecutors say that Ivan Hunter, a 26-year-old who allegedly described himself as “ the leader of the Boogaloo Bois in south Texas ”, responded to calls for action in Boogaloo Facebook discussions by driving 1,200 miles to Minneapolis and then firing an assault-style rifle into a burning police precinct on 28 May. Later, Hunter allegedly messaged Carrillo encouraging him to target police buildings during the protests, and Carrillo allegedly responded “I did better, lol,” referencing his shooting of two federal officers. In Nevada on 30 May, the day after Underwood’s killing, authorities arrested three alleged Boogaloo supporters and  later alleged  they had been plotting to set off molotov cocktails at a Black Lives Matter protest in Las Vegas, hoping to spark broader violence. Like Carrillo, all three men had  US military experience : one was an army reservist, one a navy veteran, and one an air force veteran. The day after prosecutors announced charges against the alleged Boogaloo boys in Nevada, Facebook  announced  that it was making it harder for users to search for the term Boogaloo and would no longer recommend new Boogaloo groups to users who might be interested in them, something the company had been doing previously. It still did not take the entire network of groups down. Two days after Facebook announced it would limit, but not ban, the Boogaloo movement, Carrillo would allegedly kill again. On 6 June, at 2pm in the afternoon, deputies from the Santa Cruz county sheriff’s department approached a home in Ben Lomond after a tipster had reported seeing a van filled with weapons and explosives. One of the deputies responding was  Damon Gutzwiller , 38, a father of a young toddler whose wife was pregnant with their second child. Gutzwiller had worked for the sheriff’s department since he was 24. Jim Hart, the county sheriff, would later  call him  the “picture of community policing”, a deputy who was patient and kind, and “would rather communicate his way through any problem in front of him”, instead of using force. “It wasn’t just a job. He wanted to take care of the community,” the same community where he was raising his own family, his wife, Faviola del Real, would say later. The question of what to do when law enforcement came for you at your home had been a major subject of Boogaloo discussions on Facebook. There were multiple memes inspired by “the fantasy of a lone Boogaloo holding off hordes of cops”, Alex Friedfeld, an analyst with the Anti-Defamation League’s Center on Extremism who has been monitoring the Boogaloo movement online since late 2019, said. Boogaloo Facebook groups regularly featured jokes about men filling their lawn sprinklers with gasoline to light the police on fire, he said, or stuffing a fake dog with explosives, so if police shot it as they arrived, they would trigger their own destruction. As the local deputies approached the house in Ben Lomond, prosecutors allege, Carrillo opened fire, shooting two of them. One deputy was also injured in an explosion. Gutzwiller was killed. Carrillo was shot himself, but escaped, and went on to hijack one car, then attempt to hijack another, before being arrested later that afternoon, prosecutors allege. The criminal complaint against him included a photo of the white car he had hijacked, which had slogans written on the hood, apparently with Carrillo’s own blood. One of the scrawled phrases was “BOOG”. In another van on the property where Carrillo had been hiding, investigators said they found body armor with a Boogaloo patch on it: a flag with an Igloo and Hawaiian patterned stripes, the kind of Boogaloo merchandise that had been advertised on Facebook for months. Federal prosecutors and FBI agents announced charges against Carrillo and Justus for Underwood’s murder on 16 June. “There is no evidence that these men had any intention to join the demonstration in Oakland,” the FBI special agent in charge Jack Bennett said, CBS News  reported.  “They came to Oakland to kill cops.” Later that month, on 30 June, Facebook  announced a full ban  on a network of Boogaloo groups, because of their association with real-world violence, designating them as a “ dangerous organization ” like white supremacist organizations or the Islamic State, which the company has also banned from its platform. The company said it had removed 220 Facebook accounts, 95 Instagram accounts, 28 pages and 106 groups that made up what it called the “violent” “Boogaloo”-affiliated network. It also said it took down 400 other groups and 100 pages that hosted similar content as the violent network but were maintained by accounts outside it, and that it was banning praise and support of the group on Facebook, as well as the group itself. Facebook’s takedown only happened “after there were already bodies”, Friedfeld, the Anti Defamation League analyst, said. “There were people warning them, ‘You have a huge problem,’ but it wasn’t until bodies actually dropped that they did something about it.” The Boogaloo movement is part of a broader rise in far-right extremism in the US, one that was predicted, and furiously denied by Republicans, in the  early years of the Obama presidency . Local and federal  law enforcement agencies  and the  US military  have faced criticism in recent months for doing too little to monitor and prevent the radicalization of American citizens by violent white supremacists and other domestic rightwing extremists. Social media companies, too, have faced scrutiny for allowing different strands of rightwing extremism – from the neo-Nazi and white nationalist groups that rebranded themselves as the “alt-right”, to followers of the antisemitic QAnon conspiracy theory – to flourish on their platforms, despite years of repeated warnings from researchers and journalists.  Now, in the wake of a deadly insurrection at the US Capitol, when mobs of Trump supporters, including  known extremists , invaded the building and forced terrorized lawmakers to flee, the full cost of all those choices is still being counted. But several analysts who monitor extremism say that, when it comes to the growth of the Boogaloo movement, the single organization that could have made the most difference was Facebook, because Facebook was the primary platform where the Boogaloo movement was organizing in early 2020, often in plain sight. Within weeks of publication, the lead author of the Network Contagion Research Institute Boogaloo report, Alex Goldenberg, said he had personally briefed the International Association of Chiefs of Police, as well as more than 400 military officers attending a counter-terrorism conference organized by the US army. Facebook, he said, made no contact with him at all. By the time the social media company finally disrupted the networks of Boogaloo pages and groups on its platform in late June, some experts said, it was too late: the scattered   men drawn to the idea of being soldiers in an insurgency against the American government had already connected with each other directly.  “There was a moment in time where you could have nipped this in the bud,” Friedfeld said. “Would it have stopped it entirely? No. But it would have made it harder for these networks to cohere.” In a statement, Facebook defended its policy banning dangerous organizations as “the most aggressive in the industry” and said that, as a result, it had a “high standard” for classifying groups as dangerous and banning them. Even before it banned a network of Boogaloo groups in late June, “we did a lot of disrupting work,” Facebook said, including removing individual violent posts from Boogaloo pages and groups, and proactively reporting several alleged Boogaloo Bois to law enforcement, including Ivan Hunter, the alleged Texas Boogaloo Boi, and people linked to the Michigan militia plot to kidnap the Democratic governor, Gretchen Whitmer. There were people warning them … but it wasn’t until bodies actually dropped that they did something about it The company’s Dangerous Organizations Team includes several hundred people who focus on countering dangerous organizations and studying new evolutions in threats of violence as their core responsibility, a spokesperson said, including former academics who are experts on counter-terrorism, former prosecutors and law enforcement officers, investigators, analysts and engineers. Facebook’s analysts had been closely monitoring Boogaloo activity since 2019, long before the NCRI research report came out in February, a spokesperson said. The company was already on high alert in January 2020, when a rally against gun control in Virginia drew more than  20,000 armed protesters , including some wearing  Boogaloo-themed patches , and prompted  widespread discussion of “the Boogaloo”  on social media, a spokesperson said. Facebook employees worked to identify the groups in attendance at the rally, and noted that some of those participating were already wearing the outfit that would later become recognized as the typical Boogaloo uniform. By February, Facebook had already taken down one Boogaloo Facebook group, the “Patriot Wave”, that appeared to have  members in attendance  at the Virginia rally. In addition to its own research, Facebook said it also reviewed the public reports on Boogaloo activity released in February and April, and removed some of the content mentioned in the reports. Lawyers for Carrillo and Justus declined to comment, with Justus’s lawyer noting the legal team was particularly reluctant to say anything about a pending case in which the government may seek the death penalty. Carrillo pleaded not guilty to the murders of both  Underwood  and  Gutzwiller . This summer, despite the pandemic, hundreds of people, including law enforcement leaders and politicians, showed up to mourn both Underwood and Gutzwiller at their funerals. Now, the family and friends of both men have faced the first holiday seasons suddenly without them. Underwood’s family did not respond to requests for comment. One childhood friend raised more than $10,000 on a now-concluded GoFundMe to set up a  basketball court in his memory  in Pinole, where Underwood grew up. “We are all traumatized by the way Patrick lost his life,” one  longtime friend said  at his memorial service in June. Gutzwiller’s family did not respond to a request for comment through the sheriff’s department. Current and former local law enforcement officials and friends of the family launched an education fund for the deputy’s two children that is  still accepting donations . Gutzwiller’s wife, Faviola del Real, a neonatal intensive care unit nurse, was reportedly weeks away from giving birth to their second child when he was killed this summer, and she  spoke at his funeral  in June about what a loving father he had been. “I pray for the strength to raise the amazing children he would have raised,” she said. Abené Clayton contributed reporting This article was amended on 15 January 2021. An earlier version of the headline referred to killings of law enforcement. Dave Patrick Underwood, the DHS-contracted security guard, was not a sworn member of law enforcement.
Nigeria cattle crisis: how drought and urbanisation led to deadly land grabs:	In February last year, Sunday Ikenna’s fields were green and lush. Then, one evening, a herd of cattle led into the farm by roving pastoralists crushed, ate, and uprooted the crops. “I lost everything. The situation was sorrowful, watching another human being destroy your farm,” says Ikenna, a father of 10 who farms in Ukpabi-Nimbo in Enugu state, southern  Nigeria . “I farmed a smaller portion this year because I am still scared of another invasion.” Ikenna’s experience is not an isolated event. In the past few years there have been a growing number of skirmishes between farmers and cattle herders searching for pasture and water. For many years the clashes were problematic, but the two groups usually managed to reach a mutual accommodation. But in the past two decades, the climate crisis has contributed to altering that old order, and what used to be a friendly arrangement has become a crisis marked by looting, raids, cattle rustling and premeditated killings. In 2016, Ukpabi-Nimbo, Ikenna’s community, was attacked, allegedly by cattle herders, resulting in the death of 46 people, according to one local media report. “Nimbo will never be the same after that morning,” Ikenna says of the attack. At the root of the crisis, according to experts, is Nigeria’s teeming cattle population, which has more than doubled from an  estimated  9.2 million in 1981 to  around 20 million , making it one of the world’s largest. Nigeria’s human population has grown too, to about 200 million, the highest in  Africa  by far. This has led to cities sprawling ever larger and wider, in some cases into formerly designated cattle routes and reserves. Routes that dated back to the 1950s, in line with colonial arrangements, have either been overrun or dominated by new human settlements – pushing herders further into contested territories. Grazing space that should accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more In rural communities, smallholder farmers are claiming large swathes of grazing land. “It means that grazing space, for example, that should originally accommodate only 10 cattle is now being grazed by 50 or more,” says Ifeanyi Ubah, a cattle rancher based in eastern Nigeria. Nigeria is, moreover, a crossroads for cattle from other countries: transhumance migrants from Cameroon, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad routinely pass through in search of better climate, pasture and more plentiful water. Though there are fewer than 100 official border crossings into the country, Abba Moro, an ex-government official who headed the ministry of interior, was quoted as saying that there  were more than 1,499 illegal entry routes  into the country as of 2013. Terrorist groups have become involved in the situation. Boko Haram has been accused of using money obtained from the sale of rustled cattle to fund its deadly operations. On one occasion, Boko Haram militants killed 19 herders as they attempted to steal their cattle. A rising number of attacks has led to the  reported loss  of two million cattle and the death of 600 herders, many of whom have been forced to vacate the fertile Lake Chad basin in search of new lands. But the climate crisis is the biggest factor driving tensions. Most parts of northern Nigeria have suffered severe desertification and drought. Mean annual rainfall in this region has  dropped below  600mm, compared with 3,500mm in the south coast area.  This change threatens the livelihoods of around 40 million people,  especially livestock and smallholder  farmers. Large numbers of cattle herders are being forced to move from traditional grazing areas to central and southern Nigeria when dry periods start – a situation that heightens competition and heralds more clashes. “While growing up, I saw trees, forest, rivers and streams in most parts of northern Nigeria. The grasses grew and it was more than enough for the cattle,” says Bala Ardo, one of the leaders of cattle herders in south-east Nigeria. “But it’s no more. The situation has forced the average herder to seek pasture and water in places they never would have visited in the past, as he struggles to find drinkable water for himself and family and then his animals.” The government, meanwhile, has only taken piecemeal action. In 2018, the federal government proposed  colonies for cattle  and funded grazing camps across various states in the country. But local leaders were resistant, and fears grew in the south in particular that ethnic groups such as the Muslim Fulani would use the scheme to  grab land . Some researchers  estimate  that the members of the Fulani ethnic group own 90% of Nigeria’s livestock.  As the climate crisis continues, the government has set up the National Livestock Transformation Plan, which aims to modernise the livestock sector through a series of phased interventions from 2018 to 2027. Ranches for breeding and processing will be created, and several pilot projects have already been established. But this plan, too, is encountering difficulties. According to Khalid Salisu, a journalist in one of the pilot project regions, “It doesn’t serve the needs of cattle herders adequately. The herders in the ranches are struggling to find enough water and pastures to keep their herds alive during the dry season.” In the absence of effective solutions from the central government, states and communities are proposing various remedies. In Benue state, southern Nigeria, for example, legislation in 2017 banned open cattle grazing. The law required herders to rent or buy lands to host their ranches. The heart of the problem is the need to persuade herders to give up treating land and water as a free resource. It will be difficult to persuade them to move to capital-intensive ranching, said Ubah. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved Abubakar Sambo, the leader of the northern community in Enugu state, says the herders must be consulted before fresh initiatives are launched. “The policies received by cattle herders largely on radio and television cannot work. The herdsmen, for whom the policies are meant, should be directly involved.” He believes younger herders need to be educated and sent to study model ranching systems in other countries. “What the herders have achieved [cattle population growth] despite all the challenges is remarkable. It shows the huge potential of the livestock sector,” says Ardo. “Imagine what the result could be if the government put the right structure and policies in place.” Sign up for the  Animals farmed monthly update  to get a roundup of the best farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at  animalsfarmed@theguardian.com
Bobi Wine says soldiers have stormed his home as Uganda counts vote:	Soldiers have stormed the home of  Bobi Wine , the Ugandan opposition leader has said, as votes continued to be counted in the country’s election. “We are under siege,” the pop star turned politician  tweeted . “The military has jumped over the fence and has now taken control of our home.” President Yoweri Museveni has taken an early lead as votes are counted in Uganda’s  most keenly watched election in years , while opposition figures said the vote had been marred by fraud and violence. With a third of the votes counted, Museveni had more than 65% of the tallied ballots and was ahead of Wine in almost every region. Wine, one of 10 opposition challengers, had gained about a quarter of the vote, according to Uganda’s electoral body. Lt Col Deo Akiiki, Uganda’s deputy military spokesperson, said the soldiers were at Wine’s house to protect him. “As presidential candidate, do you want his security to be compromised? It’s not a deployment to arrest him. Its a deployment to keep his security like any other presidential candidate has. It’s a simple as that.” Wine, who has galvanised a mass movement of young people challenging the president’s 34-year rule, said at a press conference on Friday morning that Ugandans should reject the results.  “I am very confident that we defeated the dictator by far,” he said. “The people of  Uganda  voted massively for change of leadership from a dictatorship to a democratic government. But Mr Museveni is trying to paint a picture that he is in the lead.” Results are expected to be announced by Saturday. A candidate must win more than 50% to avoid a runoff vote. Helicopters and tanks were on patrol as millions went to the polls on Thursday following one of the most turbulent and violent election campaigns. Wine’s rejection of the results could prolong heightened tensions in the east African country. Security forces loyal to Museveni  violently suppressed opposition supporters  during the campaign. Museveni’s bid for a sixth term in power was only made possible when MPs changed the constitution to remove age limits. He has repeatedly accused Wine of being a foreign-backed “traitor”, while Wine has branded him a “dictator”. Many in  Africa  see the challenge to Museveni, who at 76 is twice as old as Wine, as emblematic of a continent-wide generational struggle between ageing leaders who refuse to relinquish power and younger voters mobilising against them. The charismatic Wine has the backing of many young people in Uganda – where the median age is 15.7 – who are drawn to his anti-establishment message. Many observers have expressed fears of state-backed moves to prevent transparency during the polls. On Wednesday night internet access was cut off for most users in the east African country, though some have used VPNs to communicate online. Uganda’s electoral commission said the lack of internet access had not affected the tallying of the count from around the country. After polls closed on Thursday, hundreds of Wine supporters in Kampala returned to their polling stations to heed his call to “protect the vote” by watching the count. At the station where Wine had voted, security forces chased his supporters away. Isabella Akiteng, a civil society activist, said late on Thursday that she and 29 others who were observing the polls had been arrested at a hotel in Kampala and were being interrogated by police. On Wednesday, the US and EU said they would not observe the elections, after several officials were denied accreditation. Peter Mwesigye, director of the Africa Media Centre of Excellence, said it would take time to determine the extent of voter fraud and violence at the polls. “We know definitely there have been credible reports of fraud, but it’s going to be much harder and it will take many more days for us to begin to get the sense and scope of it,” he said. “The shutdown of the internet robbed the process of transparency that is required of an election. It has basically been an environment that doesn’t qualify for one to call it a free and fair election.” Lina Zedriga, deputy president of Wine’s National Unity Platform for northern Uganda, said it would use all non-violent means to challenge the result. “It’s a mess. We have witnessed yet another false and great sham election […] They are just alleging and creating their own results. “We are calling upon our supporters to be calm. They want us to provoke and make us violent. We are non-violent people. We will definitely use all non-violent means possible that is going to be discussed by our legal teams.”
UK records 1,248 deaths – as it happened:	We’ve launched a new blog at the link below – head there for the latest:  The hospital system in the Amazon city of Manaus is collapsing from a second wave of Covid-19 and it is running out of oxygen , Brazilian health minister Eduardo Pazuello has said. Speaking on a webcast with president  Jair Bolsonaro  at his side, Pazuello said the city’s hospitals were short of medical staff as deaths surge again.  Amazonas state has appealed to the United States to send a military transport plane with oxygen cylinders. Here’s a quick recap of the latest coronavirus developments across the globe over the last few hours: Britain reported 1,248 new deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test on Thursday, down from a record high of more than 1,500 the previous day.  The number of people in the UK to have been given a first dose of a Covid-19 vaccine as of 13 January is 2,918,252, according to Public Health England, a rise of 278,943 from the figures published on Wednesday. A total of 437,977 people have received a second dose in the UK as of January 13, a rise of 9,745 from the previous day, PHE added. Earlier in the day, a number of NHS staff gathered outside Downing Street to protest over the government’s handling of the pandemic. Wearing PPE and carrying a sign which read “You failed the public, you failed the NHS, Boris must go”, the five campaigners arrived at 8pm, the scheduled start time of the Clap For Heroes. Nobody was heard clapping along Whitehall in the heart of Westminster as one nurse told reporters: “The situation in hospitals is so severe, we are stretched across all ICUs.” ICU nurse Ameera Sheikh told reporters: “It’s been very difficult, very challenging. “We’re stressed out and very anxious, there’s a lot of PTSD amongst staff, staff are going off sick ... leaving nurses very short, which increases the risk of patients deteriorating and ultimately patients dying. “This is the government’s fault, they need to take responsibility, they need to provide us with better pay and better working conditions.” As the first groups from Central America reached the Guatemalan border as part of a caravan aiming to reach the United States , regional governments are using coronavirus measures as the latest tool to curtail migration. Small groups of migrants arrived in the  Honduran  border town of   Corinto  on Thursday afternoon, where they were stopped by police demanding negative coronavirus tests, according to local media. Hundreds more have amassed outside the bus terminal in San Pedro Sula in advance of the caravan’s formal departure on Friday morning, according to footage from local television outlets. Guatemala ,  Honduras ,  El Salvador  and  Mexico  issued a joint declaration earlier this week imposing coordinated health measures to deter migration, including requirements to produce negative coronavirus tests at border checkpoints. The tightening by Mexican and Central American authorities, coupled with pandemic-linked US border restrictions in place since March, represent a sweeping effort to use public health regulations to deter movement along one of the world’s busiest migration routes at a time when a fierce second wave of coronavirus is sweeping the region. In Mexico, the pandemic has killed nearly 137,000 people and the capital’s hospitals are spiking with Covid-19 cases. This week’s caravan, slated to depart  Honduras  on Friday, would be the first of the year and comes six days before US president-elect Joe Biden takes office. Yet, Central American and Mexican authorities are stepping up efforts to stop migrants well before the US border, which will likely be a relief for Biden, whose aides have privately expressed concerns about the prospect of growing numbers of migrants seeking to enter the US in the early days of his administration. On Thursday,  Guatemala  cited the pandemic in order to declare emergency powers in seven Guatemalan border provinces migrants frequently transit through en route to the Mexican border. The measures limit public demonstrations and allow authorities to disperse any public meeting, group or demonstration by force. Honduras and Guatemala have announced they will deploy thousands of soldiers to preemptively stop caravan members not complying with health regulations, while Mexico deployed agents to the border with Guatemala. In online forums, migrants hoping to join the caravan expressed concern on Thursday about the crackdown, with some suggesting searching for “blind points” where they could cross the borders undetected by authorities. Central America is reeling from economic crises, high rates of violence, and the devastating fallout of two major hurricanes that battered the region in November. “We barely have food to eat, how do they think we are going to pay for these (coronavirus) tests?” said 29-year-old Ulises Santos from El Salvador, who is hoping to join the caravan. Migration experts say the public health measures are part of a broader effort by Central American and Mexican authorities, under pressure from Washington, to stop migrants before they reach US territory. “The US border is moving further and further south,” said renowned Honduran human rights activist  Ismael Moreno . “The goal (of local police) is to stop migrants, whether through repression, threats, extortion, or requirements to present a Covid-19 test.”  The Gambia has registered two cases of a British-identified coronavirus mutation which is likely more infectious , the tiny West African state’s government said. Gambian health minister  Ahmadou Samateh  told lawmakers the strain was detected in two people entering the country - both of whom were asymptomatic. “People coming from 20 hot-spot countries, like the UK, Spain, France and Sweden must face another test because we have detected the new variant,” he said. “This one transmits faster”. Coronavirus  variant B117 likely emerged in southeastern England in September, according to  Imperial College London . The  World Health Organization  says it has already spread to 50 countries worldwide. This strain is believed to be more easily transmissible because of a mutation of the spike protein, the part of the virus which latches on to human cells. A former British colony of some two million people, The Gambia is the smallest country on mainland  Africa . Health officials in the poor nation have registered 3,890 coronavirus cases to date, with over 125 fatalities. Samateh said the government was engaged in “initial talks” to procure a consignment of Covid-19 vaccines, which it expects to acquire in several months. Turkey has vaccinated more than 285,000 people  as it began administering Covid-19 shots developed by China’s Sinovac Biotech to health workers on Thursday.  President  Tayyip Erdoğan  also received his first dose of the vaccine in Ankara. He urged political leaders and lawmakers to endorse the inoculation process and called on Turks not to heed criticism of the vaccine. Health minister  Fahrettin Koca  also urged citizens to get vaccinated as soon as their turn came, saying it was the “most important way” to beat the pandemic. At a research hospital in Istanbul, 30 clinics were set up to administer the vaccine. Health workers were given a first dose, with a second to be given 28 days later. Surgeon general  Nurettin Yiyit  said the hospital could vaccinate around 1,800 people a day and that its 3,500 staff, including nurses and janitors, could be vaccinated in two days. As of 8.32pm, Turkey had vaccinated 285,940 people, according to health ministry data. Asked about the rapid pace of the vaccinations, Turkey’s health ministry said vaccines had been distributed across the country at the start of the week and distribution from provincial storage centres had taken place overnight, after emergency authorisation for the vaccinations was granted. Seriously ill Covid patients are being transferred from overstretched UK capital London hospitals to intensive care units almost 300 miles away in Newcastle , the Guardian can reveal. The crisis engulfing the capital’s hospitals is so severe that in recent days patients have also been moved 67 miles to  Northampton , 125 miles to  Birmingham  and 167 miles to  Sheffield . NHS England has told hospitals in the north of England, the Midlands and other areas to open up hundreds of extra ICU beds to take patients from London, the south-east and east, where the new variant has pushed Covid hospital admissions to new levels. It is the latest dramatic illustration of the increasingly difficult situation confronting the health service. Hospitals across the UK are battling to provide care for 36,489 people with Covid, an increase of 5,872 in seven days. There were a further 48,682 confirmed cases reported on Thursday but Public Health England said that UK deaths data had been delayed due to a “processing issue”. The number of people who have received a Covid-19 vaccine in Israel has passed the two million threshold, with the prime minister saying there was “light at the end of the tunnel”. Israel “will become the first country to emerge from the corona crisis,” prime minister  Benjamin Netanyahu  said. “I am the second millionth,” to be vaccinated in Israel, read a sign held by 22-year-old Margaret Alsoso as she received her first dose of the vaccine in the city of  Ramla near Tel Aviv . Netanyahu - who faces yet another re-election contest and a corruption trial over the coming weeks - has sought to highlight his personal role in the inoculation campaign. The prime minister was the first to get the jab on 19 December, when Israel launched its inoculation campaign with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. In early January authorities said two million people would receive a two-dose Covid-19 vaccine by the end of the month. As of Thursday only 150,000 people had received their two doses. But as Israel pushes ahead aggressively with its vaccination drive, it is also witnessing a surge in the pandemic with some 9,000 coronavirus cases registered daily. The country, currently in its third national lockdown, has recorded more than 523,000 cases, including around 3,850 deaths, according to the health ministry. On Thursday, Netanyahu urged Israelis to respect lockdown restrictions. Amnesty International has called on Israel to provide coronavirus vaccine doses to Palestinians in the occupied  West Bank  and  Gaza , saying the Jewish state is obliged to do so under international law. As coronavirus continues to tear across the US without any sign of slowing down, officials have warned there is a “full resurgence” in most major population centres – and that the country could see an additional 92,000 deaths in less than a month. There have been more than 23m confirmed Covid-19 cases in the US and 385,503 deaths, Johns Hopkins University’s most recent data  revealed . White House coronavirus taskforce reports from 10 January, obtained by  CNN , said they were seeing a “full resurgence” of the virus in “nearly all metro areas” and advocated for “aggressive action”. The report, which is sent to states, suggested measures such as using “two or three-ply and well-fitting” masks, enforcing “strict” social distancing” and more aggressively testing young adults. Officials worried that there was “significant, continued deterioration from  California  across the Sunbelt and up into the south-east, mid-Atlantic and north-east”. These regions effectively comprise all of the continental US. The reports were quoted as stating that there was a “clear continuation of the pre-holiday high rate of spread as measured by rising test positivity, increased cases, increased hospitalization rates and rising fatalities”. Additional date compiled by the New York Times indicate that a record number of deaths almost daily in the US largely stems from skyrocketing cases in California and  Arizona . In  Los Angeles  county, there is a Covid-19 death every eight minutes. Chilean authorities remain confident in a vaccine developed by China’s Sinovac despite jitters elsewhere , after researchers in Brazil said its efficacy was lower than initially suggested. Rodrigo Yañez , the Chilean trade undersecretary tasked with procuring Covid vaccines for the country, said Chile’s health regulator was assessing all the available data and would announce its decision on an emergency roll-out for the inoculation soon. He said vaccines would serve their critical purpose if they helped diminish severe symptoms, hospitalisations and deaths. This week, researchers in  Brazil  released late-stage trial clinical data showing the Sinovac vaccine was 50.4% effective at preventing symptomatic infections, including “very mild” cases. The previous week they said the vaccine, called CoronaVac, showed 78% efficacy against “mild-to-severe” cases. “The numbers in Brazil are good though they could be misleading in terms of focusing only on the 50% because the target is to avoid people filling the hospitals and fatalities,” he told Reuters. “It should be very effective with the more severe symptoms of the disease, provided that the clinical data supports what was announced this week.” Chile paid $3.5m to host a clinical trial of the vaccine and has also ordered 60m doses to be administered to its population of 18 million over three years. The country’s regulator sent two inspectors to the Sinovac factory in  Beijing  in November ahead of the expected arrival of the first doses in Chile in mid-January. Chile has already started vaccinating its health workers using a Pfizer developed shot and its regulator is also weighing approval of AstraZeneca’s for emergency use. The disappointing Brazilian efficacy news prompted  Malaysia  and  Singapore , which also have purchase agreements with Sinovac, to say on Wednesday that they would seek more data from the Chinese firm on efficacy rates before they approved and bought supplies. Sinovac vaccination campaigns are  already underway in  Indonesia  and  Turkey , with Turkish president  Tayyip Erdoğan  receiving the jab on Thursday. Yañez told Reuters the Chilean Public Health Institute would look at the data from Brazil as well as Turkey and Indonesia, which reported efficacy of 91.25% and 65.3% efficacy respectively based on interim trial data. He said Sinovac’s vaccine wasn’t the only one which has raised doubts, pointing to experts in Australia who had questioned whether herd immunity could be achieved from the 62% efficacy reported for the AstraZeneca vaccine. “The common flu vaccine is between 50% and 60% effective - we run massive vaccination campaigns with those levels of efficacy,” he said. “We are in a position where we need to put a stop to the more severe impact of Covid-19. No vaccine so far is capable of proving that it also stops infections spreading. At the end of the day all of them are more or less efficient in helping you avoid the impact.” The US tennis player Tennys Sandgren has arrived in Melbourne after Tennis Australia reportedly intervened so he could board a charter flight despite testing positive for coronavirus . In a series of tweets on Thursday, Australian time, Sandgren initially suggested he would not be able to board the flight for the  Australian Open , writing “Covid positive over thanksgiving” and “Covid positive on Monday”. Later, Sandgren, a quarter-finalist at last year’s open, added it appeared he would able to board the chartered flight before lauding the Tennis Australia chief executive,  Craig Tiley , as a “wizard”. “Wow I’m on the plane. Maybe I just held my breath too long,” he said in a tweet. He then explained his first positive test was in November and he was now “totally recovered”. “I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point.” A lot couch virologists out there. My two tests were less than 8 weeks a part. I was sick in November, totally healthy now. There’s not a single documented case where I would be contagious at this point. Totally recovered! The Australian Open suggested Victorian health authorities had given Sandgren the all-clear to fly. The tournament’s official Twitter account said people who had recovered and were “non-infectious can continue to shed the virus for several months”. “Victorian government public health experts assess each case based on additional detailed medical records to ensure they are not infectious before checking in to the charter flights,” the Australian Open said. “Players and their teams are tested every day from their arrival in Australia, a much stricter process than for anyone else in hotel quarantine.” A group representing major US airlines has backed president-elect Joe Biden’s plan to mandate facial coverings for all air passengers , but asked him to lift it once the coronavirus pandemic ends and give them flexibilities in enforcing it. Airlines for America , which represents American Airlines, Delta Air Lines, United Airlines and others, asked Biden in a letter seen by Reuters to “allow air carriers to maintain their existing policies and practices which are aimed at de-escalating conflict in-flight and allowing the aircraft to continue while providing a consequential enforcement backstop on the ground”. Twitter has lifted restrictions briefly imposed on the official account promoting the Russian Sputnik V Covid-19 vaccine. The account was restricted for around an hour earlier in the day with a notice saying Twitter had seen “some unusual activity” on the page. “This account was temporarily locked in error by an automated spam filter. This action has been reversed and the account is now fully operational,” Twitter said in a statement. The Sputnik V account said that, according to an explanation from Twitter, the brief shut down was due to “a possible security breach from Virginia, USA”. The account did not provide any further details. 
Help us document the US healthcare workers who die fighting coronavirus:	Lost on the frontline is a project by  the Guardian  and  Kaiser Health News  that aims to document the life of every healthcare worker in the US who dies from Covid-19 during the pandemic. From doctors to hospital cleaners, and from nursing home aides to paramedics, this project will capture the diverse range of frontline health workers risking their lives to help others in this fight. You can read more about the project  here  . If you know a healthcare worker who has died from Covid-19, we’d like you to share their story. We are specifically documenting workers who were exposed while treating or caring for patients with Covid-19 during the pandemic, or were exposed because they worked at a medical facility serving Covid-19 patients. These include but are not limited to: Doctors Nurses Paramedics and EMTs Medical technicians Pharmacists Home health aides Nursing home staff Respiratory therapists Mental health workers Medical administrators Environmental services staff Food service workers or cleaning crews at medical facilities Porters who transport patients While we can’t profile everyone in depth, our goal is to mark every death we can. You can get in touch by filling in the form below (or if you’re viewing this on Apple News  please click here instead ). Your responses are secure, as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian and its partner journalists at Kaiser Health News have access to your contributions. Kaiser Health are expert and independent journalists covering health care. One of our journalists who is working on the Lost on the frontline project will be in touch before we publish, so please provide contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form,  click here . Read terms of service  here .
Vaccine scepticism in France reflects 'dissatisfaction with political class’:	I n  France , every child is now obliged to have 11 vaccinations. If parents want their children to attend school, or take part in many extracurricular activities, they must accept. There is no opt-out or concessions made to vaccine doubters. On Monday France’s government and health authorities are speeding up the country’s Covid-19 vaccine drive – a process complicated by widespread scepticism about the inoculation that has encompassed the usual global conspiracy theories. For weeks, polls have suggested up to 60% of French citizens do not wish to be vaccinated. As the government’s vaccine operation enters its third week,  official figures  show that as of Saturday at least 93,000 people had been given the jab – a much lower number than elsewhere in Europe, including the UK, Germany and Italy.  Laurent-Henri Vignaud, a science historian whose 2019 book  Antivax,  co-written with immunology specialist Françoise Salvadori, examines vaccine scepticism in the west since the 18th century, says we should not heed polls suggesting the French will refuse the vaccine. “There’s a very big difference between what the French say and what they do,” he told the Guardian. “And polls whose methodology and questions can seem abstract do not reflect what happens when people know where they will have the vaccine, what it does, the how, when and why.” Vaccine doubters have existed as long as vaccines , but for years polls have suggested France has more than most of its European neighbours – an odd reputation given that immunology pioneer Louis Pasteur was French and is a figure of fierce national pride. Prof Jocelyn Raude, an expert on health behaviour at the École des Hautes Études en Santé Publique who has studied the anti-vaccine movement, says that as recently as 2005 polls showed 90% support for vaccines, “which seems incredible today”. However, by the turn of the 21st century the seeds of doubt had already been sown. In the 1990s, a mass campaign to vaccinate French children against hepatitis B coincided with a jump in multiple sclerosis cases, though studies never found a convincing link between the two.  In 1991, there was a medical scandal not linked to vaccines specifically when it was discovered that health authorities had knowingly distributed blood products contaminated with HIV to haemophiliacs in the 1980s. Several ministers were later charged with manslaughter. However, Raude said it was the 2009 H1N1 scandal, in which the government massively overordered 94m vaccine doses at a cost of €869m (£780m), that fuelled today’s vaccine scepticism. The health ministry later cancelled more than half the order but the damage was done. Opposition parties criticised the waste of public money and accused officials of being in league with big pharma. In the end, 323 people in France died of H1N1, only 6m people were vaccinated and 19m vaccine doses were destroyed. An official estimate put the cost of the debacle at €382m. Raude says the scepticism was amplified when some high-profile French celebrities began expressing vaccine doubts, relayed by newly emerging social media networks. Then came the  Mediator scandal . The diabetic drug, widely but wrongly prescribed to those seeking to lose weight, was linked to between 500 and 1,200 deaths over more than three decades. Mediator’s manufacturer, Servier, was accused of charges including manslaughter, and 12 people ended up in the dock in a criminal trial last year, including officials who were also paid as consultants of pharmaceutical companies. The company and the individuals charged deny wrongdoing. Judgment is expected in March. “It was a tipping point. The Mediator scandal validated in people’s minds the idea of corruption between officials and pharmaceutical companies in France; that it was about business not health safety,” Raude says. Another cause, he says, is the lack of confidence in doctors and scientists. “It’s not new for the French to lack confidence in political leaders, but there is a low level of confidence in the medical authorities in France. The effect of this is if you don’t trust the experts, you don’t follow their advice.” Vignaud says vaccine scepticism is less against the vaccine itself than those promoting it, reflecting  a distrust of “politicians , high-profile doctors and experts and journalists”. “France doesn’t have any more hard and fast anti-vaxxers than anywhere else, what it does have is … a certain dissatisfaction with the political class,” he says. “There is a strong expectation of the state, but we are permanently disappointed: we see this with the vaccine programme: some say it’s too slow, others it’s too fast. Everyone is disappointed.” The  film Hold-Up , a much lampooned and debunked epic claiming Covid-19 is a global conspiracy, has compounded the mistrust and been been shared by influential figures. Among those trying to combat the disinformation with facts and humour is the Facebook site  Les Vaxxeuses . “Vaccines are the biggest medical advance … don’t let lies make you doubt the benefits,” the website says. Over the weekend anti-vaccination proponents were dealt a blow when the far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed course and said she would agree to receive a Covid jab, having previously voiced her opposition. Ministers are confident France’s vaccine programme will catch up in the coming weeks, insisting it is “a marathon, not a sprint”. “Once access to the vaccine becomes a reality people will have the vaccine. They have had enough,” Vignaud says. Raude agrees the government’s “slow steps” strategy appears to be working. “The  government has been slow and careful  so as not to frighten people … when French people see the benefits, they will do it.”
Sri Lanka v England: first Test, day three – as it happened:	Joe Root is giving an interview.  “Very pleasing, to be in this position after losing the toss.” What was the key to his double hundred?   “Being clear how I wanted to play, having a clear method for each individual bowler.”  Has he changed anything since last year? “Yes, quite a few things. Tried to get more rhythm into my batting, find triggers, things I can do when the bowler’s running in that might give me a bit of rhythm. And just trying to clear my mind of everything other than that next ball.”  Who’s he been working with? “Actually spent a lot of time with myself,” he says, looking mildly sheepish. So have we all, Joe. “That’s been the advantage of [Covid], so much time to look back at things, watch cricket around the world – some of the best players, Kane [Williamson] at the minute, playing unbelievably well, watching how he plays and goes about things. You’ve got to learn off your peers and advance your game.”  He mentions the England coaches too – “Jacques Kallis, Paul Collingwood, Graham Thorpe on a regular basis” – and then he deflects the spotlight onto the team. “It won’t mean half as much if we don’t get anything out of this game.” The interviewer wonders if he’s going to have an ice bath, like the bowlers. Root chuckles. “A little bit stiff and sore... but it’s a great stiff and sore.” A great stiff and sore: what more can we ask?  Thanks for your company and correspondence, and those glimpses of the OBO world from Finland to Naples. The match report will be here shortly, and I’ll see you dark and early, at 4.15am tomorrow UK time, for the fourth day’s play. The umpires have called it a day. A day that belonged to Sri Lanka, which says a lot for their character. They took England’s last six wickets for a hundred – in fact for 49 as Jos Buttler fell for 30 and the tail failed to wag. Joe Root went serenely on to 228, and his excellence has been the difference between the two sides.  Sri Lanka could easily have folded again under the weight of a 286-run lead. Instead they’ve shown all the grit that went missing on day one, with Kusal Perera batting on after taking a nasty blow on the hand from Mark Wood, and Lahiru Thirimanne making a Zen-like 76 not out. On a turning pitch, they’ve given themselves an outside chance of turning the tables. England’s spinners have been ordinary, and Stuart Broad merely miserly. It’s not quite game on yet, but it’s not game over either. “Sir Lord,”  says the subject line from Max Harrison.   “It would be worth hauling Botham’s rear end out of the unelected Lords by his ermine, just to see the look on his face, if nothing else.” Personally, I’d like to go back in time and ask the young Botham – pint in one hand, roll-up in the other, not necessarily tobacco – what he makes of the idea. I like to think he’d laugh and say, “They won’t ask, and even if they do, I won’t say yes.” It’s not dark everywhere.  “Writing from a sun-kissed Naples,” says Colum Fordham, “although Vesuvius has a smattering of snow and looks rather gorgeous. I think that England have got the right balance with the quicks. After all, Wood’s bouncer intimidated Perera, which indirectly led to his demise at the hands of Curran who invariably conjures up a wicket out of nothing. Broad is undroppable and bowling with miserly precision and guile. So unfortunately, Anderson has to rest on the sidelines.  “On the spin front, Leach and Bess are doing their best but Leach is out of sorts and only just beginning to create problems for the batsmen and Bess is a work in progress. I think Moeen is our best spinner for the Ashes, with back-up from Root.” Yes, he’s England’s best spinner when fit and well, but maybe not in Australia, where his record is awful. I’m with Nasser Hussain: somehow, England need to persuade Adil Rashid that this could be his moment. They may have to send Moeen round with some DVDs of movies about cops coming out of retirement for one last case. And they’re off. Frustrating as it is, there’s been more play today than the forecast led us to expect.  61st over: Sri Lanka 156-2 (Thirimanne 75, Embuldeniya 0)  A nightwatchman has come out, and Thirimanne makes use of him by taking a single off Bess’s second ball. England have more men round the bat, at last, but the umpires are looking at the skies again... 60th over: Sri Lanka 155-2 (Thirimanne 75, Embuldeniya 0)  Reward for sheer perseverance for Leach, who now has one for 67 off 20 overs. For Mendis, after four ducks, making 15 was a minor triumph, a display of bloodymindedness. He faced 65 balls and played his part in a stand of 54.  That’s more like it! Leach produces the slow left-armer’s dream ball, pitching on middle-and-off, kicking and turning, and Mendis, pushing forward, can only glove it to Jos Buttler, who takes a sharp catch. A breakthrough made in Somerset. 59th over: Sri Lanka 155-1 (Thirimanne 75, Mendis 15)  A maiden from Wood. Does he think he’s Stuart Broad? 58th over: Sri Lanka 155-1 (Thirimanne 75, Mendis 15)  No such alarms for Sri Lanka, who treat this ball just like the last one and pick up a single off Leach, a nurdle by Thirimanne. The skies are darkening, so we may not get the 15 overs that are officially remaining. A tweet from Daniel Forman. “Your OBO [32nd over] just sent me on an Ezra Moseley research trip, by which I mean I looked at his  wiki . The only West Indian rebel tourist to get a later Test cap, I learned.” And Gooch, whose hand Moseley broke with that fateful ball, had been a rebel tourist too. Is there no honour among thieves? England convince the umpires that the ball has gone out of shape. When this happened in their innings this morning, it prompted two wickets in two balls – Buttler and Curran. 57th over: Sri Lanka 154-1 (Thirimanne 74, Mendis 15)  Realising that something must be done, Root summons Wood, the only real fast bowler in the match. He bangs it in from round the wicket, but Mendis is unruffled. Willing as ever, Wood also brings his signature move, hurling himself to the ground on delivering the ball. That’s what I call going flat out.  56th over: Sri Lanka 153-1 (Thirimanne 73, Mendis 15)  Mendis spots an arm ball from Leach and works it away for two. England’s most consistent spinner today has been Root. 55th over: Sri Lanka 151-1 (Thirimanne 73, Mendis 13)  To bowl one full toss can happen to anyone. To bowl two in two overs looks like carelessness. Bess emulates Leach and Thirimanne helps himself to three. When he adds a clip for two, it’s the  fifty partnership . Sri Lanka now have three of them in the match, the same as England, and they’re still 135 behind. The difference between the sides has been Root’s appetite for runs. 54th over: Sri Lanka 145-1 (Thirimanne 68, Mendis 12)  Leach does now have someone in at short leg – who won’t thank him for the first ball of this over, a full toss. It’s asking to be bludgeoned for four, and Mendis is happy to oblige. Double figures! He should be raising his bat. 53rd over: Sri Lanka 139-1 (Thirimanne 67, Mendis 8)  Bess is bowling round the wicket, into what should be the potholes at the other end, but nobody has told Thirimanne, who plays an effortless cover drive. Gotta take the smooth with the rough.  52nd over: Sri Lanka 136-1 (Thirimanne 63, Mendis 8)  Ah, I take it back, Leach was just changing ends. Mendis gives what might well be a bat-pad chance to short leg, if there was anybody round the bat. Good captaincy to keep Leach on, not so good to show so little faith in him with the field. 51st over: Sri Lanka 135-1 (Thirimanne 63, Mendis 7)  Just when he was finding himself, Leach is taken off. Back comes Dom Bess, to see if he can muster the outrageous fortune that brought him five wickets on the first day. Not yet, he can’t. 50th over: Sri Lanka 134-1 (Thirimanne 63, Mendis 6)  Broad carries on joining the dots. He’s trying to frustrate the batsmen out, but the Sri Lankans are not for boring. And that’s  drinks , with England finally making the breakthrough thanks to Sam Curran’s golden arm, but Sri Lanka still having a very good day. Hell, even Kusal Mendis has made a run. “Curran in a homage to Botham?” splutters Phil Withall on Twitter, picking up on the wicket at 10:02. “Can we expect him to go the full long-walking, wine-glass-dipping, Brexit-supporting, knighthood-receiving homage or just the one delivery?” Ha. Not just a knighthood, a peerage. That’s how sane and sensible Brexit Britain is. 49th over: Sri Lanka 134-1 (Thirimanne 63, Mendis 6)  Another top edge off Leach as Mendis plays a conventional sweep, but there’s nobody on the 45 and the ball just lollops onto the grass. Mendis celebrates with a cut for two, his first hint of aggression.  48th over: Sri Lanka 130-1 (Thirimanne 62, Mendis 3)  A maiden from Broad, who doesn’t quite have a banana on his head, but definitely has a good head on his shoulders. His figures are magnificently Broadish: 7-5-3-0. 47th over: Sri Lanka 130-1 (Thirimanne 62, Mendis 3)  Mendis is beaten by an even better delivery from Leach: the ball grips, the batsman gropes. Just when he might have been taken off, Leach is locating his mojo.  “Broad bandana,” goes the subject line from Garry Sharp. “It’s famously well known that, if there were no D in the alphabet, Edward Woodward would be Ewar Woowar. But nobody has spotted that, also, Mr Broad would be wearing a piece of soft fruit on his head. I felt it important that this be mentioned. Thanks for the great coverage.” Our pleasure – thank you for the entertaining emails. The ump was spot-on – it was a good ball, but it was missing the leg bail. Leach thinks this one is turning into leg stump. The ump thinks it’s doing too much. I can see both sides. 46th over: Sri Lanka 128-1 (Thirimanne 61, Mendis 3)  Broad concedes a run! A tuck off the pads by Thirimanne. Broad is holding the ball delicately, in his fingertips, to stop it getting sweaty, a sure sign that England are yearning for some reverse swing. If it comes, Wood could be lethal.  45th over: Sri Lanka 127-1 (Thirimanne 60, Mendis 3)  Thirimanne reverse-sweeps Leach again and gets a top edge, but escapes as the ball lands safely in no-man’s-land.   Meanwhile Mendis summons the 12th man, who brings him a drink and what looks like a painkiller. He hasn’t batted for this long for ages – he’s probably aching all over. 44th over: Sri Lanka 123-1 (Thirimanne 57, Mendis 2)  Curran comes off after doing his job as the partnership-breaker, and here’s Stuart Broad. Bandana? Check. Line’n’length? Check. Maiden? Check. “Hi Tim,” says Ian Wilson. “It’s actually sun shining here in Side, Turkey, after a bit of rain yesterday.” Enviable. “I just don’t understand the logic that separates Broad and Anderson in this match. On this surface Anderson’s guile would be a far better bet than Wood’s pure pace and given the fact that England are going to be using the spinning team most of the innings, both Broad and Anderson would get plenty of rest between spells.” They would, but I thought England got this one right. Anderson bowled 41 overs last time they were in Sri Lanka and took one wicket.  43rd over: Sri Lanka 123-1 (Thirimanne 57, Mendis 2)  Leach continues, and he still can’t find the control that spinners expect on a turning pitch. Thirimanne reverse-sweeps him for four. Leach bounces back by turning one past Mendis’s outside edge, but his figures, 12-0-48-0, confirm that he hasn’t been himself today.  42nd over: Sri Lanka 118-1 (Thirimanne 52, Mendis 2)  Thirimanne flicks Curran for three to reach a patient  fifty  off 128 balls. And then he’s  dropped  in the gully by Dom Sibley – a loose guide that went at a very catchable height. Root covers his face in his hands, turning himself into an emoji. 41st over: Sri Lanka 113-1 (Thirimanne 48, Mendis 1)  When you’ve reached a milestone like that, it’s only human to relax. Mendis misses his next sweep and there’s an appeal for LBW that looks good to me, but England don’t review. Off his seventh delivery, Mendis sweeps Leach, very carefully, and this time there is a single. His Olympic dream has died, but he’ll always have his Audi. 40th over: Sri Lanka 111-1 (Thirimanne 47, Mendis 0)  Thirimanne tucks Curran for the most comfortable of fours. Since Perera was out, he has taken over as the main man, in his quiet way. The deficit is down to a mere 175. Here’s Brad McMillan. “Having followed the OBO on my phone since waking at 6am, I finally crawled out of bed just now and, coffee in hand and settled on the sofa, the very first ball I saw on the TV coverage was the wicket. Rest assured I won’t be moving from this spot for the next few hours.” 39th over: Sri Lanka 107-1 (Thirimanne 43, Mendis 0)  Thirimanne sweeps Leach for four before taking the single England want so they can get at Mendis. Can he go from an Audi to the Olympics? His eyes are on stalks, understandably, and Leach is making him play. Block, block, sweep – but it’s not getting past the man behind square. The tension is delicious. 38th over: Sri Lanka 102-1 (Thirimanne 37, Mendis 0)  In comes Kusal Mendis, who should be driven to the middle in an Audi – his last four Test innings have gone 0, 0, 0, 0. History is beckoning to him: one more duck and he’ll be the first specialist batsman to get five ducks in a row in 143 years of Test cricket. He makes things happen! Curran bowls a long hop outside off, possibly a homage to Ian Botham, and Perera slaps it straight to Leach at wide third man. That’s the end of a fine innings, and a brave one.  37th over: Sri Lanka 100-0 (K Perera 62, Thirimanne 37)  Leach troubles Perera, finding an edge and a glove, twice (ouch), but among the false shots there’s a very classy one, the finest of glances, which bisects leg slip and the keeper to bring up  the  hundred partnership . It’s been a masterclass in the art of nil desperandum.  “Panic?” says the subject line of an email from Steve Hudson. “Call me pessimistic (call me an England fan),” he continues, “but SL maybe getting a 150 lead on a wearing, turning pitch facing three handy spin bowlers? Fancy England to get them?” Yes, I would, as they have some fluent players who barely got going in the first innings – Crawley, Buttler, Curran, Bess, even Broad. But you’re right, it would make a great finale.  36th over: Sri Lanka 93-0 (K Perera 56, Thirimanne 36)  Thirimanne takes a sharp single, the throw comes into the keeper’s end and it hits Perera on the leg. England are hell-bent on sending him to hospital, one way or another, but again he grits his teeth, or bites them together as Ole Gunnar Solskjaer said of his players at Burnley the other night. The players are back out there, including the impregnable Perera , and it looks as if Sam Curran is going to have a bowl. So far in this match he hasn’t taken a wicket, or scored a run, but he always has it in him to make something happen. 35th over: Sri Lanka 90-0 (K Perera 55, Thirimanne 34)  Perera cuts Bess for two, blocks the rest of the over, and makes it to  tea . The session belongs firmly to Sri Lanka, who have shown the grit they so conspicuously lacked in the first innings. In fact, they’ve ruled the day so far, but thanks to Joe Root’s mastery, they’re still in a hole. See you in 15 minutes.  34th over: Sri Lanka 88-0 (K Perera 53, Thirimanne 34)  Wood is ruthless enough to keep banging it in to Perera, but Root isn’t ruthless enough to post a short leg, and Perera is capable enough to fend the ball off for a single and a breather.  Meanwhile, the camera noses into the England dressing-room and spots the familiar silhouette of Moeen Ali, released from solitary confinement after going down with the damned virus. “He came out of quarantine an hour ago,” Mike Atherton reports. “And came straight to the ground, as you would if you’d been in isolation for two weeks.”  33rd over: Sri Lanka 87-0 (K Perera 52, Thirimanne 34)  A quiet over from Bess ends with Perera getting yet more strapping on his hand. His right arm is half man, half mummy. “Hello Tim from a very damp Sussex,” says James Evans. “Can’t help thinking that a leg-spinner would be more useful here than Mark Wood. Where’s Ian Salisbury when you need him?” Ha. I suspect he’s in a very damp Sussex. By the way, this email came in before Wood produced that snorter, which showed exactly why he’s there. 32nd over: Sri Lanka 83-0 (K Perera 51, Thirimanne 32)  Perera pulls Wood again to reach an assured  fifty , just what Mickey Arthur ordered. But then he gets a brute of a bouncer – how does Wood do it, on this slow pitch? – which hits him on the top of his hand. As Mike Atherton says, that’s like the blow Graham Gooch took from Ezra Moseley in Port-of-Spain in 1990. I was there and even the old lags in the press box winced. Perera whips off his glove, walks around, studies the damage and gets some spray from the physio, who follows up with some heavy strapping. The next ball is short but not vicious, and calmly worked off his hip for a single. Test cricket is a test of character, and Perera just passed.  31st over: Sri Lanka 79-0 (K Perera 49, Thirimanne 29)  Root takes himself off, with figures of 6-0-10-0 and a couple of moral victories, and brings back his other off-spinner, Bess. Thirimanne sweeps him for four, only his second boundary from 96 balls. 30th over: Sri Lanka 74-0 (K Perera 48, Thirimanne 25)  Root agrees that it’s time for seam, but he plumps for the pace of Wood rather than the pique of Broad. The field is interesting – slip, gully, leg gully and a deepish short leg. When Wood tries a bouncer, Perera bypasses the last two of them by playing a textbook pull to deep square’s right. “As to snow,” says Ralph Jennings, “we have had plenty here in Finland. Snowing for the last three days. It’s warmer today at -18, thank goodness, as yesterday’s -27 was a bit parky.” Oof. “Later today I’m off to skate on the local frozen lake and trust me with 184,000 lakes in Finland everyone has a local lake. Regards and come on England.” Nice factoid there. If the Beatles had known about it, we might never have heard about the 4,000 holes in Blackburn, Lancashire.  29th over: Sri Lanka 68-0 (K Perera 43, Thirimanne 24)  Another beauty from Root – in the channel again but fuller, almost yorker length, and spinning past Perera’s outside edge. Buttler appeals but doesn’t press for a review. 28th over: Sri Lanka 67-0 (K Perera 43, Thirimanne 23)  Perera finds the gap at mid-off with a push for three and Leach is leaking runs again. England can afford it but it’s a sign that Leach, good though he was in the first innings, has a fair amount of rust to shake off.  27th over: Sri Lanka 62-0 (K Perera 40, Thirimanne 21)  Root continues to ask questions, luring Thirimanne into a sweep that ends in a play-and-miss and a bye. If he carries on like this, Root can be the spinner in the Ashes and have Jos Buttler coming in at No.8. Here’s Harry Lang. “Hope you’re keeping well. Typing in from a very damp Earlsfield (south west London). Great to see Root mastering the perfect sweep (square root?) and some youngsters showing such promise. I had a thought (may have been a dream - lockdown insomnia is a confusing mistress) - has any team in the modern age gone full Moneyball on their selection policy? Using A.I. rather than suggested form to pick teams based on conditions, opponents, wicket and other such factors? Would be fun to see a random selection from the lower leagues dropped in just because a computer says so (and then have them absolutely nail it).Thanks as ever for the OBO for those of us too tight to line Sky’s pockets.” Pleasure. And that’s a great point. 26th over: Sri Lanka 60-0 (K Perera 39, Thirimanne 21)  After that flurry of strokes, Leach retires order. He has none for 24 from seven overs. Time for some seam, I would have thought. Stuart Broad must be hatching a plan, and may well be bearing a grudge after being left high and dry by Root when he was just getting going. “Good morning Tim,” says Simon McMahon, “I hope you are well.” I am, thank you, touch wood. “Icy cold with sleet and snow showers here on the east coast of Scotland. Given that it’s a Saturday, and everyone’s at home anyway, I was a bit surprised to be woken up by a machine clearing the pavements at 7am. Still, a good excuse, as if you need one, to follow the cricket. Surely only the weather can save Sri Lanka. There’s no snow forecast in Galle, is there?” Ha. They are expecting rain, but it’s holding off for now. 25th over: Sri Lanka 58-0 (K Perera 38, Thirimanne 20)  No such liberties are taken with Root. 24th over: Sri Lanka 57-0 (K Perera 38, Thirimanne 19)  Perera charges Leach again, and this time he does bring out the big shot, lofting over long-on for  six . Next ball, he sweeps hard for four. And that’s the  fifty partnership,  Sri Lanka’s second one of the match. England managed three – the difference was that two of them went past a hundred, 114 by Root and Bairstow, and 173 by Root and Lawrence, adding up to 287. Those stands account for England’s lead on first innings – 286. Sri Lanka simply have to turn this one into a big one. 23rd over: Sri Lanka 45-0 (K Perera 27, Thirimanne 18)  Just a couple of singles off Root, who has 3-0-7-0 and has performed like a proper bowler.
UK shuts travel corridors and requires negative Covid tests to enter:	Boris Johnson  has announced a dramatic tightening of the UK’s borders, with all international arrivals to be forced to quarantine as well as demonstrate they have had a negative Covid test. After months of criticism of the government’s lax border policies, which Labour claimed were “costing lives”, the prime minister said he was tightening the rules to prevent new variants of the virus reaching the UK and safeguard the vaccination programme. “It is vital to take these extra measures now when day by day, hour by hour, we are making such strides in protecting the population,” Johnson told a Downing Street press conference. Despite some tentative signs that infections  may be levelling off , he also underlined the desperate situation facing England’s hospitals, urging the public to think twice before going out at the weekend. “There are now more than 37,000 Covid patients in hospital across the UK and, in spite of all the efforts of our doctors and nurses and our medical staff, we are now seeing  cancer treatments  sadly postponed, ambulances queueing, and intensive care units spilling over into adjacent wards,” he said. The perilous state of the NHS was underlined by a Guardian analysis that showed two-thirds of all  NHS  trusts across England were  treating more coronavirus patients  last week than they did at the peak of the first wave of the pandemic Figures show that in 17 trusts the number of people with coronavirus outnumbered all other patients. On the current trajectory, the number of people being treated for Covid in England’s hospitals could be double that of the April 2020 peak within weeks. With the number of new Covid cases increasing by 55,761 on Friday, and a further 1,280 people reported to have died within 28 days of testing positive, sources made clear the government would await evidence on whether the Covid-19 vaccines prevent transmission before considering laying out a timetable for  lifting lockdown restrictions . However, England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, appearing alongside Johnson, said there was early evidence that the measures put in place in London and the south-east had begun to bear fruit in controlling the virus. “The peak of the infections, we hope, already has happened in some parts of the country particularly in the south-east, east of England and London, where there was initially a really big surge with the new variant, and it is fantastic that that is beginning to happen thanks to what everyone has done,” he said. “Other areas that went into lockdown a bit later, that peak will be a bit later.” As well as announcing the new border rules, Johnson hailed the progress of the government’s vaccination programme, saying that almost 3.3 million had received a jab, including 1.3 million people aged over 80 – 45% of the total – and more than 100,000 older care home residents. The new travel restrictions, which will come into force at 4am on Monday, will mean the suspension of all the remaining travel corridors, which had allowed arrivals from certain destinations to avoid quarantine. A new pre-flight testing regime was already due to come into place on Monday morning. It had originally been meant to start on Friday, but was delayed by the government at the last minute after the Department for  Transport  failed to produce the relevant guidance in time for passengers and airlines to be ready. The government had also already announced that it would  halt arrivals from South America and Portugal  in an effort to prevent a Brazilian variant of the virus reaching the UK. The additional measures, which also include increasing spot checks on members of the public who should be in quarantine, make it the toughest border policy the government has adopted at any time during the pandemic. Quarantine will last for 10 days, the prime minister said, unless arrivals pay to have a Covid test after five days and receive a negative result. The measures will remain in place at least until 15 February. Johnson faced a grilling this week from the senior Labour backbencher Yvette Cooper, who had urged him to take precautionary measures to prevent  new variants  of the virus arriving in the UK. Cooper chairs the home affairs select committee, which has repeatedly highlighted shortcomings in the enforcement of travel restrictions since the onset of the pandemic. It is unclear as yet whether the Brazilian variant of the disease that is causing concern, or other new and emerging variants, could be vaccine resistant. Business groups were taken by surprise by the new border measures. Joss Croft, the chief executive of UKinbound, the trade body for the overseas tourism industry, said his members would need financial help from the government. “Consumer safety is paramount and although the removal of all travel corridors is regrettable, given the current trajectory of the virus it’s an understandable decision. With our borders effectively closed, the government needs to provide urgent, tailored support for the inbound tourism industry,” he said. The shadow transport secretary, Jim McMahon, said: “Unfortunately this announcement was inevitable. However, it is closing the door after the horse has bolted.” He added: “The government urgently need to put in place a forward-looking strategy [for] testing on borders and wider controls, while also delivering on the long-promised sector-specific support for those industries who will be so hard hit by this news.”
Cities can lead a green revolution after Covid. In Barcelona, we're showing how:	T he pandemic will leave behind a very different world from that of a year ago. Thousands of people have died; entire industries have been brought to the brink; welfare states have been shaken. In the coming years, the major challenge facing all public leaders will be charting a path of recovery through the devastating human, social and economic marks that Covid-19 has left on our societies. But rather than redoubling on the fragile world of the pre-pandemic age, we should be taking advantage of this moment to build one that is more just, balanced and sustainable. Cities will play a key role in this process. Barcelona and its metropolitan area want to lead the response to one of the toughest situations that humanity has faced in modern times. Achieving this will mean tackling two interrelated challenges. We need to continue the fight against the climate crisis, spurred by the  European Green Deal . And we will need to boost the post-Covid economy through green technologies, sustainable industry and transport. Although these are global issues, change can begin in urban centres. Cities can play a pivotal role in transitioning energy use away from fossil fuels. They can adopt  non-polluting modes of transport  and build green public spaces that absorb carbon dioxide and release oxygen. Barcelona has long been committed to these goals. Over the next decade, our  “superblock ” plan will transform the entire central grid of the city into a greener, pedestrian-friendly and almost car-free area. We’ll extend this model to the entirety of the  Eixample district , first designed in the late 19th century by the urban planner Ildefons Cerdà, who envisioned an integrated, modernist extension to Barcelona based around a grid system, providing new public spaces for mobility and recreation. The Covid-19 crisis has reminded us all of the importance of scientific advances. Progress in areas such as vaccines and testing are what will provide the exit route from this pandemic. Cities can play a role in nurturing science, technology and digital industries, something  Barcelona  has been doing for years, through public policies aimed at attracting talent and building new infrastructures. Our city is home to the MareNostrum 5 European supercomputer, for example. Built by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, this new type of computer can be used in areas such as human genome research, the design of new drugs and weather forecasting. And as mayor of Barcelona, I’m currently reviewing the proposal that the Spanish government has made to the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts to make Barcelona the headquarters of this important institution, whose forecasting skills and environmental expertise are key to the fight against climate breakdown. Our aim is to become the major scientific and cultural capital of the Mediterranean, driving Europe’s transition towards a green and circular economy. And we can do so through the innovative, courageous and resourceful spirit that has long characterised our city, working to improve the quality of life of our neighbours, and ensuring that our post-pandemic society leaves nobody behind. Yet while cities can be leaders on these issues, it’s clear that they cannot – and should not – be doing this alone. Different levels of government should be working together with both public and private actors if we are going to be successful in the fight against the climate crisis and in building an equitable, green economic recovery. These are global challenges, and they will require international solutions. But cities are a good place to start. •  Ada Colau is the mayor of Barcelona
As Poles and Hungarians, we urge the EU to stand firm on the rule of law:	A s European leaders gather in Brussels this week municipal buildings and monuments in Warsaw and Budapest have been lit up in blue. The illuminations, organised by campaign groups and the mayors of these cities, are meant as a powerful reminder of the dark path ahead if the EU stands aside while the rule of law is extinguished in Poland and  Hungary . The lights are a call for solidarity with the millions of citizens of both countries who argue that EU funding should be conditional on their governments upholding these fundamental rights. The release of €1.8tn in EU funds for rebuilding after the pandemic and the EU’s 2021-2027 budget is at stake. So far agreement has  been derailed  by Hungary’s Viktor Orbán and Poland’s Mateusz Morawiecki because of their unwillingness to accept that membership of the EU depends on  upholding democratic values . This, of course, is not a new fight for these two leaders. For years now, we in  Poland  and Hungary have had to contend with our national governments undermining the fundamental values: democracy and human rights that underpin membership of the EU. Hundreds of thousands of us have taken to the streets, year after year, to fight their attempts to control our country’s media, judiciary, and democratic political systems. The list of violations of rule of law, civil society, judicial independence, and press freedom in our countries is long. Famously, the Hungarian government has trampled on academic freedom by  making it impossible  for the Central European University in Budapest to operate – the first time a university has been forced into exile since the War. In Poland, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party took control of the formerly independent National Council of Judiciary – ensuring that appointment, promotion and disciplining of the nation’s judges was to be decided by party loyalists. As I write, PKN Orlen, Poland’s state-run oil company,  has just bought Polska Press , a private media outlet that reaches 11 million Poles every day. Critics are expressing concern, and they are right to do so, given the pattern of events in Orbán’s Hungary. Here, independent media outlets have fallen, one after another, into the hands of pro-government figures – to the extent that almost no independent, or critical government media, now exists in the country. It is not an exaggeration to say that democracy is under threat in Poland and Hungary. In a major  survey  of citizens, last year, two-thirds of Poles (64%) indicated that they thought the rule of law was being undermined in their country. While, in Hungary, 58% of respondents felt that their political system was “broken”. I still remember the celebrations in my home town when Hungary joined the  European Union  in 2004. To those that had grown up behind the iron curtain, it was a moment when we knew that we would be safe from tyranny and part of a collective with our European friends. Through our membership of the EU, we have been able to undergo reforms that have solidified and strengthened the rule of law, guaranteed freedoms, and let us live and prosper as Europeans. And this is a position that is reflected, in survey after survey, with a recent round of  polling  finding that 73% of Poles and 65% of Hungarians believe membership of the EU has been good for the prosperity of their country. At aHang in Hungary and Akcja Demokracja in Poland, we have been supporting hundreds of thousands of citizens in both countries who believe in a mechanism that links EU funding to the rule of law. We have received messages of support from people expressing such sentiments as: “being spirit and body in  Europe  was my dream of youth”; “Poland’s accession to the EU was a very special day for me”; and “the current actions of the Polish government are a crime against its citizens”. These are sentiments that are widely held and which are being ignored by Orbán and Morawiecki. EU leaders  face a choice. They can appease Orbán and Morawiecki and let down the citizens of Hungary and Poland who are concerned about basic freedoms. This would embolden the two leaders and show other nationalist leaders that the tactics of blackmail can be effective. It would fuel a further shift to authoritarianism, not just in Hungary and Poland, but across Europe, and cause unnecessary fracturing of the EU27. An alternative would be to face down these “paper tigers” and stand with the citizens of these two countries for the defence of our values, as Europeans. We, and hundreds of thousands of citizens from Hungary and Poland, urge them to stand firm against the bullying tactics of Orbán and Morawiecki, and to set an example of how Europe treats autocrats. There is no east and west divide among the populations of the EU27. We are as committed to democracy and rule of law, and have as much right as western Europeans to demand our leaders leave them intact. We need the support of the rest of the EU to defend the values we share. •  Máté Varga is the founder of aHang (theVoice), Hungary’s largest progressive campaign group, and the president of the Civil College Foundation
Unlike Trump, Europe's far-right leaders haven't been damaged by the pandemic:	B y now it is almost received wisdom that “populists” (often used as a euphemism for “the far right”) have ignored the threat of Covid-19, that populists have been the electoral victims of the pandemic, and that the pandemic has exposed the political incompetence of populists in government. Most of this speculation is based on one or two individual cases, most notably the US president, Donald Trump. But he is the exception rather than the rule. In a recent  comparative study  of far-right parties in the European Union, we found that none of those three assumptions holds up to scrutiny. In fact, there has been significant variety in far-right responses to the pandemic. In contrast to Trump, most European far-right parties were quick to point to the danger of the virus to the point of outright alarmism, although many started to walk that back after the number of cases had peaked, and some even started to spread misinformation. Matteo Salvini and his League party in Italy saw the virus as a major threat, but with time opinions on Covid started to fluctuate. The main reason was that the most affected regions in Italy were governed by the League. Consequently, the party went from Salvini’s  alarmist appeals  to close the borders and ban the Chinese new year, to claims that the virus was not that bad by the League governor of the  hardest-hit province, Lombardy . Many far-right parties in opposition initially criticised their governments for responding too slowly, but quickly became the loudest critics of the alleged “anti-democratic” and “unconstitutional” government policies when lockdowns were introduced. For instance, the Alternative for Germany (AfD) argued that freedom of speech was “the clearest victim of corona”, while the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) claimed that it had stopped “totalitarian” surveillance plans. By contrast, far-right parties in government implicated the opposition in spreading the virus or frustrating the national response. For instance, the Hungarian government targeted the mayor of Budapest for mismanaging the situation, while Polish prime minister Mateusz Morawiecki argued that the opposition, “instead of taking care of peace and helping, threw sand in the modes”. The second misperception is that far-right parties have been the big losers of the pandemic – recently strengthened by the claim that Trump lost the election because of Covid-19. However, in our study of 31 far-right parties in EU member states, only half lost some support in the first, more acute, coronavirus wave, from mid-March to mid-June. Of the rest, five gained support, and 10 experienced no change in the polls. Moreover, the overall effect was marginal, within 1% on average. Far-right parties have started to lose a bit more during the continuing second wave, although the averages remain small and within the polls’ margin of error. Once again, government status seems to play a role. The far-right parties in control in Hungary and Poland mostly gained in the first wave but lost the most in the second wave. Far-right parties in governing coalitions were initially not affected but have now seen some small losses. And far-right parties in opposition, the vast majority, experienced some small losses in the first wave that have largely disappeared in the second wave. So, did the   pandemic expose “the incompetence” of the far right in power? The European data provides little evidence for this. Countries with far-right governments adopted the strictest measures of all; and while those with far-right parties in coalition took less severe measures, it is hard to assess those parties’ roles. And in terms of cases and deaths per population, the numbers are mostly lower for countries with far-right parties in government or in coalition than for countries where the far right is in opposition. It should be noted that all the countries with far-right government participation are in central and eastern  Europe , the region least hit by Covid-19 in the first wave. Still, even here countries with far-right parties in government did slightly better than other countries in the region. In short, much of the public debate about the far right, populism and Covid-19 is wrong. Overall, the far right has not ignored Covid-19, has not been its electoral victim, and has not been exposed as incompetent by the pandemic. While the far right has generally framed Covid-19 and the pandemic in line with its ideology (nativism, authoritarianism, and populism), its policy responses have differed, mainly based on whether they are in government or opposition. More than anything, these findings show that we should stop viewing the European far right through the prism of Trump. The US president is in many ways the exception rather than the rule in terms of far-right politics. And as Trump leaves the White House, far-right parties remain major players in Europe. •  Cas Mudde is Stanley Wade Shelton UGAF professor of international affairs at the University of Georgia; Jakub Wondreys is a PhD student specialising in European politics at the University of Georgia
Messina to Maastricht: the modest European towns that marked the road to Brexit:	I oannina is no Mykonos. A city on the northern Greek mainland near the border with Albania, it is landlocked and rarely on any tourist trail. As far as guidebook mentions go, it’s silverwork, feta cheese and local spring water. But back in spring 1994 it burst on to front pages across  Europe , seizing the minds of politicians. Ioannina joined the ranks of little-known European cities to host a European summit and become a household name for a fortnight. From Messina to Maastricht, such places will fill history books of the future as they retrace the story of European integration – and Britain’s troubled joining and departure. In March 1994, Europe’s foreign ministers, meeting in Ioannina, were arguing about power and who really gets to wield it. The debate was all about the EU’s smaller countries “taking back control”. The result – the Ioannina compromise – was a seemingly arcane technical bargain about voting rights in an enlarged EU, but it paved the way for fewer national vetoes and deeper European integration. Ten years earlier, in June 1985, it was Schengen – not even a town or city, but a Luxembourg village – that was on everyone’s lips. With a population of fewer than 5,000, and previously known only for its wine-making, it is close to where the territories of Germany, France and Luxembourg meet. A number of European nations met there to sign the momentous Schengen agreement – a milestone in Europe’s integration, which abolished border controls over much of Europe. And though most people think it started in 1957 with the Treaty of Rome – rich with imperial symbolism, surely – the key breakthrough actually came a few years before, in the more obscure city of Messina, the third-largest on the island of Sicily. Messina kicked off the whole EEC project. However, the British famously didn’t go. Old Foreign Office hands reminisced that was it was “too outlandish and far away” to send a UK government representative. Forty years later and over 1,000 miles north, it was another “m” that unexpectedly took centre stage. In the student-filled but quiet medieval town of Maastricht, on the banks of the River Meuse in the Netherlands, European leaders took the huge twin strides of creating the euro and launching a European political union – creating the treaty that took the city’s name. Imagine how the UK tabloids would have coped if the meeting had been in Berlin. The journey of subsequent European treaties snaked across Europe in a winding path worthy of any student’s interrail ticket – from Amsterdam to Nice to Lisbon – each stop a step on the way to more European integration. But these places are synonymous not only with leaps forward in the European project, but also rising arguments over it, as Britain fell more and more deeply out of love with the EU. Dublin – one of Europe’s smaller capitals – witnessed one of Britain’s most momentous rows with European leaders. The acrimonious summit held there was Margaret Thatcher’s first, and was dominated by her demands for her money back. As Helmut Schmidt, the then German chancellor, quipped: she had hardly spent a penny and she wanted her pennies back. The row simmered through summit after summit until it was finally defused five years later at Fontainebleau. But perhaps the most poignant is another small French town with an impressive chateau, traditionally the summer residence of French presidents. Britain’s uncomfortable relationship with Europe is symbolised by the rebuff at Rambouillet. In December 1962, the then British prime minister, Harold Macmillan, was doggedly fighting to get Britain into the European club against resistance from the French leader, General De Gaulle. Meeting at Rambouillet’s chateau, Macmillan was bluntly let down by his French counterpart. Realising his plans to get Britain into the EEC were in ruins, Macmillan reportedly left the town in tears, leaving Britain to wait another 10 years. Security concerns and growing workloads mean that more and more meetings are held in Brussels. But the crisscrossing journey to obscure European backwaters will continue without the UK. The decisive meetings on Europe’s future won’t be hosted by Carlisle, Leicester or any other UK town – but they could be in Belgrade or Minsk. •  This article was amended on 5 January 2021. Schengen is located near to where Germany, France and Luxembourg meet, rather than Belgium, France and Luxembourg as a previous version said. Nigel Gardner is a former European commission spokesman and produced the BBC’s history of Britain’s relationship with the EU.
Schwarzenegger used to exemplify politico-showbiz ridiculousness. Now he's our true moral governator:	H ow amazing. Until a few years ago – 2016, in fact – if you asked people for the most absurd example of the politico-showbusiness complex in the 21st-century United States, they would have said  Arnold Schwarzenegger ’s recall election as governor of California in 2003, his candidacy being announced on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno. He was re-elected in 2006, and just about maintained a cheerfully Reaganesque public image of a moderate Republican – uneventfully standing down in 2011 to resume his movie career. We all took the mickey out of the governator. But, right now, he is America’s moral governator with real moral authority. It was the governator who uploaded a video  telling Americans to stay home during the Covid crisis . And now it is the governator who has issued a clarion call for decency on YouTube with his admittedly cheesy but genuinely stirring, heartfelt and relevant rebuke to the Trumpians and their desecration of the Capitol – a desecration that even now many Republicans and many sophisticates on the right cannot bring themselves to condemn fully. In his mature Reaganesque style, Schwarzenegger addressed the nation from a presidential-style desk, with the stars and stripes and Californian flag in the background, and a photo of himself in his bodybuilding pomp. With Hollywood-style music on the audio track, he denounced the complicit enablers of Trump’s fascism – culminating in a hilarious flourish of Conan the Barbarian’s sword. That should have been ridiculous. It should have been silly. But, compared with the seedy rightwingers and Fox News alternative-fact merchants and the giggling cynics who said Trump didn’t matter, Schwarzenegger’s sword was rather glorious. I found myself thinking of Evelyn Waugh’s Sword of Honour trilogy – and, yes, however preposterous, there was something honourable about Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Conan sword. Schwarzenegger called the vandalising of the Capitol (and the killing of Capitol police officer Brian Sicknick) America’s “Kristallnacht”. Like many others, I have seen it as America’s beer hall putsch (and who knows if that may not turn out to be the closer analogy?). But, for the time being, Schwarzenegger is absolutely right. And from personal experience, Schwarzenegger was able to address the openly  Nazi  stylings of the Capitol attackers, with the “Camp Auschwitz” T-shirts, because he grew up in an Austria that, in contrast to Germany, went into fierce denial about its role in the second world war. Schwarzenegger spoke about his angry, depressed and abusive father who beat his children. (Schwarzenegger did not speak in detail, but throughout his governorship much press research went into Gustav Schwarzenegger, the Austrian police chief and Stalingrad military veteran who applied for Nazi party membership in 1938 before the Anschluss, but was not found to have been responsible for war crimes or abuse.) Schwarzenegger’s video today, however schmaltzy and hokey in style, was a real reminder to the fatuous callow right that Nazis and nazism are not just death-metal icons or gamer fantasies. They really did exist, with America-first cheerleaders such as Joseph Kennedy and Charles Lindbergh encouraging their fellow citizens to look the other way. And he also showed us that the immigrant experience can bring wisdom. Arnold’s video is exactly what we all needed.
'Carbon-neutrality is a fairy tale': how the race for renewables is burning Europe's forests:	K alev Järvik stands on a bald patch of land in the heart of Estonia’s  Haanja nature reserve  and remembers when he could walk straight from one side of the reserve to the other under a canopy of trees. Järvik has lived in the Haanja uplands in the southern county of Võru for more than 10 years. His closeness to the forest has shaped his life as a carpenter and the fortunes of the surrounding villages, with their handicraft traditions – a substitute for farming on the poor arable land. Upcountry, travel literature promotes the region to city dwellers, promising its ancient woodlands as a place to rest and reinvigorate the mind. But in 2015, the Estonian government  allowed what is known as clear-cutting   in some parts of the Haanja nature reserve. The practice involves stripping entire areas of mature forest and removing whole tree trunks.  This relaxation of the logging rules came as international demand for Estonian wood soared – not just for furniture or construction, but because of an unlikely culprit: Europe’s renewable energy policies. “Sometimes I can’t bear to go outside,” Järvik says, standing by the stumps left on land stripped by the logging company Valga Puu. The firm is a subsidiary of Graanul Invest Group, Europe’s biggest producer of the wood pellets which are burned on an industrial scale as biomass for heat and light in many of Europe’s former coal-fired power stations. The days Järvik is spared the sound of harvesters have become rare. “You don’t want to leave home, because the landscape has become so impassable, it leaves you feeling anguished. But still the noise comes.” Forests cover  2m hectares  or more than half of Estonia. Around 380,000 hectares (939,000 acres) of that,  including the Haanja nature reserve , fall under the EU’s  Natura 2000  network, which is designed to protect Europe’s forests and offer a haven to rare and threatened species. Haanja is home to 29 protected species, including the black stork, the lesser-spotted eagle and the corncrake.  Natura-protected zones are managed under the legally binding provisions of the  1979 EU birds directive  and the  1992 habitats directive . But logging is governed by domestic laws, and Estonia permits it as long as it does not damage bogs and other special habitats, or fall within bird mating seasons.  Campaigners say   that by allowing intensive clear-cutting in Natura 2000 sites,  Estonia  is in breach of the habitats directive and undermining the EU’s climate goals. Siim Kuresoo of the non-profit Estonian Fund for Nature (ELF) doesn’t just blame the Estonian government. He says there is a direct connection between the subsidised growth in the biomass industry encouraged by EU renewable energy policies and the acceleration of unsustainable Baltic tree-felling.  “There is clear evidence that the intensification of logging is at least partly driven by higher demand for biomass for heat and power,” says a  report  co-authored by Kuresoo for the ELF and the Latvian Ornithological Society. “Given that over half of Estonia’s and Latvia’s wood pellet exports in 2019 went to Denmark, the Netherlands and the UK, ‘green energy’ use in those three countries contributes directly to increased logging in the two Baltic states.” The Council of Estonian Environmental NGOs (EKO), of which the ELF is a member, has made a complaint to the European commission alleging “systematic” breaches by Estonia of its forest conservation obligations. *** To investigate the subsidised European pellet trade and its impact on Baltic forests, we uploaded boundary files for Estonia’s Natura 2000 zones to Global Forest Watch, an online platform for monitoring forests, and found that per-hectare tree cover loss (the removal of the tree canopy rather than outright deforestation) in these areas accelerated after 2015. That was when the government adjusted park conservation rules to allow clear-cutting of up to one hectare at a time in some nature reserves. Across Estonia, between 2001 and 2019, Natura 2000 areas lost more than 15,000 hectares (37,000 acres) of forest cover, an area more than twice the size of Manhattan. The last five years account for 80% of that loss. Further alterations to rules in other Estonian national parks are planned. This acceleration appears to be taking a toll on bird species like the black grouse, woodlark and others. Woodland birds are declining at a rate of 50,000 breeding pairs a year, according to national  records . The clearances are also damaging the ability of Baltic forests to store carbon, and could be undermining climate goals by reducing the chance for Estonia and Latvia to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas emissions.  In a country where the overwhelming majority of peoplesay they regard nature as sacred, logging has led to protests or what the Estonian media calls the “forest war”. Residents of Saku, a small town 16 miles south of Tallinn, successfully fought to save an area of forest that was scheduled to be cut down this year by RMK, the state forest management company, which manages  around half  of Estonian forests. “We convert our trees into pellets and sell them to energy plants in your countries,” says Ivar Raig, one of the Saku campaigners. “This is considered to be sustainable, but we suffer.” **** Sustainability goes to the heart of the European renewable energy debate. The drive to replace coal, one of the world’s biggest sources of carbon emissions, with cleaner sources of power, is a top priority in the fight against climate change globally. A switch to burning wood in the form of pellets appears to offer a simple and in theory carbon-neutral alternative to coal-fired power stations because trees take up carbon dioxide from the air as they grow. As long as the burned trees are replaced with new plantings, there is no net addition to the stock of carbon in the atmosphere. However, that process of carbon take-up can take many decades. And in the furnace, burning wood  releases more carbon dioxide per unit of energy than burning gas, oil, or even coal . By accelerating carbon dioxide emissions in the short term, burning wood for electricity could be fatal for states’ ability to meet the Paris Agreement goal of keeping global heating to well below 2C by 2050. Demand for woody biomass or energy from wood as an alternative to coal in power stations took off from 2009, when the  first EU renewable energy directive  obliged member states to source 20% of energy from renewable sources by 2020 and classified biomass energy as carbon-neutral. A flaw in the legislation meant that woody biomass was fully categorised as renewable, even if it came not just from wood residues or waste, but from whole trees. This meant that companies could directly harvest forests for pellets – rather than making pellets from the by-products of timber cut for other uses – in the name of sustainable forest management. As the EU moved in 2018 to double the use of renewable energy by 2030,  scientists   warned  the European Parliament that this loophole in the sustainability criteria of the revised EU legislation would accelerate the climate crisis and devastate mature forests. But against the competing interests of the multibillion euro biomass lobby, it went unamended. Almost all European countries have recorded an increase in logging for energy.  Nearly a quarter  of the trees harvested in the EU in 2019 were for energy, up from 17% in 2000. Biomass, of which wood from forests is the main source, now makes up almost  60 % of the EU’s renewable energy supply, more than solar and wind combined, and a vast cross-border   industry has emerged to meet this demand. Taxpayer subsidies are driving much of the growth in this trade. Between 2008 and 2018, subsidies for biomass, of which wood is the main source, among 27 European nations increased by 143%. In the UK, g overnment support for biomass projects  is expected to total more than £13bn by 2027 – the date at which current subsidy agreements expire, according to the climate thinktank Ember. *** When Raul Kirjanen founded Graanul Invest in 2003, it was just him and his computer in a small office. By 2005 the company had opened its first factory in Imavere, Estonia, compressing sawdust and the waste wood from other processes into tiny pellets that could be bagged up and shipped overseas for burning in everything from domestic heaters to vast power plants to generate electricity. Today the European wood pellet trade is booming. Graanul Invest is the second biggest wood pellet maker in the world and Kirjanen is  one of the richest  people in the Baltics where the Estonian press call him  “the pellet king” . In 2019, the company manufactured 2.5m tonnes of pellets, up from 1.8m tonnes the previous year, across its plants in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the US. Every month tens of thousands of tonnes of wood pellets leave the port of Riga to cross the North Sea on Graanul Invest’s vessel, the MV Imavere. Much of this cargo is bound for the port of Immingham, where it is transported to UK power stations including Drax, which has converted four of its six units from coal to biomass since 2013 and is now the world’s largest biomass burning plant. The UK accounts for more than a third of Graanul’s annual revenue. Denmark, the Netherlands and Italy are also target markets. But electricity production from wood pellets would not be financially sustainable without public subsidies: the British government paid Drax the equivalent of €2.4m (£2.1m) a day in 2019. Drax will have received more than €11.2bn (£10bn) from the UK government since its conversion to biomass in 2012 until subsidies run out in 2027, researchers from the Ember have calculated. The UK is now the biggest subsidiser of bioenergy in Europe, spending more than  £1.9bn in 2019  primarily to pay for burning imported wood at Drax, according to new research by the  Natural Resources Defence Council  (NRDC) and  Cut Carbon Not Forests . Britain is no longer bound by EU renewable energy targets post-Brexit but has set a new target of cutting emissions by 68% by 2030 and is committed to the EU goal of net-zero carbon by 2050.  Other European governments are following suit. In the Netherlands, the government has promised energy companies RWE, Uniper and Onyx (formerly Engie) more than €3.5bn in subsidies to use biomass, making the country one of the biggest importers of wood pellets in Europe. Campaigners are anxiously watching  Germany , where Onyx Power, a subsidiary of the US hedge fund Riverstone, is examining the possibility of converting coal plants to biomass.  “Biomass only exists at the scale that it does because of subsidies,” says Duncan Brack, associate fellow at the London-based thinktank Chatham House. “We’re effectively paying to increase carbon emissions in the atmosphere, which is an absurd use of public money.” Brack says that the 2009  EU renewable energy directive  triggered a raft of subsidies for renewable power generation. “But since then solar and wind have really crashed in price. Now is the time to stop subsidising biomass.” “There’s huge infrastructure employing people and spending money, all based on subsidies,” says Michael Norton of the European Academies’ Science Advisory Council (EASAC). “The original simplistic idea of bioenergy from sustainable forestry suddenly blossomed into an industry achieving the opposite of what it was meant to do.” **** In November 2020 we   visited the Haanja nature park to verify the accelerated felling suggested by satellite data. Travelling south through the park, we passed small villages made up of wooden houses, wide black lakes and cows grazing in pastures. Near Vakari village our van took a left, passing wetlands surrounded by birch trees, and turned on to a stretch of road in a clearing. It was as if someone had carefully cut out rectangles of forest. A sign said the plot was owned by Valga Puu. Since 2016, more than 100 hectares (247 acres) of forest in the Haanja park have been felled on land owned by Graanul Invest Group, a significant increaseon the previous five years, when less than 20 hectares (49.4 acres) was felled, according to Global Forest Watch. We checked their data against our own analysis of high-resolution Google satellite images and corroborated it on the ground.  Graanul Invest collects  84% of its wood  by clear-cutting, according to its 2019 sustainability report. “Clear-cutting is the main harvesting method in Estonia that allows us to renew forests the fastest way,” the company told us. “Most trees in Estonia have quite a short lifespan and harvesting and planting a forest sublot as a whole means that all young trees will be at the same age and can start to grow together.” In practice, the method means leaving mostly stumps in the harvested patch. In the nature reserve, a few trees stand sentinel, part of Graanul Invest’s efforts to maintain biodiversity. The forest portfolio owned by Graanul Invest and its subsidiaries spans  55,000 hectares  (136,000 acres) across Estonia and Latvia and 12% of this is land protected under conservation programmes such as Natura 2000. Graanul has been able to accelerate tree felling on the protected lands because Estonia’s Nature Conservation Act divides it into three  zones : strict nature reserve, conservation zone, and limited management or buffer zone. Human intervention is prohibited in the first two; limited economic activities by landowners, including logging, are allowed in the buffer zones. Clear-cutting in buffer zones must still comply with the EU habitats directive.  Graanul Invest says the adjustment of the rules since 2015 hasn’t changed how much its forest management companies cut down, but makes them “more efficient”. The company also says their forest management companies do not directly harvest wood to be turned into pellets. “The main target is to harvest high-quality logs for sawmills or [the] plywood industry, then to pulp mills. Only material that is not suitable for other industries comes to pellet production,” a spokesperson said. Official literature from its logging subsidiary Valga Puu tells a different story. “Our goals for 2020 are related to the supply of Graanul Invest plants,” the company says in its latest annual report. We put this to Valga Puu’s chief executive, Andres Olesk. “Not the best wording,” he responded . But 40% of the wood that Graanul Invest harvests   on this land comes from whole trees deemed not straight enough or the right size, for such uses such as furniture or construction. This “low-quality wood”, as it is called in the trade, is crushed and turned into wood pellets. Harvesting old and poorly managed forests can increase the ability of the forest to hold carbon and improve the habitat for small birds and mammals,  according to the European commission . This could be the case in Estonia, where much of the woodland grew naturally 70 years ago on farmland left behind by Estonians who were killed or deported from rural areas during the second world war. “The share of low-quality timber in Estonian forests has always been high due to the fact that during the Soviet era the forests were not managed at all,” Marku Lamp, deputy secretary general of the Estonian ministry of the environment, says. “This has in some ways been an opportunity to sell the low-quality stock.” But Almuth Ernsting of climate activist group Biofuelwatch says the term “low-quality wood” is based on economic considerations only: “[It] takes no account of the ecological, climate or cultural value of the trees.” Robert Matthews, a UK climate scientist whose team carried out some of the research underpinning the revised EU Renewable  Energy  Directive, describes the idea of low-quality wood as “the sting in the tail”. “What is low-quality wood? It’s almost like a get out of jail free card.” On paper, Estonia’s forest stock seems to be  stable and even slightly increasing,  according to Estonia’s 2020 Forest Resources Assessment (FRA). On the ground, we found felled areas replanted with small spruces, which count towards forest area, even though the young trees will take decades to absorb the same amount of carbon as the old felled trees. These “temporarily unstocked or recently regenerated” forests have increased more than 20% since 2010,  FRA data says , with serious consequences for the capacity of Estonian land to store carbon. As a result, the Estonian land-use sector, which includes forestry, is expected to switch from being a carbon sink to an emitter of carbon by 2030,  according to Estonia’s National Energy and Climate report  – the same year by which, under the  EU’s updated Renewable Energy Directive,  Europe must have increased its energy from renewable sources to 32%. Graanul Invest  replanted 1.5m trees in 2019 , according to its annual report. Birch, a deciduous tree, is the dominant species across the 55,000 hectares (136,000 acres) in the company’s portfolio, but Graanul Invest replants  1.7 times more coniferous types such as spruce , a fast-growing species that the company says can “improve the carbon sequestration capability” of forests. Even so, it takes years for these tiny spruces to grow large enough to extract or sequester the carbon that is emitted by cutting them down – a problem known as carbon debt. It takes decades or even centuries for whole trees, unlike corn or other biomass crops, to regrow, says Massimiliano Patierno, an environmental engineer at the International Institute of Law and Environment. “If we count a period of, say, 40 years, in which the new trees have cancelled the carbon debt, then yes, that biomass can be seen as carbon-neutral,” he says. “But if we consider a very short period of time, it is likely that the carbon debt will not be cancelled.” Dr Mary Booth at the Partnership for Policy Integrity says that if the wood or forestry residues burned for electricity were instead left to decompose on the soil, they would emit carbon dioxide more gradually. “The accumulated net impact of such emissions likewise speeds warming,” she says. The latest felling in the Natura 2000 part of the Haanja nature park took place recently in a forest that was 70 years old and home to a number of different species, Siim Kuresoo says.  Experts hold that generally, the more diverse the forest, the greater the variety of animals and plants it can host. Žiga Malek, assistant professor in land use and ecosystem dynamicsat Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, says: “The vegetation that was there before protected the soil from being eroded.” Clear-cutting is allowed in Natura 2000 areas as long as it does not conflict with local conservation rules, Malek adds. “In this case it would mean minimum disturbance,” he says. “Which this is not.” Replanted forests can provide climate benefits, he adds, but they cannot fully replace the lost forest ecosystem.  Altering the forest type can also affect the amount of carbon stored in the ground. Mature and closer-to-natural forests sequester more carbon in the long run, due to a healthier ground biomass, Malek says. “Even if the clear-cut area is planted with one fast-growing species, it will not be as effective in terms of carbon sink as the more nature-like forest would in the long term.”  Kirjanen says his company is not doing anything out of the ordinary. In an email, he said that the “awesome” Estonian timber industry is the largest employer in rural areas because it has been able to grow and compete internationally. Almost all Europe’s existing forests are the result of “forest management” of a similar kind. “If we want our forests to be like this in the future, they must be managed,” he said. “Many protected areas in national parks are semi-natural communities, and without maintenance, conservation values often disappear.” *** There are signs that the EU intends to tighten the rules around what wood can be harvested as renewable energy. An  expert group  convened by the European commission recently recommended that biomass should be considered sustainable only if it comes from feedstocks listed in an annexe of the renewable energy directive, including bark and sawdust, and “pre-commercial forest thinnings”, apart from sawn logs.  Graanul Invest says that if there is demand for wood as in other fields, it makes sense to use the waste material both from forestry and the wood industry for useful applications – including energy. But scientists and campaigners say we simply don’t have time to cut down trees for energy production if we are going to meet climate goals.  “The urgency has completely changed in the last 15 years,” Michael Norton says. “We don’t have until 2070 – emissions have to come down sooner. Biomass that increases carbon emissions in the next 10 to 30 years is not compatible with climate change policy.” Back in the Haanja nature park, Kuresoo says it will take many decades for the trees that have been felled to date to grow back to their former size. “This idea of carbon neutrality is a fairy tale,” he says. “Climate change is already happening. We should be planting trees instead of taking them down.” This article is based on Money to Burn, a  cross-border investigative project  led by the Dutch public investigative journalism platform Argos and supported by Investigative Journalism for Europe. Additional reporting by  Catherine Joie ,  Piret Reiljan ,  Paul Toetzke ,  Sophie Blok ,  Ties Gijzel ,  Silvia Nortes  and  Ben Heubl . This article was amended on 14 January 2021. Drax has converted four of its six units from coal to biomass, not four power plants as an earlier version said.
Mesut Özil poised to join Fenerbahce as agreement on ending Arsenal deal nears:	Mesut Özil is close to agreeing a settlement with  Arsenal  that would allow him to terminate his contract and join Fenerbahce this month. The playmaker’s future has been a live topic for several months and the question has been when, rather than if, he will depart a club at which he has fallen dramatically out of favour. Özil’s £350,000-a-week deal at Arsenal ends on 30 June but the two parties are on the verge of confirming an early parting of ways. Talks are understood to be continuing but player and club can now see a clear route out of a situation that has cast a shadow for longer than anyone involved would have liked. Özil was frozen out of Mikel Arteta’s plans after football returned from its Covid-19 hiatus in June and  was then completely cut  from the manager’s 25-man Premier League and Europa League squads for the first half of this season. He has become an expensive problem and, certainly among Arsenal’s fanbase, a deeply divisive one. Fenerbahce emerged this week  as the frontrunners for Özil’s signature in the event of a disentanglement with Arsenal, with the Major League Soccer club DC United also linked with the 32-year-old. He admitted in a Twitter question and answer session on Monday that Turkey and the US were the “two countries I want to play football in before I retire” and also explained that he grew up as a Fenerbahce fan, describing them as a Turkish version of Real Madrid. Terms with Fenerbahce are not expected to be a problem and his arrival in Istanbul should be confirmed as soon as the loose ends with Arsenal are tied up, potentially in the next few days. Özil won 92 caps for Germany, where he was born, during his international career but has Turkish heritage and has retained strong links with his ancestors’ country. It will draw the curtain on a seven-and-a-half-year spell at Arsenal that began amid significant excitement when he  signed from Real Madrid for £42.5m  in September 2013. The spell has not been without its successes, which have included three FA Cup wins, but did not quite provide the herald the fruitful new era that Arsenal had hoped for. His first three years at the Emirates were particularly impressive, with a return of 19 Premier League assists in 2015-16 bringing him the club’s player of the year award. Özil’s effectiveness waned, though, particularly after the departure of Arsène Wenger. He was dropped by Arteta’s predecessor, Unai Emery, while several off-pitch issues have caused friction with his employer. Özil was unhappy in December 2019 when, after he publicly criticised the treatment of Uighur Muslims in China,  Arsenal distanced themselves  from his comments.
Wolves v West Brom: Premier League – live!:	That’s the end of a very eventful, highly entertaining first half. West Brom looked lively, and could have been two up before they were hit by a Wolves double whammy. Both teams have contributed to a fine 45 minutes of football. More please! The Black Country derby is back, after a nine-year hiatus, and not a moment too soon. 45 min +1:  Snodgrass loops long from the right. Gibbs volleys from the left-hand corner of the six-yard box. He pulls his effort across the face of goal and out for a goal kick. 45 min:  Snodgrass makes his way past Saiss on the right, but can’t find anyone with his low cross. West Brom have played well, and will wonder how they’re losing. Moutinho’s corner drops at the near post and instigates a quick game of pinball. The ball pings to Boly’s feet, six yards out. Boly opens his body and slams into the bottom left! Boly has given away a penalty, set one up with a backheel, and scored one himself. What a return to action for the Wolves defender! 42 min:  Traore turns on the jets again, then takes it up a notch from there! It’s an unstoppable run. He reaches the byline but his cutback is blocked out for a corner. And from that ... 40 min:  That goal came slightly against the run of play, after a decent period for West Brom. The scoreline seems pretty much right over the piece, though. This is a lovely goal! Neto’s free kick isn’t up to much, and half-cleared by West Brom. Saiss hoicks it back into the mixer from the right. The ball hits Silva on the shoulder and breaks to Boly, who backheels down the inside left, returning it to Silva. Silva opens his body and steers a delightful sidefoot across Button and into the bottom right. What a finish! 37 min:  Snodgrass clips Neto down the left, and this is a free kick in a very dangerous position, just to the side of the West Brom area. Neto gets up and takes himself, and ... 36 min:  Ajayi is booked for a cynical tug on Dendoncker, who was threatening to launch a Wolves attack. One suspects Big Sam will be happy enough with that, too. 35 min:  Neto’s slovenly touch is snaffled by Snodgrass, who exchanges passes down the inside-right channel with Pereira. Snodgrass enters the box and attempts a shot-cum-cross from a tight angle. He falls over backwards and the ball is cleared, but that’s yet another decent move by West Brom, who have a few green shoots on display this afternoon. 34 min:  Neto shovels a gorgeous pass down the inside-left channel, nearly releasing Silva into space. Bartley does extremely well to anticipate the danger, coming over to skelp clear. 33 min:  Grosicki lashes a shot over the bar from 25 yards. He’s looked very lively on his first  Premier League  start this season. 31 min:  A free kick for Wolves out on the right. It’s flung diagonally into the box. Sawyers wins the first header. Pereira wins the second, steering it cleverly to Robinson, on the edge of the six-yard box. It’s a lovely move, and Robinson is onside, but he pokes straight into the chest of Rui Patricio, who had closed him down and made himself big. What a chance to double West Brom’s lead! 30 min:  A little bit scrappy, all of a sudden, but very hotly contested by both teams. Imagine if Molineux was packed to the rafters for this! 28 min:  Traore crosses from the right. Button claims under pressure from Silva. Wolves are enjoying themselves down this right flank. 27 min:  The third corner is half cleared, but Neto comes back at the visitors down the right. He crosses low towards the near post, where Boly backflicks cutely from the edge of the six-yard box. Just wide right. A lovely attempt, and one Button may not have reached had it been on target. 26 min:  Moutinho fizzes the corner into the six-yard box. Traore flicks on, and Livermore flashes over for a third corner. Back to the right this time. 25 min:  Semedo probes down the right again, winning a corner. Wolves load the box. Moutinho curls long, forcing Bartley to head out for a corner on the other side. 23 min:  Wolves take their turn of looking after the ball. Some pretty triangles, without any real purpose. West Brom are making them work for their possession. It’s all in their own half. 21 min:  West Brom’s all-new improved press is giving Wolves a few problems. Gibbs and Grosicki swarm and win the ball off Neves, then advance down the left. A few flicks nearly make some space; not quite. But Big Sam will be delighted with the improvements on display so far. Small acorns, and all that. 19 min:  Pereira sashays down the middle and looks to thread one into the bottom right from the edge of the D. There’s not quite enough oomph in his effort, and Rui Patricio claims easily. Wolves break, Traore going on another Power Meander down the right. The cross is no good, but what speed! This is superb end-to-end fun. 18 min:  Some great hold-up play by Silva, who holds off three men and lays off to Dendoncker, who has another thrash from distance. He gives it some fierce welly, but it’s straight at Button , who claims. 17 min:  Traore turns on the jets and makes off down the right. He digs out a cross for Dendoncker, on the penalty spot. Dendoncker is slightly behind the ball, and can’t get any power on the header he attempts to guide into the top left. It floats harmlessly wide. 15 min:  Dendoncker and Traore take turns to whistle shots goalwards. The first attempt is wide and high, the second straight at Button. A really lively opening to this game. Great fun. 13 min:  This is a good response by Wolves. Neto crosses from the left. Button struggles to claim under pressure from Silva, but does so in the end. The ball brushed the hand of Gibbs during the melee, but there was nothing he could do, it being punched onto his arm by Button from close range. No penalty. The little things are going West Brom’s way at the minute. Small margins between success and failure. 12 min:  Incidentally, the penalty decision was ratified by VAR. The foul was  right  on the white line; another couple of inches upfield and it wouldn’t have been given. But it was the correct decision, made in real time, by one of the Premier League’s better and more thoughtful referees. 10 min:  Wolves come straight back at West Brom, Silva grooving down the left. He’s clipped by Sawyers. A free kick just to the side of the D. Neves takes, but hoicks straight into the wall. West Brom clear. Pereira spots Rui Patricio going one way, then calmly slots into the top left. A lovely penalty. West Brom get the reward for their lively start! 7 min:  The visitors ping it around, Grosicki in the thick of it. The ball is slipped to Robinson, his back to goal on the edge of the box. Boly sticks a leg out and catches Robinson. Michael Oliver thinks about it for a while, then points to the spot. 6 min:  West Brom continue to look bright during these early exchanges. Robinson is doing an awful lot of sniffing around up front, putting Boly and Coady under pressure. Wolves, that Semedo run apart, are struggling to play their way upfield. 4 min:  Semedo takes on three men and zips with purpose down the right. It’s a fine run, made at full pelt, and he earns a corner which Moutinho takes. From the set piece, Neves has a whack from distance. Blocked. Then Boly has a dig, threading one towards the bottom right. It’s smothered easily by Button. 2 min:  Allardyce will be pretty happy with that brisk, front-foot start. Gauntlet down. Wolves respond by stroking it around the back awhile, asserting their status as hosts. After a blast of Hi Ho Silver Lining ... and the taking of the knee in the fight against racism ... West Brom get the ball rolling.  The first Black Country derby for nine years is on! West Brom win a throw down the right immediately, and it’s a first touch in a Baggies shirt for Snodgrass. He wins another throw. The ball’s flung into the mixer, and Robinson nearly gets a toe on the ball at the edge of the six-yard box. Rui Patricio collects, but that was nearly a sensational start for the visitors! Here come the teams!  Wolves are in their famous old gold, while West Brom sport their trademark navy blue and white stripes. Two looks with plenty of old-school class. We’ll be off in a minute or two! Nuno’s turn.  “It’s been difficult to manage all the situations, because of what has happened to us. We have tried to find solutions. It’s the balance between senior players and youth that will make us stronger. We must compete and play a good game. We know what this means to Wolves as a club against rivals so we want to compete well. We must stay together as a unit, fighting for each other. It’s the most important thing.” Big Sam speaks to BT Sport.  “We’re desperate for a result and there would be nothing better than making the fans happy. We’re trying to stop conceding goals that are avoidable. Our concentration levels sometimes lapses at moments, and it only takes the opposition a few seconds to exploit that. So that has been the focus when we’re out of possession. In possession, it’s all about trying to create more chances in open play, our quality has to get better, but that’s something I’ve seen in the short time I have been here. It’s a balance of defending correctly and creating more opportunities.” Wolves make two changes to the team that lost 2-1 at home to Everton on Tuesday night.  Adama Traore has recovered from a hamstring problem, while Willy Boly’s thigh has mended. Morgan Gibbs-White and Rayan Ait Nouri make way. West Brom ring the changes.  Four in all from the team that went down to Blackpool in the FA Cup. Robert Snodgrass makes his debut, while Callum Robinson, Dara O’Shea and Romaine Sawyers return. Branislav Ivanovic, Lee Peltier and Filip Krovinovic drop to the bench, while Conor Gallagher is suspended. Sam Johnstone and Matt Phillips are both absent, laid low by coronavirus. Wolverhampton Wanderers:  Rui Patricio, Nelson Semedo, Coady, Boly, Saiss, Dendoncker, Neves, Joao Moutinho, Traore, Silva, Pedro Neto. Subs: Hoever, Ait Nouri, Gibbs-White, Vitinha, Ruddy, Cutrone, Shabani, Kilman, Corbeanu. West Bromwich Albion:  Button, O’Shea, Ajayi, Bartley, Gibbs, Livermore, Sawyers, Matheus Pereira, Snodgrass, Grosicki, Robinson. Subs: Lonergan, Furlong, Robson-Kanu, Krovinovic, Ivanovic, Edwards, Peltier, Kipre, Field. Referee:  Michael Oliver (Northumberland). It’s the first Black Country derby for nine years.  As with any other local rivalry, football’s most unappealing prize - bragging rights - are up for grabs. Three precious points are too, manna from heaven for a couple of teams struggling a little bit at present. West Brom’s travails have been well publicised.  The short end of that story: Sam Allardyce has been wheeled in. It’s not been going that well for the Premier League’s most famous troubleshooter, though. Having run themselves into the ground for a point at Liverpool, they’ve subsequently lost the next two home games by an aggregate score of 9-0, then got themselves knocked out of the cup by third-tier opposition. Six points below Brighton and safety, albeit with a game in hand, they need something badly this afternoon. But then so do the hosts.  Wolverhampton Wanderers are a better team than their arch rivals right now, not that recent form offers much proof of that. They’ve only won one of their last eight league matches, losing five, and have only managed more than one goal twice during that run. They’re desperately missing Raul Jimenez, who sustained that serious head injury during a win at Arsenal that took Wolves sixth; they’ve been on the downward spiral ever since. They too could do with the three points, though the situation isn’t half as desperate as the Baggies. Despite it all, Wolves go into this match as strong favourites.  West Brom will take succour from the fact the last time they visited Molineux, in 2012, they won 5-1. It’s one of the signature clashes of the season. It’s the Black Country derby. It’s on! Kick off:  12.30pm GMT.
Cake, Pot Noodles, roast dinner: foods your parents didn’t know could be vegan:	 Chas Newkey-Burden  Fri 15 Jan 2021  16.17 GMT   Last modified on Fri 15 Jan 2021  16.18 GMT   Once upon a time, your parents labelled you the fussy eater of the family. But look at them now: so scared of vegan food you’d think you were asking them to eat sand. The benefits of plant-based eating are clear: according to a  study  by researchers at the University of Oxford, eating a plant-based diet can reduce your carbon footprint by up to 73%. Even skipping meat for just one day a week can reduce your annual carbon footprint by as much as not driving your car for a whole month. So, now’s the time to prove to your parents they’re more vegan than they realise with this handy menu of plant-based foods they already know and love, whatever the occasion. Marmite on toast  Sceptics often ask how vegans get vitamin B12 in their diets. Well, Marmite is bursting with it and your parents’ generation has been eating it all their lives. The iconic spread is also packed with other healthy vitamins including B1 (thiamine), B2 (riboflavin) and B3 (niacin). Croissants   Want the buttery taste without the actual butter? Jus-Rol’s ready-to-bake croissants get the tasty flakiness just right – or try La Boulangere vegan croissants. Roast dinner  With all the nut roasts and imitation meats available, there are many options to make a plant-based Sunday roast. The even better news is that no one needs to miss out on the all-important finishing touches because Bisto Onion Gravy has long been plant-based. Curry  Who wants to miss out on curry? Nobody, we can assure you. And now you won’t have to with Bol Malaysian Laksa Curry. A fresh and modern take on a traditional Malaysian classic, this protein-packed meal combines a creamy coconut curry with black turtle beans and spiced chickpeas. Your parents won’t be opting for their usual chicken tikka masala on the next curry night, that’s for sure. Beans on toast The ultimate comfort food, Heinz baked beans on toast is entirely vegan – and you can even mix things up with Birds Eye Potato Waffles, which are made out of freshly mashed potatoes. Ice-cream  What? An ice-cream made out of oats? Keep up, people: plant-based ice-cream is just as good as the traditional variety. Oatly’s impressive ice-cream range includes chocolate fudge, strawberry, vanilla, hazelnut swirl and salted caramel. So there’s something for everyone! Biscuits  Lotus Biscoff caramelised biscuits are so beautifully moreish that there should probably be a law against them. They are the perfect accompaniment for your parents’ morning coffee – and entirely vegan. Cake  When your mum and dad were growing up they probably saw the adverts that boasted that Mr Kipling makes “exceedingly good” cakes. Well, it turns out he also makes exceedingly good vegan treacle tart. Popcorn  They may not “Netflix and chill” much any more (take a moment to block that image out of your head), but your parents probably still enjoy some popcorn when watching a film. Many leading brands – including Tyrrells, Metcalfe’s and Propercorn – have plant-based popcorn, or you can make your own with an air popper. Crisps  Did you think vegans miss out on the bacon flavour? They sure don’t. Get an instant hit of the crackling meat with Tesco’s plant-based rashers, This Isn’t Bacon Rashers. Your parents won’t be able to tell the difference between the real thing. Crackers  Ritz Originals are salty, savoury and will melt in your mouth. Top with vegan cheese and feel good that absolutely no animals were harmed in the making of them. Win-win. Pot Noodles When your mum and dad were your age, there’s a good chance that Pot Noodles formed a big part of their food intake. That’s just how students lived in those days. Surprisingly, even the Brazilian BBQ Steak, Chinese Chow Mein, Piri-Piri Chicken and Beef and Tomato flavours are all vegan. Stout Vegans used to have to avoid stout because animal products were used as finings to help filtration. However, in 2018, this process was phased out and the black stuff is now cruelty free. There are also countless vegan lagers, wines and spirits. We’ll cheers to that! Need help talking to dad about milk? Visit  oatly.com/helpdad
Anyone shocked by the US Capitol attack has ignored an awful lot of warning signs:	P erhaps the most powerful shocks, the most painful surprises, are the ones that we saw coming yet refused to believe would happen. Our ability to fear something and, at the same time, assume it will never occur is one aspect of human nature that seems particularly ill-suited to our continued wellbeing and survival. Throughout the 6 January  attack on the US Capitol , as journalists and politicians expressed their stunned astonishment, one couldn’t help wondering: hadn’t they heard about the hundreds of people, some of them armed, who stormed the Michigan state capitol building in  April , objecting to Governor Gretchen Whitmer’s stay-at-home order? Had they forgotten that a  young woman  was killed during the August 2017 Unite the Right march in Charlottesville, Virginia – a neo-Nazi event that Donald Trump declined to unequivocally condemn? Had their interns not been keeping up with – and informing their bosses about – the popular Twitter feeds and Facebook pages of far-right hate groups and extremist conspiracy theorists? Had no one explained that the Proud Boys’ T-shirt insignia – 6MWE – means “Six Million [Jews] Weren’t Enough”? During the assault on the Capitol, as I listened to the panic and horror in the voices of the journalists who, until now, had reported on Donald Trump with something closer to detached disapproval, I wondered: is this what it takes to finally make them understand  who this man is  – and what he wants for our country? What did they think he meant when he tweeted about the gathering planned for 6 January: “Be there. It will be wild.” Even as the “wild” rioters were scaling the walls of the Capitol, some news media persisted in calling them “protesters” and “demonstrators”. These insurgents were far more than that. Images of politicians sheltering in “safe locations” in the Capitol complex reminded me of how, on 13 November 2015, my son – whose band was playing at the Trianon theater in Paris that evening – sheltered backstage while jihadis murdered 89 people at the Bataclan auditorium, a few blocks away. The difference between protesters and terrorists is critical. Demonstrators are expressing their response to a policy, an event or a series of events – systemic racism, for example. But terrorists plot violent mayhem, rehearse, fail, come up with a new plan, try again and again until they succeed. We all recall that the destruction of the World Trade Center was preceded by a 1993 attempt to bomb the WTC parking garage. The attack on the Michigan state capitol and the Charlottesville march were rehearsals for what transpired in DC last week. Donald Trump  is clearly responsible for the 6 January attack. His speech to the crowd that day was an incitement to violence. But it would be a mistake to imagine that the fury and lawlessness of his supporters will disappear when he retires to Mar-a-Lago, goes to jail or begins campaigning for the 2024 presidential election. It’s important to recall that Trump has been the accelerant but not the fuel, not the kindling that has allowed the flames of hatred and bigotry, of anti-democratic rightwing fanaticism to blaze as brightly as they do now. Many of us have a film clip or photo, taken on 6 January, that most haunts us. A friend posted an image of some thugs trying to burn a heap of costly equipment – cameras, recorders, microphones – abandoned, during the rout, by Associated Press reporters. But the image I find most troubling is a short video clip of a dozen or so rioters idly wandering the Senate floor, picking up papers from the senators’ desk, then strolling on.  If these Trump loyalists believe – as they kept chanting – that the duly-elected, soon-to-be Biden-Harris administration is not their government, it’s not only because their president told them so. And the framed portraits, the statuary, the gleaming chandeliers they saw in the Capitol building were unlikely to change their minds. The interlopers on the Senate floor looked less triumphant than bewildered, and their bewilderment is not unrelated to the sources of their rage: the massive income inequality, the epidemic unemployment, the opioid and Covid pandemics, the sense of being excluded and forgotten that helps inspire xenophobia, racism, sexism and violence. The rapid decline of our public educational system and the rise of far-right media are not unrelated; among the things that education gives us is the ability to think, to distinguish the truth from the lie, to process and evaluate the information we’re given. These are the problems and the perils that the Biden-Harris administration will have to deal with, and which all the palliative talk about unity, reconciliation, and “working across the aisle” is not going to come remotely close to fixing. Let’s be clear: the Biden-Harris administration has exactly four years to repair some large part of the damage that’s been done – a short time to begin a massive and necessary project. Otherwise, these violent groups are going to rehearse, retry, recoup, try again and again – until they succeed. With or without Donald Trump, the violence, if it ever goes away, will come roaring back. Lawmakers like Josh Hawley, loudly voicing their objections to the 2020 election results, are already campaigning for the job of anti-democratic dictator in 2024. Unless some substantive changes are made – something more sweeping than the middle-of-the-road policy tweaks that seem to be in the offing – the next coup attempt may very well succeed. And we’ll be left to marvel at something else that we always suspected was possible, but that we never believed would actually happen here, and certainly not to us. Francine Prose is a novelist. Her new book The Vixen is out June 2021
Experts remain divided over merits of mass Covid tests in schools:	The education secretary, Gavin Williamson, has put mass testing for coronavirus  at the heart of his strategy  to reopen schools after the lockdown. It is a controversial strategy that has divided scientists. Some believe mass testing can help reduce outbreaks at schools, while others argue it could make matters worse by giving teachers and pupils false reassurance. Mass testing relies on lateral flow tests, or LFTs, which contain antibodies that bind to the virus. When a nasal swab is tested in an LFT, any virus present in the sample sticks to the antibodies and produces a dark band, a bit like a pregnancy test’s indicator. LFTs are not as accurate as the standard NHS lab-based PCR tests, but they are cheap and produce results fast – within 30 minutes. The downside of LFTs is their performance.  In a pilot trial in Liverpool , mass testing failed to spot more than half the people who were infected but had no symptoms. The tests missed nearly a third of asymptomatic people who had high viral loads and were at highest risk of spreading the disease. Another issue with LFTs is that their accuracy falls in the hands of amateurs. Given that teachers and parents will be administering the tests, this could reduce their value further. In an interim evaluation of the kits, researchers at the University of Oxford and Public  Health  England’s Porton Down lab found the tests picked up 79% of cases when used by skilled lab scientists, but only 58% when used by self-trained members of the public. Jon Deeks, a professor of biostatistics at the University of Birmingham, argues that LFTs are not fit for many of the purposes the UK government has in mind, mass testing in schools included. Because the tests miss so many infections, a negative test would not mean a teacher or pupil is virus-free. The danger is that teachers and pupils are falsely reassured and, thinking they are safe, put others at risk. The problem is compounded by letters to parents and guidance for teachers that claim the tests are “very accurate”, he adds. It is not the only concern. Deeks believes that repeated, ineffective testing is a harmful diversion of resources, and risks traumatising children, particularly those with learning difficulties and mental health problems. Not all scientists are opposed to the testing, however. The Independent Sage committee – not to be confused with the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies – concedes that mass testing is not a panacea and will not, on its own, make schools safe. But they back mass testing as a means to find cases of coronavirus, rather than deciding whether or not people are infected. “A negative test should not be taken as an indication that someone is not infected or to relax other mitigations at either an individual or collective level,” the group said in its  “safe schools policy” report . Adam Finn, a professor of paediatrics at the University of Bristol, has made a similar point, saying LFTs are “red light tests” not “green light tests”, meaning that testing negative does not mean a person can behave as if they are virus-free.
Questions will be asked over timing of closing UK travel corridors:	The announced  closure of all international travel corridors  to the UK marks the end of another week of changing policy, with the timing and implementation dismaying many. Travel corridors will be axed in effect from Monday morning. The corridors, which exempted inbound travellers from the requirement to quarantine for 10 days, may make little practical difference to the airline and travel industry in the current context. Schedules have been slashed and comparatively few people are likely to have travelled to or from the majority of the few dozen destinations remaining on the corridor list: some obscure, some no longer linked by flights to the UK, others barring British travellers. Holidays are banned; a few Caribbean destinations with longer-staying visitors are the most likely to have affected travellers, with the likes of Dubai already recently removed from the list. The industry has said it accepts the overwhelming public health case for the move. The suspension of all corridors will coincide with the requirement for pre-departure testing for all arrivals – a policy that many airports and airlines had called for months ago, if globally coordinated, as an enabler of safer travel. Both the UKinbound tourism body and Airlines UK, which represents UK carriers, have urged the government to make it clear the measure is temporary and, until it is lifted, to provide  more financial support  to a sector that is in effect in the deep freeze. While the government will point to the emergence of new variants, questions will again be asked on the timing, coherence and implementation of the rules. Boris Johnson imposed a ban  on flights from Brazil this week  – almost three weeks after UK flights were barred by Brazil. Enforcement of negative Covid tests for travellers arriving in England  had to be delayed  from 4am on Friday after the government only published the requirements late on Wednesday evening – a matter of hours before affected flights could have departed, leaving passengers perplexed and some paying hundreds of pounds for unnecessary paperwork. Even now, the Business Travel Association is warning the government has yet to issue detailed information on where those travelling for work can get acceptable tests. Essential workers – medical researchers, energy suppliers and humanitarians – must, it suggests, be able to travel with confidence in procedures and in the knowledge they can return home. There is a sense of deja vu after the similarly botched introduction of the  “test to release” scheme  – which still allows people arriving in the UK to apply to exit quarantine early after five days with a further negative Covid test. That scheme also had a lengthy period between announcement and implementation – and then arrived with a list of suppliers that could not deliver, to the cost and frustration of many who ended up out of pocket and in isolation. The bigger question may yet prove to be why public health measures at the borders first promised by ministers a fortnight ago have taken two weeks to introduce, should new variants from abroad be discovered in the UK. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, joked on Friday he was the last person to give advice on whether people should book travel – a reference, no doubt, to the travel corridor to Spain  he axed while on holiday  there last year. Unfortunately, no one is better placed to answer than Shapps.
'Brazilian horror story': internet melts down over sculptor's peculiar waxworks:	The first household name Arlindo Armacollo smothered in beeswax was Mother Teresa. Then came Albert Einstein, Pope John Paul II and a string of global luminaries who the entrepreneur-turned-artist admired. “It might look simple, but to achieve this richness of detail was hard work,” a local television reporter gushed during  a 2015 visit to Armacollo’s waxwork collection  in southern Brazil. “The artist wanted to capture the character as well as the soul of each person.” Whether the septuagenarian sculptor achieved that goal is now a matter of intense international debate, after images of his wax creations went viral on social media – six years after first being displayed in the town of Rolândia. Footage of Armacollo’s startling figures spread like wildfire last week after internet users unearthed – and ridiculed –  the video report  about their exhibition in a local church. The strangely disfigured personalities on show include Nelson Mandela, who has a beefcake’s body, a tiny head and dazzling peroxide hair; Princess Diana, who wears a crazed and terrifying grin; and Marilyn Monroe, who boasts a neck the size of a tree trunk and a seemingly melted face. Nearby, black hairs sprout from unusual corners of Elvis Presley’s shiny wax face. “Brazilian horror story,”  gasped  one of the numerous Twitter users discombobulated by the models. Word of the collection – which reminded some of  Spain’s jaw-dropping botched restorations  – soon spread. Journalists from leading news outlets in Brazil and beyond pursued the previously unknown artist for a reaction to his newfound fame. “I couldn’t care less [about the criticism],” Armacollo, 77, told the Guardian on Tuesday as he was flooded with interview requests and invitations for television appearances he planned to decline. “If it was about making money it might bother me whether people appreciated what I was doing or not. But I do the things I do because I enjoy them. I did this for our town. If people like it, come and visit. If they don’t, don’t,” he shrugged. “Why worry?” Armacollo’s statues, which each involve about 5kg of wax and imported English eyeballs, have moved since their 2015 television debut and are now housed in a nearby museum named after his father. There, Princess Diana has been joined by newer sculptures, including a similarly peculiar portrayal of the Queen. Until recently the exhibition also featured a statue of the corruption-busting judge Sergio Moro with a distinct resemblance to England defender Harry Maguire. But Armacollo evicted Brazil’s former security minister after  he resigned  from government and  took a high-paid job  with a consultancy involved in the judicial recovery of one of the construction giants he once pursued. “It’s all a bit weird, isn’t it?” Armacollo said. Like many in south  Brazil , Armacollo is a supporter of Jair Bolsonaro, and had considered honouring the right-wing populist president with his wax. “But then I thought: ‘I’m going to hold off for a bit to keep an eye on his behaviour.’ For now I’m still behind him and think he’s on the right path – but let’s wait a bit more to see to see if that solidifies.” The artist scoffed at the idea of celebrating Bolsonaro’s leftwing rival, the former president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. “You’re not in favour of him, are you?” he asked this reporter with a mistrustful laugh. Politics aside, Armacollo hoped “all this commotion” would attract tourists from other cities and abroad. A similar museum in Norfolk achieved cult status as “the world’s worst waxworks”, drawing thousands of visitors with  its un-lifelike lifelikes . Armacollo’s only regret was the reaction of his teenager granddaughter, left distraught by the mocking of her grandfather’s mannequins. “She’s very sensitive. She even cried,” the artist admitted, “but now she’s laughing about it too.”
Covid eruption in Brazil's largest state leaves health workers begging for help:	Health workers in Brazil’s largest state are begging for help and oxygen supplies after an explosion of Covid deaths and infections that one official compared to a tsunami and said could be linked to a new variant. Amazonas, and particularly its riverside capital Manaus, were pummeled by the epidemic’s first wave last April, when authorities  were forced to dig mass graves  for victims. But at a press conference on Thursday, the state governor, Wilson Lima, admitted the situation was now even more dramatic and declared an immediate 7pm to 6am curfew to slow the outbreak. “We are facing the most critical moment of the pandemic, something unprecedented in the state of Amazonas,” Lima told reporters as he announced the restriction. As he spoke, horrific details were emerging of a breakdown in Manaus’s public health system, with reports of many patients dying after public hospitals and emergency care units ran out of oxygen. More than 206,000 people have now died across  Brazil , the second highest total in the world after the US. “This is an unprecedented calamity,” said Jesem Orellana, a local epidemiologist from the Fiocruz public health research centre. “In the coming hours Manaus is going to be the protagonist of one of the saddest chapters of the Covid-19 epidemic in the world.” “There is no [oxygen],” added Orellana, who has been calling for a local lockdown since September. “Colleagues of ours – nurses, doctors and even social workers – are being called in to perform manual ventilation on people. A single human being is only capable of performing manual ventilation for about 20 minutes, so if you want to save one life without oxygen you are going to need at least three or four people per patient.” The director of one of Manaus’s most important public hospitals sent health workers a WhatsApp message pleading for their help. “The Getúlio Vargas hospital has no oxygen and all patients are being  ambuzados  (manually ventilated). If anyone can help rotate the ventilation of the patients in the ICU on the fifth floor, please, we need you,” he told them. “This is the situation. It is critical. Let’s fight. If you can help, please do.” Another health worker at the same hospital told the Guardian employees had been too busy trying to save lives to count the dead. “Manaus is chaos,” they said. “We have no oxygen.” One  video shared on social media  showed a distraught woman emerging from one public clinic shouting: “We’re in an appalling state. The whole unit’s oxygen has simply run out and there are many people dying. Anyone who has any oxygen available please bring it to the clinic [near the airport]. There are so many people dying, for the love of God.” Speaking alongside the governor at Thursday’s press conference, local health official Tatiana Amorim said the  R value  in Amazonas state was now 1.3. “This means that for every 100 people 130 are being infected each seven days. This speed was seen in April and May [at the height of the first wave]. This means that we are truly again experiencing a tsunami.” Amorim said there were three possible explanations for the sudden surge in infections: the relaxation of containment measures, increased transmission during Christmas and end-of-year festivities, and the chance that a new coronavirus variant was circulating in Amazonas. Lima, a 44-year-old television presenter aligned with Brazil’s rightwing president Jair Bolsonaro, claimed the federal government was mobilized “so we can overcome this moment as soon as possible”. “We’re on a war footing,” he said, announcing that coronavirus patients would be evacuated to other states for treatment. Brazil’s vice-president, Hamilton Mourão,  tweeted  photographs of oxygen cylinders being airlifted into Manaus by the air force. But many will see such actions as too little, too late. Infectious disease specialists have spent months urging authorities to impose some kind of lockdown to avoid exactly this kind of situation. Their penultimate petition, on 4 January, warned Manaus was again being “plunged into chaos” and implored: “We need to save lives and not repeat 2020’s health and humanitarian tragedy in 2021.” State authorities only took action on 26 December,  ordering shops to close for 15 days,  before backing away from those measures after street protests from local business people and workers. “Politics kills,” the Getúlio Vargas hospital health worker said on Thursday. Orellana said the number of burials left no doubt the city was facing its darkest hour. “Yesterday, we broke a new record for the fourth day in a row with the absurd total of 198 burials. On Saturday there were 130 burials. On Sunday, 144. On Monday, 150. On Tuesday, 166,” he said. In normal times the average would be about 30. “It is a catastrophe, and the coming hours will be the worst you can possibly imagine.”
UK bans arrivals from South America over Brazilian Covid strain:	The UK government has been accused of putting lives at risk with a botched border policy after it banned arrivals from South America and  Portugal  several days after concerns emerged about a new Brazilian variant of Covid. The transport secretary,  Grant Shapps , announced that arrivals from more than a dozen countries including Argentina, Venezuela, Bolivia and Peru would be halted. He said Portugal had also been included because of its close travel links with Brazil. It is unclear as yet whether the Brazilian strain may be vaccine-resistant. UK citizens and permanent residents will be exempt from the travel ban but they and their families will have to self-isolate for 10 days on arrival. The shadow home secretary, Nick Thomas-Symonds, welcomed the measures as necessary but criticised the government’s failure to implement more systematic checks on arrivals. “This is yet another example of government incompetence, lurching from one crisis and rushed announcement to another. The failure to put in place an effective policy on testing before entry and a quarantine system that is checking only one in 100 people is putting lives at risk,” he said. The new measures came 24 hours after Boris Johnson was pressed by Labour’s Yvette Cooper about why he had not taken more urgent action in response to reports about the Brazilian strain of the virus. Cooper welcomed the travel ban on Thursday but warned: “We know from the first wave of the Covid crisis that focusing just on direct flights isn’t sufficient. We still need a proper testing and quarantine system for airports and ports as other countries have.” She called the government “irresponsible” for delaying its new testing regime for all arrivals to the UK at the last minute, pointing out that the Brazilian strain had been identified in Japan by testing of passengers in airport quarantine. The new testing system, which will require travellers to have a negative Covid test before coming to the UK, has been pushed back from Friday morning to Monday after a backlash from travel companies and tourists who complained the government had failed to provide enough guidance to operate the scheme effectively. The prime minister’s spokesperson defended the last-minute delay, calling it a “grace period”. “We always said we would introduce the regulations on Friday, and the laws still come into force on Friday, but we’ve implemented a grace period over the weekend so that passengers can have a little bit more time to get access to the tests they need that meet our requirements,” he said. The safeguarding minister, Victoria Atkins, had earlier suggested the delay had been made for business reasons. Speaking to Sky News, she said: “There’s a very delicate balancing act here between controlling the virus but also ensuring that we are not putting too much of a burden on the economy.” Travellers will need to present proof of a negative test result to their carrier upon boarding, and UK Border Force will conduct spot checks on arrivals. Arrivals who flout the rules will face a minimum £500 fine, and the operator who transported them will also be fined. Passengers will still have to quarantine for 10 days regardless of their test results. The guidance specifying the type of tests and documentation that would be required was not published on the government’s website until late on Wednesday, making it almost impossible for potential inbound travellers abroad to arrange tests in time for the original deadline. The decision on the travel ban was made at a meeting of the ministerial Covid-O committee on Thursday morning on the basis of evidence from experts on the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) on new viruses. Government sources said devolved administrations supported Shapps’s decision, with Wales and Scotland poised to announce similar action. Johnson had hinted at fresh restrictions on Wednesday when he was grilled by MPs about the issue, telling Cooper: “We’re putting in extra measures to ensure that people coming from Brazil are checked: and indeed stopping people coming from  Brazil .” Direct flights between Brazil and the UK were banned last month as the Brazilian government tried to prevent the highly transmissible English variant of the virus arriving on its shores. The UK government has been criticised throughout the pandemic for failing to act rapidly enough to control the borders.
UK 'nowhere near' looking at lifting Covid lockdown restrictions:	Ministers are awaiting evidence on whether the Covid-19 vaccines prevent transmission of the virus before they can even consider laying out a timetable for lifting lockdown restrictions, government sources say. With early data suggesting the  tide may be beginning to turn  in some parts of the country, Boris Johnson has come under pressure from lockdown sceptics on his own backbenches to say how and when the “stay at home” order can be loosened. But a Downing Street source insisted: “It’s just too soon. We’re nowhere near even looking at what the process would be.” Johnson issued a video message on Friday, urging the public to “think twice before leaving the house this weekend”. As well as analysing the latest data on case numbers and hospitalisations, it is understood ministers are waiting to see Public  Health  England (PHE) research on the impact the vaccines may have on limiting the spread of the disease. “That’s very important,” one government insider said. Clinical trials demonstrated the overwhelming efficacy of the vaccines in preventing patients from becoming ill and dying with Covid but did not make clear whether those people could still be vectors for the virus. Johnson has been notably cautious about promising an end to the lockdown, warning that he cannot yet say whether schools will be able to reopen after the February half-term. He is  unlikely to follow Scotland  and  Wales in tightening restrictions , focusing instead on compliance. The new business secretary, Kwazi Kwarteng, urged employers earlier this week to take “every possible step” to enable their staff to work from home. Data published by the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) on Friday offered some early signs that infections appear to be levelling off. The latest  R number  for the UK is 1.2 to 1.3, and 1.1 to 1.3 in England, with the number of new infections in the UK growing by between 2% and 5% every day, according to Sage. The week before, the R value for the UK was 1.0 to 1.4. The R value indicates the average number of people to whom an infected person passes the virus. The number of people  testing positive for the virus  showed an increase on Friday, however, to 55,761, up from 48,682 on Thursday. While overall the R number suggests the outbreak is continuing to grow, there are regional differences, with London, the south-east and  the east of England  showing signs that infections could be levelling off or even potentially falling. In the capital, the R number is between 0.9 and 1.2, with the number of new infections somewhere between shrinking by 2% and growing by 3% a day. But experts warn the figures do not reflect the present moment in time. “These estimates represent the transmission of Covid-19 over the past few weeks due to the time delay between someone being infected, having symptoms and needing healthcare,” the team behind the government’s R number data said. The Sage estimate is based on R values calculated from a number of teams, including the MRC Biostatistics Unit at Cambridge University, whose own analysis is more upbeat – potentially because its number is calculated from different types of data to some other groups, including from mobility trends. Lockdown-sceptic Tory backbenchers have seized on early signs that the second wave may have peaked to press the case for the government to loosen restrictions. The Covid recovery group chair, Mark Harper, has set 8 March as a deadline for starting to reopen some aspects of the economy – three weeks on from the government’s  15 February deadline for vaccinating the most vulnerable groups . The Conservative MP Steve Baker wrote to colleagues earlier this week to say  Johnson’s leadership would “inevitably be on the table”  if he failed to set out “a clear plan for when our full freedoms will be restored” – though when the letter leaked to the Sun he quickly tweeted his support for the prime minister. Only 14 Conservative MPs voted against the latest lockdown rules, which expire at the end of March – but many others supported the government while calling for restrictions to be eased as soon as is practicable. However, ministers are focused on the fact that cases remain at an extremely high level, and the lag between infection and hospitalisation means the situation in hospitals will get worse before it gets better. Experts say it is too soon to asses whether cases have peaked. Dr Michael Tildesley, of the University of Warwick, who is part of the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (SPI-M) that feeds into Sage, said more time was needed before it became clear how case numbers were changing. “There are early signals in the south-east and London that spread may be slowing, but there is still a lot of uncertainty around this,” he said.
Pandemic death toll exceeds 2 million people worldwide – as it happened:	This liveblog has now closed. Our coverage of the coronavirus pandemic continues on our new live blog. Pfizer’s reduction of its COVID-19 vaccine shipments will not delay  Canada’s  goal of getting most people inoculated by the end of September, the country’s procurement minister said as the country battled a second surge in infections. “This is a temporary delay and we remain on track to have enough approved vaccines for everyone who wishes to get vaccinated by the end of September 2021,” Procurement Minister Anita Anand said. Pfizer said it would slow production in late January and early February due to changes to manufacturing processes aimed at boosting production, but would provide a “significant increase” in doses in late February and March. Canada’s Major-General Dany Fortin, who is in charge of coordinating the country’s vaccine rollout, told reporters Canada will receive about half the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine over the next four weeks than had been previously expected. However, Pfizer/BioNTech will “offset” the shortfall and still deliver - as had been planned - some 4 million by the end of March, he said. Canada is struggling to contain a second wave of the novel coronavirus. On Friday, the health ministry said there could be a spike of more than 100,000 new cases in just the next nine days. That means almost 12,000 new cases per day, compared with the 7,565 new cases reported on Thursday. The incoming administration of  US  President-elect Joe Biden will seek to vaccinate all people over 65 and frontline workers, as Biden seeks to administer 100 million Covid-19 vaccines during his first 100 days in office. The Biden team said that after he takes office on January 20th, Biden will use the Defense Production Act to increase supply of vaccine vials, syringes, needles and related equipment to try and speed up the vaccination of Americans.  In  Australia , the airline Emirates has abruptly suspended flights to and from Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane indefinitely, leaving hundreds of Australians stranded. On Friday evening, the airline announced its last flight into Brisbane from Dubai would be on Saturday, while the last flights into Sydney and Melbourne would be on Tuesday. The airline says their last flights in and out of each city are as follows: Dubai-Brisbane (EK430), 16 January Brisbane-Dubai (EK431), 17 January Dubai-Sydney (EK414), 18 January Sydney-Dubai (EK415), 19 January Dubai-Melbourne (EK408), 19 January Melbourne-Dubai (EK409), 20 January “Customers holding tickets with final destinations Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane will not be accepted for travel at their point of origin after the completion of the above flights,” the airline said. “Emirates regrets any inconvenience caused. Affected customers should contact their travel agent or Emirates contact centre for rebooking options.” An estimated 37,000 Australians are stuck overseas wanting to get home. Australia’s international arrival caps will be cut by almost 50% from today. Tunisia  said on Friday it recorded 4,170 new confirmed coronavirus cases, a record since the start of the pandemic. Tunisia on Thursday imposed a four-day national lockdown and closed schools until Jan. 24 to combat a sharp rise in COVID-19 cases. Other measures included rotating staffing in state jobs to reduce people in offices and transport, longer curfew hours and the removal of all chairs from cafes. Coronavirus  cases have been rising fast in Tunisia, which had managed to contain the virus last year. They have now reached 175,065 cases and 5,528 deaths. With intensive care units in most public hospitals full and the sharp rise of infections and deaths, officials suggested extending the lockdown for at least two more weeks.  An experimental Covid-19 vaccine from Johnson & Johnson produced protective antibodies against the novel coronavirus in 90% of 805 volunteers by 29 days, and that increased to 100% by day 57, according to data from an ongoing mid-stage study. Side effects such as fever, muscle aches and injection site pain resolved quickly, researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Yet to be approved by regulators, the J&J vaccine must show efficacy as reflected by a lower risk of infections and severe disease in study participants who receive it compared to those who do not. Efficacy data from a large late-stage trial on the vaccine is due by February. Experts expect the vaccine to show efficacy at or above 80%, which would exceed the 50% benchmark for regulatory approval but trail the roughly 95% achieved in trials of already-authorised vaccines from Moderna Inc and Pfizer Inc with BioNTech SE.  The J&J vaccine requires just a single dose, and it does not have the cold storage requirements of the other vaccines. Brazil’s  president Jair Bolsonaro said a plane would be sent to India to pick up COVID-19 vaccines in two or three days at most, after the government had announced the flight would leave on Friday. Bolsonaro added there was little he could do about the pandemic in Brazil as a second wave tears through the country and that he “should be at the beach.”  The  French  government said 389,000 people have received the coronavirus vaccine thus far, Reuters is reporting.  Scattered vaccine shortages cropped up on the front lines of the  US  battle against the pandemic, prompting at least one large healthcare system to cancel a slew of appointments of people hoping to be inoculated.  The supply-chain blips arose as the country struggles to speed up the pace of vaccinations, which totaled 12.3 million, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New York, mayor Bill de Blasio said the city has vaccinated about 300,000 of its more than 8 million residents, but was on course to run dry next week because it was burning through vaccines faster than they were being replenished. “We’ve been getting resupply right now at a very paltry level of about 100,000 doses a week,” de Blasio said on WNYC radio. “We went through 125,000 in the first four days of this week, and our numbers are increasing every day.” De Blasio has said the city would be on track to meet its goal of vaccinating 1 million New Yorkers by the end of January if it is able to get supplies.  If there’s no supply, we’re going to have to freeze the appointment system,” he said. That would be insane after all the progress has been made.”
Victoria Covid hotspots: list of Melbourne and regional Vic coronavirus case locations:	Victorian authorities have released a list of public exposure sites visited by a confirmed case of Covid-19. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at Victoria’s  Department of Health and Human Services website . List of public exposure sites in Victoria If you have visited any of the locations listed below during the date and time indicated you must  get tested  immediately and quarantine for 14 days from the exposure. If you have visited any of the locations listed below during the date and time indicated you must  get tested  immediately and quarantine until you receive a negative result. If you have visited any of the locations listed below you should monitor for symptoms - If symptoms develop, immediately get tested and isolate until you receive a negative result. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Growing up, I heard about Australia's fictitious fair go. Now I know it's not the case:	Name : Tristan Williams Age:  24 Dreams of:  Being a social media account manager For me, 2021 is a year of starting again. Starting from the ground and building myself up. Towards the end of last year, I saw the ugly side of life. I saw society’s overindulgence, I learned the importance of keeping the important people close, and I started, like most people do at the closing of a year, asking myself the important rhetorical question of “Who am I?” In my last diary,  I relayed an experience I was having  where Centrelink cut my income completely in the lead-up to Christmas. I am excited to say this is a problem that no longer plagues me. On December 24, I had my payment reinstated. I was ecstatic. Actually, ecstatic is too small a word for what I was feeling. After being roughly three weeks without any source of income, this news was the best Christmas gift of all. I was thankful to be an Australian – and then it hit me. I had been very hard done by. I was wrongly cut from my payments, with no concession, no backup, no notice, and with zero reason that I can think of. Yes, I was happy at the prospect of getting my money back, but I was not thankful. I was angry. Should I be thankful? Is my anger justified? Many people in my immediate life who read my second diary said that Centrelink benefits are a privilege, not a right, and that got me thinking. And then I was even more angry. These people made it sound like it was somehow my fault for leaving myself so financially vulnerable, even though I lost work this year because of Covid. Some people made me feel guilty, and quite wrongly so, for actually needing the help of our government to survive the day-to-day.  Those who have never graced the halls of a Centrelink service centre cast aspersions in the direction of anyone seeking the government dollar to simply make ends meet. Even during the life and times of Rona, you heard of people feeling ashamed, distraught, “lower-class”, for needing the support of the government when they were made redundant or couldn’t find the hours to make ends meet. This mentality needs to change now if we as a nation are going to push through and survive. This mentality rubs off. When I first accessed Centrelink I thought “I can’t support myself”, “I can’t do what I need to do”, “I am a burden on society.” Many times I was made to feel like a lower-class citizen for my lack of contribution. But now, I’m content to say: to hell with that. Any functioning government which cares about its citizenship should offer a standardised safety net of support without judgment, without stigmatisation and without condemnation. The constant victimisation of the vulnerable members of our society has led Australia into a class system where a massive wealth divide is quite clear. It’s a scary notion and it’s happening all around us. Growing up, you hear all about this fictitious “fair go” and the social wealth hierarchy. That anyone, with enough hard work, can attain their comfortable life. However, I know first hand this is very much not the case. Social mobility is a term romanticised by the wealthy and the government to force the less fortunate and working class into the endless cycle of overworking to just make ends meet and essentially make someone else richer. I believed in this notion growing up. That my good grades, hard work and exceptional achievements would somehow lead me to a comfortable life. This is all fake. The rich are getting exemptions and concessions while the poor are being vilified and overworked. This needs to change now. Now this diary, yes. It has taken a bit more of a political tone than the last. There is a reason for this. Over the last few days, I have had a few great moments of personal reflection as to what the coming year means for me. Over my life I have been fortunate to wear many hats, undertake many roles and experience many opportunities. But with that, I haven’t learned who I am underneath all of that. When I strip away the layers, who is the real Tristan underneath? And that is what this year is going to be about for me. Political advocacy is something I have done before and will do again. Social justice is a great passion of mine, being an openly proud gay man. I am unapologetically me. I think the whole Centrelink debacle not only got my blood boiling, but in some ways, it reactivated a political energy that I have always felt there. Something that comes out every now and then in debates of passion, but never towards something as personal as standardised wealth and conditions of living. I am starting this year rebuilding who I am. Graduating from my masters. Creating a research manifesto. Becoming financially stable through the establishment of a more thorough freelancing venture. And hopefully, proving to all of the doubters that I can do it; nay, that young people can do it. There are times when society likes to count us young folk out, but I believe that 2021 is our year. The year where we can start to really see the world and life for what it is; a story in which we didn’t even know we were the authors – until now.
NSW reports no new local Covid cases, as Queensland denies hotel quarantine breach – as it happened:	With that, we’ll be closing the blog for today. Here’s a recap of the day’s headlines: Emergency warnings have been issued for separate  bushfires  threatening lives in Perth’s eastern foothills and the Wheatbelt region, AAP reports. Firefighters are battling to contain an out-of-control blaze in  High Wycombe , near the Perth Hills. Residents in the suburb’s north-east are warned they are in danger and need to act immediately to survive. An emergency alert has also been issued for parts of  Daliak  in the Shire of York, about 96km east of Perth, which has forced the closure of the Great Southern Highway. Affected residents should leave now if there is a clear path or prepare to actively defend their home, the  Department of Fire and Emergency Services  said on Friday. Those who remain should close all doors and windows and turn off evaporative air conditioners but keep water running through the system if possible. Health  experts have cautiously endorsed the Victorian government’s decision to push ahead with hosting the  Australian Open , saying the positive Covid-19 test recorded by former world number one  Andy Murray  before arriving at the tournament showed the protocols were working. As  Victoria  recorded no new cases of the virus for the ninth day in a row on Friday, the health minister,  Martin Foley , confirmed that both Murray and American  Madison Keys  had returned positive coronavirus tests and would be unable to travel to Melbourne without first returning a negative test. “Mr Murray and the other 1,240 people as part of the program, need to demonstrate that if they’re coming to Melbourne they have returned a negative test,” he said. “Should Mr Murray arrive, and I have no indication that he will, he will be subject to those same rigorous arrangements as everyone else.” Read more: Australia’s  Department of Agriculture  is making inquiries after the  American Pigeon Racing Union  claimed that  Joe , a pigeon that was thought to have travelled to Australia from the US, is actually a fraud – a revelation  that may well save his life. The public rallied to the defence of Joe after Australian agricultural authorities said he would be euthanised to prevent the risk of diseases from the US being transmitted to Australian native birds. The racing pigeon was believed to have survived a 15,000km Pacific Ocean crossing from the United States to Australia after  Melbourne  local  Kevin Celli-Bird  discovered the exhausted bird in his backyard on Boxing Day. Some speculated the bird may have hitched a ride aboard a cargo ship, rather than flying the entire distance. It was originally believed that the pigeon’s blue tag was evidence that he had disappeared from a race in the US state of Oregon on 29 October, but this assertion has now been thrown into doubt. The American Racing Pigeon Union posted a statement on Facebook saying the tag on the bird was not a genuine American Union band. Read more: South Australia  will lift its coronavirus travel restrictions with greater Brisbane from Sunday, AAP reports. The change means people travelling to SA from Brisbane will no longer need to spend 14 days in quarantine. However, they will still be asked to be tested for coronavirus three times – on days one, five and 12. SA’s chief health officer,  Nicola Spurrier , says the easing of measures reflects the latest information from  Queensland  health authorities on the progress containing a cluster of cases there. No changes are planned for people travelling from NSW. Under present arrangements, people from regional NSW can enter SA but must have the three virus tests. The hard border arrangements for the greater Sydney, Central Coast, Blue Mountains and Wollongong regions will remain. People from those areas are not allowed to enter SA unless they are an essential worker or have an exemption. SA reported one new Covid-19 case on Friday in a recently returned traveller from overseas. The state has 10 active infections, all acquired overseas and in hotel quarantine. Police suspect a  Melbourne  woman killed her three children before taking her own life in the city’s outer-north on Thursday. The bodies of a 42-year-old woman, a seven-year-old girl, a five-year-old girl and a three-year-old boy were  found inside a Tullamarine house  about 12.20pm. My colleague  Nino Bucci  with the full report: Police investigating the deaths of three children and their mother at a home in Melbourne’s Tullamarine on Thursday do not believe the family’s father was involved.  In a statement released shortly after 3pm on Friday,  Victoria  police said they believe the 42-year-old mother was responsible for all four deaths. Police said: Police located the bodies of a 42-year-old woman, a seven-year-old girl, a five-year-old girl and a three-year-old boy inside the address. All were residents of that property. A 48-year-old man, who also resided at the house, assisted police and last night was released without charge. Detectives have also spoken to a large number of people, including the family, friends and neighbours of the deceased. An extensive forensic examination of the scene has also been conducted. Investigators do not believe the 48-year-old man was involved in the incident and police are not looking for anyone further in relation to the matter. Homicide squad investigators have formed the preliminary view that the 42-year-old woman is responsible for all four deaths and on completion of their investigation, a report will be provided for consideration of the coroner. •  In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. For more on Thursday’s events: 🏏 Great to be at the Test seeing so many people enjoying themselves and everyone doing the right thing  #AUSvIND   #GabbaTest   pic.twitter.com/qGZrqrAjdJ You can follow day one of the fourth Test between Australia and India over on Guardian Australia’s liveblog: The Morrison government is appealing to  China  to rule out discriminating against Australian coal, with the resources minister raising fears about the “human cost” of the standoff as seafarers are stuck aboard more than 70 ships waiting to unload the product. In an interview with Guardian Australia,  Keith Pitt  said the cost of coal had increased as a result of the impasse but Canberra was “yet to hear anything through official channels” about any change in Beijing’s treatment of the Australian commodity. Like other Australian ministers, Pitt has been unable to secure a call with his Chinese counterpart amid ongoing tensions in the relationship between the two countries, but he said he remained hopeful of dialogue: “My door’s always open.” The comments came after the opposition said Australian exporters  faced another grim year  driven by tensions with China. Labor raised fears of “a humanitarian crisis brewing off the coast of China” with about 1,500 seafarers believed to be aboard the 73 ships. Beijing has told the owners of nearly 8m tonnes of Australian coal to find new buyers because the cargo will not be unloaded in China,  according to the Australian newspaper , but China’s embassy in Canberra has yet to respond to Guardian Australia’s request for confirmation. Pitt said there were about 70 ships “in what’s called the stack, waiting to unload” Australian coal. The resources minister said this coal had already been purchased and paid for by the Chinese buyers, but raised concern about the welfare of the seafarers. “Clearly, there’s a human cost to these delays,” Pitt, a  Queensland  Nationals MP, said in a phone interview on Friday. Read more: For the second day in a row, there are no new locally-acquired Covid-19 cases in Australia in the most recent reporting day.  Advice from the Nat Incident Centre is there are likely 0 cases of community transmission in Aust today There is 1 case under investigation in Qld, likely to be a historical case. Pls cont to test if any symptoms Sadly there have been 750k+ cases & 15k lives lost globally today The federal opposition leader,  Anthony Albanese , and his health spokesman,  Chris Bowen , are renewing their accusation the Morrison government is shifting responsibility for quarantining international arrivals onto states.  The criticisms come amid questions about how Covid-19 spread in a  Brisbane hotel  being used to quarantine international arrivals, and the Victorian government’s efforts to bring international students to the state and international tennis players to the  Australian Open  in Melbourne.  Albanese said: The federal government wants you to think they’re not in charge of quarantine. They want to push responsibility onto the states. That’s not leadership. The Federal Government wants you to think they're not in charge of quarantine. They want to push responsibility onto the states. That's not leadership. Quarantine is a federal responsibility. It's right there, in our Constitution, in black and white.  pic.twitter.com/cgeDRVtnmU Bowen also  tweeted :  As state premiers grapple with how to deal with contagious strains of the virus, the Morrison government is missing in action. This week, a  Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade  spokeswoman told Guardian Australia there are 37,000 Australian citizens and permanent residents registered as being overseas and unable to return home.  The number of stranded is expected to increase after Queensland, New South Wales and Western Australia  halved their quarantine intake for at least a month . Email from  @dfat  that luckily I read. If you don’t log in to your account they “may” remove you from the list!  #strandedAussies  check your email and keep an eye on your registration.  @removethecaps   @KKeneally   @SenatorWong   pic.twitter.com/Yj0jUK14lW Stranded Australians have accused Dfat of attempting to remove some of those registered from its tally of those stuck overseas.  Dfat has previously denied taking this measure in December. Guardian Australia contacted Dfat for comment.  Today we learnt that someone has purchased the domain  https://t.co/E3snA8JKIH  and redirected it to our site. We had no knowledge of, or involvement with, this, however, we welcome the off chance that Senator Hanson has changed her mind on refugee policy! 🤞🤞🤞 The federal agriculture minister,  David Littleproud ,   has lashed the Victorian premier  Dan Andrews ’   reported plan to introduce a quota within its hotel quarantine capacity specifically to bring international students into  Victoria . Littleproud said the plan ignores chronic shortages of farm workers  – a result of Australia’s international border closure – that has plagued the fresh produce industry during critical harvest periods.  He wants Andrews to create space in his quarantine system for some of the 25,000 pre-vetted Pacific seasonal workers.  Littleproud said: In October last year, the  Australian Fresh Produce Alliance  presented the Andrews government with a quarantine plan developed by Aspen Medical however so far Dan Andrews has failed to respond to the plan or discuss any alternative options with industry.  Dan Andrews has already done a special deal for tennis players from Covid hotspots and now wants a special deal to bring in international students, but he is stubbornly refusing to help his own farmers. Since we reopened the Pacific and Seasonal labour schemes in August last year, farmers in Western Australia, New South Wales, Tasmania, Queensland and the  Northern Territory  have safely recruited over 2,000 workers yet Victoria is yet to even develop a quarantine protocol. If Dan Andrews doesn’t act soon, all Australians will feel the pain through massive crop losses and higher grocery prices. You can read more about Australia’s current shortage of farm workers here: Thanks for bringing us all the news this morning  Matilda .  I’m  Elias Visontay , and I’ll be taking you through the next part of the afternoon.  If you see anything you think I should be aware of, you can contact me via email at  elias.visontay@theguardian.com  or via Twitter  @EliasVisontay . This is officially too much excitement for me so I’m passing over to  Elias Visontay  who will keep you updated on all the news of today (pigeon or otherwise).  I cannot believe that this is my third post in a row about a single pigeon, but here we are.  In a shocking twist,  the American Racing Pigeon Union is claiming that Joe was never from the US  and is in fact a fraud.  But if this is true it might mean that he has escaped death row after all.  BREAKING NEWS: Joe may not actually be from the US after all. I have pigeon whiplash! What is the truth! Does this mean Joe could be saved?  pic.twitter.com/7Svh6qoMaP
Covid hotspots NSW: list of Sydney and regional coronavirus case locations:	New South Wales  health authorities have updated a list of hotspots Covid-positive people have visited while infectious. Those who attended some locations must isolate immediately for 14 days after you were last there, others must monitor for symptoms. Here’s an overview and what to do if you’ve visited them. More detailed information is available at the  NSW Health website . Anyone who was in the following section of the below clinic at the listed time is a  close contact who must immediately get tested and self-isolate for 14 days regardless of the result : Wentworthville:  Wentworthville Medical and Dental Clinic (in the dental, physio and imaging waiting room only), Friday, 15 January, 11.30am to 1.15pm All previous locations and transport services announced can be found in the searchable tables below. Due to the unprecedented and ongoing nature of the coronavirus outbreak, this article is being regularly updated to ensure that it reflects the current situation at the date of publication. Any significant corrections made to this or previous versions of the article will be footnoted in line with Guardian editorial policy.
Iran bans importation of Covid vaccines from the US and UK:	Vaccines produced by the US and UK will be banned from entering  Iran , its supreme leader has said, even though his country has suffered the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East. “Imports of US and British vaccines into the country are forbidden ... They’re completely untrustworthy,” Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said in a live televised speech. “It’s not unlikely they would want to contaminate other nations. “Given our experience with France’s HIV-tainted blood supplies, French vaccines aren’t trustworthy either,” he added, referring to France’s contaminated blood scandal of the 1980s and 1990s. Khamenei’s comments reflected the tense relations between Iran and the west, which have not abated in the waning days of Donald Trump’s presidency. In his speech, Khamenei mocked American democracy and human rights in the wake of  the riot at Capitol Hill in Washington , and said Iran was in no hurry to negotiate with the incoming Biden administration. But he said if the US lifted sanctions, Iran would respond. He said the issue of compensation for sanctions could be pursued at a later date. His remarks came as Iran prepared to discuss a plan to purchase medical supplies by unlocking as much as $1bn (£735m) of $7bn in frozen assets held in two South Korean banks. The plan will be discussed when the South Korean vice-foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, travels to Tehran in an effort to secure the release of a   South Korean vessel  seized by the Iranian navy earlier this week . Some of the South Korean delegation reached Tehran on Friday. Iran’s central bank governor said Iranian oil revenues had fallen to $20bn, a drop of more than half, as a result of US sanctions. The Iranian foreign ministry claimed the diplomat’s visit was totally focused on the unlocking of Iranian assets, insisting it had been arranged before the ship seizure, although the official Iranian press has been reporting the US block on Iranian assets in Korea ever since the ship was stopped for allegedly polluting the marine environment. Tehran has been in lengthy negotiations with  South Korea  on how to access the assets held in South Korean banks without falling foul of US extraterritorial sanctions, something that is likely to happen if dollar transactions are involved. In the past Iran has exported oil and natural gas to South Korea using settlement accounts based on Korean currency. Owing to the imposition of US sanctions, Tehran has been unable to access its money, even though it insists the money could be transferred in South Korea currency and used exclusively for the purchase of sanction-exempt food and medicines. Seoul claims it has not received the necessary US Treasury assurances that the payments would not lead to fines. More recently, Iran has suggested the money would be used to buy vaccines using the UN-approved  Covax facility . Any payment via a dollar transaction might give the US Treasury leverage to fine the banks involved, and Seoul has said there is no safe way to transfer the money. In relation to the coronavirus, Iranian officials have previously said that importing the Pfizer vaccine, which must be shipped and stored at -70C (-94F), poses major logistical challenges for Iran. The country has struggled to stem the worst virus outbreak in the Middle East, which has infected nearly 1.3 million people and killed nearly 56,000. Iran launched human trials of its first domestic Covid vaccine candidate late last month.
IFS calls for a fairer UK after Covid brings greater inequality:	A leading thinktank has called for action to make Britain a fairer country after its research showed that the Covid-19 pandemic had led to greater  inequality . The Institute for Fiscal Studies said the most vulnerable – those on lower incomes, the young, the least-educated and people from  black, Asian and minority ethnic backgrounds  – had been hit hardest by the crisis. Covid-19 has “cruelly exposed huge variations in how easily we are able to weather threats to livelihoods, to educational progress, to physical and mental health”, the IFS said. “These disparities have been closely correlated with pre-existing inequalities between groups according to their education, income, location and ethnicity – in ways that are often hard to disentangle, but depressingly familiar.” Eighteen months ago, the IFS launched a  five-year study of inequality  headed by the economics Nobel laureate Sir Angus Deaton. In a new year update, the thinktank said the pandemic had thrown up challenges that could not be ducked. The report noted that: Mortality rates in the most deprived communities were about twice as high as those in the least deprived. BAME groups were more likely to die than the white majority, in part reflecting their occupations. The better-paid and more highly educated had found it easier to cope financially with the crisis. Among graduates, there had been a 7% fall in the number doing any paid work; among non-graduates it was 17%. Children from poorer families found it harder to do schoolwork during lockdown, received less online teaching, and have been more likely to miss school since September. Elderly people have suffered high mortality rates from Covid-19, but the young have felt the economic consequences, with the under-25s more than twice as likely as older workers to have lost their jobs. The IFS said: “We need to do more to ensure greater economic opportunities for minority ethnic groups, and ensure that they are not consigned to low-paid and self-employed occupations. They would benefit disproportionately from policies that, for example, provided greater security for the self-employed and others in insecure work, improved pay and conditions in health and social care, and supported progress through the labour market.” The report also said that without targeted support for children who had fallen behind as a result of the crisis, the “huge educational inequalities that existed” before the pandemic were almost certain to get worse. The IFS said the risk of permanent scarring to the younger generation would be reduced if help was provided to school leavers and graduates looking for work and training. Asset prices had been bolstered by  Bank of England action to support the economy , making it important for the Treasury to support the young and those without wealth. Deaton said: “As the vaccines should, at some point this year, take us into a world largely free of the pandemic, it is imperative to think about policies that will be needed to repair the damage and that focus on those who have suffered the most. We need to build a country in which everyone feels that they belong.”
Paramedic in new year honours list calls for global health equality:	A paramedic who volunteered for eight months caring for people in one of the world’s most remote communities has called for action to erode stark global health inequalities after being awarded a  British Empire Medal  (BEM) for services to emergency medicine and disaster response. Nich Woolf, who turned 68 on New Year’s Day and is originally from London, had planned to be in  Vanuatu  – more than 2,000 miles (3,200km) off Australia’s east coast – working with ambulance crews from February to April but was only able to return home in mid-October due to pandemic travel restrictions. “Because all the Australians went home as their government said they had to, I was left on Santo island as the only qualified paramedic, along with three local students,” Woolf said. “I was essentially on call from end of March through to October when I left.” The paramedic, who along with working for ambulance crews in the west of England and Wales has volunteered in Afghanistan, Ethiopia and Haiti, added of the award: “It was a complete surprise and a shock. I’m very proud of it. I’ve always thought that the best thing I could do with my life was to help other people. “Give a man a fish and feed him for a day, teach a man to fish and you feed him for life. So I’ve shared knowledge with people and in return they often share their knowledge with me, even when healthcare resources are not good. “My volunteer work has kept me going in my life. That’s what I’m about, I believe in using any skills that I have to benefit other people.” With Vanuatu’s largest island not having a working X-ray machine and limited other facilities, some patients Woolf reached had to be sent by air almost 200 miles to the country’s capital and main hub, Port Vila, while others with conditions and diseases more easily treatable in the west died, unable to receive the necessary care due to the poor infrastructure. “These were things that are serious but would easily be dealt with in the UK,” said Woolf. “It was a difficult time. I was having to really stretch myself as a paramedic to deal with things. It’s lovely to be recognised in the new year honours but it brings up a lot of feelings about how much more work there is to do to sort out the health inequalities that exist in the world. “It’s worth putting a lot of effort into helping people get the healthcare they deserve. People say they’ll spend money on hospitals but seem to spend it on weapons instead.” In early April, the Pacific archipelago of approximately 80 islands  was hit by a cyclone  that brought winds of almost 200mph and destroyed whole villages. “The place was wrecked and the southern half of the island was devastated,” he said. “A lot of villages in the rainforest had lost every single building, including dozens of kindergartens, which for some children could be their only ever schooling.” To help raise money to build a new preschool on Espiritu Santo, the largest island, Woolf teamed up with other expats to present a funding proposal for about £7,000 to the UK, Australia and New Zealand high commissions. “Its not fully sorted but we have had some good offers,” said Woolf, who is also a trustee of Somerset charity Festival Medical Services.
Poor families' living costs have surged during pandemic, UK study finds:	More than a third of the UK’s poorest families have seen their already meagre incomes squeezed during the pandemic because they have had to spend more on food, gas and electricity, and home schooling, a study has revealed. The  Resolution Foundation  thinktank found that while UK household spending broadly dropped and financial savings increased during the Covid crisis, this was not the case for many low-income families, who saw basic living costs surge. The government had failed to provide effective support for the poorest families, it said, and with the third lockdown expected to last months, it urged ministers to retain the  £20 pandemic top-up  to universal credit beyond April, as well as boost other benefits for the low-paid. “The study shines an unforgiving light on the absence of targeted, adequate support for families on a low income, who today face the combined insecurity of Covid-19 and increased financial pressure,” said the study. This added pressure came after years of weak growth in living standards for the poorest households, in turn leading to a general worsening of mental health, it added. It said: “Financial worries have been added to the general stress and anxiety of the pandemic for many families with children.” While higher-income groups were able to save money they would ordinarily have spent on commuting, eating out or holidays – and often spent this windfall on luxuries – those in the lowest income cohort often struggled to make ends meet, the study found. One woman interviewed for the research contrasted how rising food costs had eaten up “every penny of her savings”, while her better-off nephew “has been able to get his garden done with artificial grass and bought a hot tub with what he has saved”. One woman with children, living on on universal credit, told researchers: “The assumption is that spending has gone down. But that’s coming from the perspective of people who have disposable income … If you had no outgoings on luxuries like coffee shops, takeaway, clothes shopping, pubs, eating out etc, then nothing has been saved.” She added: “Our only saving has been £2.50 a week we spent on playgroup, and on petrol as we drive out to places less. On a whole we have seen our spending increase. Our electricity and gas bills have gone up for a start, as we’re at home more. We have spent a lot more on food, especially during the first lockdown when there were shortages and we had to buy expensive brands.” Many poorer families found the extra costs of feeding and entertaining children at home pushed up spending when schools closed, as did the need to equip school-age sons and daughters with laptops and broadband access for online learning. Normal coping strategies employed by poorer families – visiting friends and families for occasional meals, or using the library for free internet access, and charity shops for cheap clothes – became harder as a result of household mixing restrictions and the closure of libraries and non-essential retail. The study incorporates research by the Nuffield Foundation-funded  Covid Realities  project, which has tracked the experiences of low-income families and carers over the course of the pandemic as well as surveys of 6,000 UK adults in May and September. Dr Ruth Patrick, a lecturer in social policy at the University of York, who leads the Covid Realities research programme said: “While the need for the lockdown is clear, there is an equally urgent need to address the additional financial pressures that families on a low-income face through greater income support to families with dependent children.” A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to supporting the lowest-paid families through the pandemic and beyond to ensure that nobody is left behind. “That’s why we’ve targeted our support to those most in need by raising the living wage, spending hundreds of billions to safeguard jobs, boosting welfare support by billions and introducing the £170m covid winter grant scheme to help children and families stay warm and well-fed during the coldest months.”
UK to face delay in delivery of Pfizer Covid vaccine:	The UK is among several countries facing delays in delivery of the  Pfizer/BioNTech coronavirus vaccine  due to upgrades in its production capacity, the company has said. The US pharmaceutical firm is increasing production at its plant in Puurs, Belgium, in an effort to produce more doses than originally planned for 2021, temporarily reducing deliveries to all European countries. Shipments of the vaccine, produced in partnership with Germany’s BioNTech, to the UK are set to be affected this month. The UK has secured 40 million doses of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. A government spokesperson said: “We are in the process of understanding the implications of Pfizer’s announcement today to our plans. However we continue to plan to hit our target of vaccinating all four priority groups by 15 February.” The  Oxford/AstraZeneca  jab is also licensed and being used in the UK. European governments have said the credibility of their vaccination programmes are at risk due to Pfizer’s decision. “This situation is unacceptable,” the health and social affairs ministers of six EU states – Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia – said in a letter to the EU commission. “Not only does it impact the planned vaccination schedules, it also decreases the credibility of the vaccination process.” Germany, Europe’s largest purchaser of the vaccine, said that it regretted the “unexpected and … very short notice” announcement as the company had promised “binding delivery dates” until the middle of next month. Norway and Lithuania had earlier said that the pharmaceutical company was reducing supplies across Europe. “What we want is for Pfizer-BioNTech to restore their deliveries to the agreed schedule,” Lithuanian health minister Arunas Dulkys told Reuters. A  Pfizer  spokesperson said: “We understand a change to deliveries has the potential to create uncertainty. “However, we can confirm the overall projected volumes of delivery to the UK remain the same for quarter one (January to March). “We continue to liaise with the UK Government and the Vaccines Taskforce to work through short-term impact of these changes to our January deliveries and support the goals of the UK Covid-19 vaccination programme.” Boris Johnson said on Friday that the UK has vaccinated more than 3.2 million, with almost 45% of over-80s and 40% of care home residents receiving doses so far. PA Media contributed to this report.
Covid vaccine: 72% of black people unlikely to have jab, UK survey finds:	Advisers from the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) have raised fresh concerns over Covid vaccine uptake among black, Asian and minority ethnic communities (BAME) as research showed up to 72% of black people said they were unlikely to have the jab. Historical issues of unethical healthcare research, and structural and institutional racism and discrimination, are key reasons for lower levels of trust in the vaccination programme, a report from Sage said. The figures come from the  UK Household Longitudinal Study , which conducts annual interviews to gain a long-term perspective on British people’s lives. In late November, the researchers contacted 12,035 participants to investigate the prevalence of coronavirus vaccine hesitancy in the UK, and whether certain subgroups were more likely to be affected by it. The government’s  joint committee on vaccination and immunisation  has published a list of groups of people who will be prioritised to receive a vaccine for Covid-19 in the UK. The list is: 1 All those 80 years of age and over and health and social care workers. 2 All those 75 and over. 3 All those 70 and over. 4 All those 65 and over. 5 Adults under 65 at high at risk of serious disease and mortality from Covid-19. 6 Adults under 65 at moderate risk of at risk of serious disease and mortality from Covid-19. 7 All those 60 and over. 8 All those 55 and over. 9 All those 50 and over. 10 Rest of the population. Overall, the study found high levels of willingness to be vaccinated, with 82% of people saying they were likely or very likely to have the jab – rising to 96% among people over the age of 75. Women, younger people and those with lower levels of education were less willing, but hesitancy was particularly high among people from black groups, where 72% said they were unlikely or very unlikely to be vaccinated. Among Pakistani and Bangladeshi groups this figure was 42%. Eastern European groups were also less willing. These figures are higher than  previous estimates  by the  Royal Society for Public Health . Its poll of 2,076 UK adults found 57% of respondents from BAME backgrounds would take a Covid jab if advised by their GP or another health professional, compared with 79% of white respondents. “Trust is particularly important for black communities that have low trust in healthcare organisations and research findings due to historical issues of unethical healthcare research,” said the Sage experts. “Trust is also undermined by structural and institutional racism and discrimination. Minority ethnic groups have historically been underrepresented within health research, including vaccines trials, which can influence trust in a particular vaccine being perceived as appropriate and safe, and concerns that immunisation research is not ethnically heterogenous.” The report emphasised the need for engagement with trusted sources such as GPs, and scientists from within BAME communities to respond to concerns about vaccine safety and efficacy. “Approaches should acknowledge the historical issues in healthcare research to address mistrust towards government and healthcare services experienced in black communities in relation to vaccination,” it said.
Coronavirus live news: Keir Starmer suggests he would back tougher measures; Japan's Covid second wave linked to rise in suicides:	Air travel between  Moscow  and the capitals of  Finland ,  Vietnam ,  India  and  Qatar , suspended since the early weeks of the coronavirus pandemic, will resume frmo 27 January, Russian authorities have said.  A statement shared following a meeting of the government’s coronavirus HQ said that the four countries were seeing fewer than 40 new cases per fortnight per 100,000 people, according to  Reuters . Suicides rose in  Japan  in the second wave of the country’s Covid pandemic, particularly among women and children, despite having fallen in the first wave, a survey has found. According to a Reuters wire report, the July to October suicide rate was up 16% on the same period a year earlier, according to a study by researchers at Hong Kong University and Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology. It was a stark reversal on a 14% drop in Japan’s suicide rate in the February to June period. The decline was linked to government subsidies, reduced working hours and school closures, the study found.  However the prolonged pandemic has since badly affected industries where women predominate, increasing the burden on working mothers, while domestic violence increased, the report said.  The suicide rate for women rose 37%, about five times the increase among men, while the child suicide rate spiked 49% in the second wave, corresponding to the period after a nationwide school closure. “Unlike normal economic circumstances, this pandemic disproportionately affects the psychological health of children, adolescents and females (especially housewives),” the authors wrote in the study published on Friday in the journal Nature Human Behaviour. Taro Kono, administrative and regulatory reform minister, told Reuters on Thursday that while the government would consider extending the state of emergency, it “cannot kill the economy.” People worry about Covid-19. But a lot of people have also committed suicide because they have lost their jobs, they have lost their income and couldn’t see the hope. We need to strike the balance between managing Covid-19 and managing the economy.  Emergency legislation is needed to protect doctors and nurses from “inappropriate” legal action over Covid treatment decisions made amid the pressures of the pandemic, health organisations have argued. A coalition of health bodies has written to the government urging it to update the law to ensure medical workers do not feel “vulnerable to the risk of prosecution for unlawful killing” when treating coronavirus patients “in circumstances beyond their control”. Health groups argued that there is no legal protection for Covid-related issues such as when there are “surges in demand for resources that temporarily exceed supply”, PA reports. The letter, addressed to  health secretary Matt Hancock , was co-ordinated by the Medical Protection Society, with the British Medical Association and the Doctors’ Association UK among the signatories. AstraZeneca’s Covid vaccine  has been approved for emergency use in  Pakistan , the health minister said on Saturday, making it the first coronavirus jab to be allowed for use in the South Asian country. Pakistan, which is in the midst of a second wave of infections, has said it would procure more than a million doses of Sinopharm’s vaccine, but the Chinese vaccine has not yet been approved by the Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan (DRAP). “DRAP granted emergency use authorisation to AstraZeneca’s Covid vaccine,” the country’s health minister, Faisal Sultan, told Reuters. Pakistan reported 2,432 new coronavirus infections and 45 deaths on Friday, taking the total number of cases to more than 516,000 and deaths close to 11,000.  Keir Starmer  has suggested he would back further Covid curbs, saying “the tougher the restrictions now the quicker we get the virus back under control”. Answering questions following a speech to the Fabian Society’s new year conference, the  Labour  leader said he was “still worried” by the number of infections despite  signs they are falling .  He said the “sense that we are through the worst” of the third wave is wrong, as he welcomed further restrictions on travel announced by the Government on Friday.  Starmer explained:  Nobody likes restrictions but the tougher the restrictions now the quicker we get the virus back under control, the quicker we reduce the number of hospital admissions and the quicker we get that number of deaths, tragically, down... (The NHS) is really under strain at the moment and we need to do whatever we can to reduce that strain, particularly in the next few weeks, which are going to be critical. Greece  started vaccinations among the elderly on Saturday, after first inoculating tens of thousands of frontline workers to halt the spread of coronavirus. More than 75,000 healthcare workers and nursing home residents and carers have received the shot of  the vaccine produced by Pfizer/BioNTech  since the country rolled out the plan along with other EU countries last month. Kyriakos Mitsotakis, the Greek prime minister, has said the aim is to have 2 million people inoculated by March. The country has a population of about 11 million.  Snow has forced all three rapid Covid testing centres in  Luton  to close, the local council has said, adding the decision would protect staff and public safety. ❄️ ⚠️ Due to snow and for the safety of the public and our staff, our rapid testing centres at Lewsey and Farley community centres and at Luton Central Library are closed today. China  has finished building a 1,500-room hospital for Covid patients to fight a surge in infections believed to have arisen from infected people or goods arriving from abroad. The hospital is one of six with a total of 6,500 rooms being constructed in Nangong, south of Beijing in Hebei province, according to the official Xinhua News Agency. A total of 645 people are being treated in Nangong and the Hebei provincial capital, Shijiazhuang, Xinhua said.  The latest infections spread unusually fast, the National Health Commission said, adding in a statement: “It is harder to handle”. It attributed the latest cases to “abnormal management” and “inadequate protection of workers” involved in imports but gave no further details.  Part of the statement said: They are all imported from abroad. It was caused by entry personnel or contaminated cold chain imported goods. A plane carrying one million doses of Sinopharm’s Covid vaccine arrived on Saturday in  Serbia , making it the first European country to receive  the Chinese vaccine  for mass inoculation programmes. President Aleksandar Vučić was accompanied by Beijing’s ambassador to the Balkan country at Belgrade’s airport as containers carrying the vaccines were unloaded from an Air Serbia plane, Reuters reports. “I would like to thank President Xi Jinping and Chinese leadership for sending us one million doses of the vaccine,” Vucic told reporters.  Hello everyone, it is Yohannes Lowe here. I am taking over the liveblog from Damien for an hour or so, so feel free to drop me a message on  Twitter  for coverage suggestions. Nearly three-quarters of black people in the  UK  have said they are unlikely to consent to Covid-19 vaccination, a survey has found.  Linda Geddes , a Guardian science correspondent, has the story: Historical issues of unethical healthcare research, and structural and institutional racism and discrimination, are key reasons for lower levels of trust in the vaccination programme, a report from Sage said. The figures come from the  UK Household Longitudinal Study , which conducts annual interviews to gain a long-term perspective on British people’s lives. In late November, the researchers contacted 12,035 participants to investigate the prevalence of coronavirus vaccine hesitancy in the UK, and whether certain subgroups were more likely to be affected by it. Overall, the study found high levels of willingness to be vaccinated, with 82% of people saying they were likely or very likely to have the jab – rising to 96% among people over the age of 75. Women, younger people and those with lower levels of education were less willing, but hesitancy was particularly high among people from black groups, where 72% said they were unlikely or very unlikely to be vaccinated. Among Pakistani and Bangladeshi groups this figure was 42%. Eastern European groups were also less willing. A further 4,029 people have tested positive for coronavirus in  Malaysia , the country’s health ministry has announced, the biggest daily increase since the beginning of the pandemic.  So far the country has recorded 155,095 infections. The health ministry also reported eight new deaths, taking the total number of fatalities to 594.  Adverse reactions to the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine may have contributed to the deaths of some frail and elderly patients in  Norway , the country’s medicines agency has said.  In a  statement  published on Friday, the Norwegian medicines agency said it had recorded 23 deaths “associated with Covid-19 vaccination,” adding that “common adverse reactions may have contributed to a severe course in elderly people who are frail.”  Sigurd Hortemo, chief physician at the Norwegian Medicines Agency, said: The reports suggest that common adverse reactions to mRNA vaccines, such as fever and nausea, may have contributed to a fatal outcome in some frail patients. The statement pointed out that while trials of the vaccine did not include “patients with unstable or acute illness” and few over the age of 85, the country’s vaccination programme was now focused on the elderly and people in nursing homes with serious underlying conditions, “therefore it is expected that deaths close to vaccination time may occur.” “We cannot rule out that adverse reactions to the vaccine occurring within the first days following vaccination (such as fever and nausea) may contribute to more serious course and fatal outcome in patients with severe underlying disease,” the statement added. 
Up to 1m Hindus gather in India as festival goes ahead amid Covid fears:	Up to a million Hindu pilgrims have gathered on the banks of the River Ganges in northern  India , marking the start of a major religious festival that is taking place despite the risks of Covid infection. Millions more are expected to descend on Haridwar in the coming weeks for  Kumbh Mela , one of the world’s biggest religious gatherings. Pilgrims bathe in the Ganges in the belief that the sacred waters will cleanse them of their sins. Officials have said measures to prevent a surge in Covid infections include pre-booking to control numbers, strict social distancing and colour-coded bathing areas. “The pandemic is a bit of a worry, but we are taking all precautions,” said one of the organisers, Siddharth Chakrapani. Most of those walking into the freezing river on Thursday morning were not wearing masks and social distancing was hard to maintain. Senthil Avoodai K Raj, a senior police official, said thousands of security forces were present and fines could be imposed for breaching Covid regulations. India has recorded more than 10m Covid cases – the second highest number in the world after the US – and has recorded more than 150,000 deaths. On Saturday, the government will launch a  vaccination drive , aiming to inoculate 300 million people by early August. Healthcare and frontline workers will be vaccinated first, followed by people over 50 and those with underlying health conditions. Some pilgrims in Haridwar dismissed the threat from the virus. “India is not like Europe … when it comes to immunity we are better,” said 50-year-old Sanjay Sharma. “It’s really sad to see people not gathering at Kumbh in the same numbers as they would earlier … The greatest truth on Earth is death. What’s the point of living with fear?” Unesco has recognised  Kumbh Mela  as intangible cultural heritage. According to Hindu mythology, gods and demons fought a war over a sacred pitcher containing the nectar of immortality. Drops fell at four different locations, which now alternate as hosts. Several other religious festivals are taking place in India this week, including the Gangasagar Mela in Kolkata, where officials expect about 15,000 people. Madurai in the southern state of Tamil Nadu is due to host a bull-chasing carnival known as  Jallikattu , where revellers grab hold of the beasts’ horns as they run through crowds of people. Many religious gatherings across the world have been cancelled or scaled back because of Covid. Only a few thousand Muslims took part in  last year’s hajj , the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, compared with more than 2 million in normal years. The pope celebrated midnight mass on Christmas Eve with fewer than 100 participants instead of the usual 10,000. In nearly all countries, Christians, Muslims, Jews and those of other faiths have curtailed or cancelled events marking religious festivals in the past 10 months.
Indian court suspends new agriculture laws after mass protests:	India’s supreme court has suspended a series of controversial new agriculture laws that had prompted hundreds of thousands of farmers to stage a months-long protest in Delhi over fears their livelihoods were at stake. Since November,  upwards of half a million farmers had marched to the peripheries of Delhi  and occupied roads and highways going into the capital, setting up a 24-hour protest camp and refusing to move until the new laws were repealed. Farmers, mainly from the states of Punjab and Haryana, had argued that the new laws were passed by the government without consultation, had exposed them to the mercy of large corporations for crop prices and put them at greater risk of poverty and losing their land. The farmers’ protests have proved to be  one of the greatest political challenges to face prime minister, Narendra Modi , since he came to power in 2014. It was one of the first times the government had been forced to the negotiating table following mass agitation and, despite eight rounds of talks, had remained in deadlock. After two days of deliberation, the supreme court ruled on Tuesday to suspend the laws. Judges ordered the creation of a four-man committee to look into farmers’ grievances over the laws, saying they were “extremely disappointed” with how negotiations had gone so far. The judges also expressed concern at the lack of consultation with farmers when passing the law. “These are matters of life and death. We are concerned with laws. We are concerned with lives and property of people affected by the agitation. We are trying to solve the problem in the best way. One of the powers we have is to suspend the legislation,” SA Bobde, the chief justice, told the court. While many politicians who had expressed anger at the farm laws celebrated the ruling, it was met with derision by farmers’ leaders who said “now is not the time for a committee”. Farming  unions reiterated that they would not participate in any court-ordered committee process and would not call off their protest until the new legislation was repealed. “The members of the supreme court-appointed committee are not dependable as they have been writing on how agri laws are pro-farmer. We will continue our agitation,” said farmer leader Balbeer Singh Rajewal at a press conference. The farmers said they still intended to go ahead with a planned protest tractor rally through Delhi on India’s Republic Day on 26 January. So far 60 farmers have died while taking part in the protests, which have involved camping out in make-shift tents in icy winter temperatures. Some described the ruling as a setback for Modi, who can usually rely on the backing of the supreme court, which is widely seen as favourable to the ruling government. However, other observers noted that the court’s decision to suspend the farm laws gave the government a way out of the negotiation deadlock without appearing to have bowed to the demands of the farmers.
Indonesia earthquake: dozens dead after tremors and landslides hit Sulawesi:	At least 37 people have been killed and hundreds injured following a strong earthquake that shook the island of Sulawesi in  Indonesia  early on Friday morning, prompting landslides and destroying houses. Thousands of people fled their homes to seek safety when the 6.2-magnitude earthquake hit just after 1am local time on Friday morning. The epicentre was 6km north-east of Majene city in West Sulawesi. Hundreds of buildings were destroyed or damaged, including a hospital, which collapsed with more than a dozen patients and staff trapped beneath it. “The hospital is flattened,” said Arianto, who like many Indonesians goes by one name, from the rescue agency in Mamuju city, near Majene. Rescuers were also trying to reach a family of eight buried beneath the rubble of their destroyed home, he told AFP. At least 37 people have been killed in Majene and Mamuju, and rescue workers fear the death toll will rise further. “Many of the dead are buried under rubble,” said Ali Rahman, the head of the local disaster mitigation agency in Mamuju. In Majene, 637 people were said to be injured. The full extent of the damage caused by the quake, which was 10km deep, is still emerging. Accessing affected areas is a challenge: roads are blocked, bridges have fallen and the local airport in Mamuju has also been damaged. Electricity is cut and phone lines are down. Videos shared on social media showed panicked residents rushing to safety and collapsed homes brought down by the quake. In one video, a father could be heard asking people to help rescue his children buried under rubble. “My children there … they are trapped inside, please help,” he said. Footage released by the national disaster agency showed a girl trapped in the wreckage of a house crying out for help. Her mother was alive but unable to move out, she said. “Please help me, it hurts,” the girl told rescuers. Busrah Basir Maras, 36, a teacher, was sleeping at home in Malunda, Majene, when the earthquake struck. His family woke him and they fled on a motorbike. “It took six hours for me to drive my motorcycle [away from] the epicentre. But it was hard because there were many landslides. I was crying and I am still crying,” he told the Guardian. His family were safe but the head of his village was killed by a collapsing building. Many people had died, he said. “They were sleeping and then buried in the collapsed building.” Survivors who were still stuck in rubble at the epicentre needed medical attention, he said. The earthquake was felt strongly for about seven seconds. It did not trigger a tsunami warning, but people along coastal areas fled to higher ground as a precaution. The head of Indonesia’s Meteorology, Climatology, and Geophysical Agency (BMKG), Dwikorita Karnawati, told a news conference that strong aftershocks could follow, and that another powerful quake could still trigger a tsunami. In 2018, the city of Palu in Sulawesi was struck by a  devastating 6.2-magnitude quake  and tsunami that killed thousands of people. At least 26 aftershocks have been recorded in the area over the past day. The same district was hit by a 5.9-magnitude quake on Thursday afternoon, which damaged several homes. Indonesia is a nation of high tectonic activity. It is often struck by earthquakes, volcanic eruptions and tsunamis because it lies on the Ring of Fire, an arc of volcanoes and fault lines in the Pacific Basin. The response to latest quake will be complicated further by the coronavirus, which Indonesia has struggled to contain. It recorded its biggest daily increase in coronavirus cases on Friday with 12,818 new infections. So far there have been 25,484 confirmed deaths from Covid-19. “One of our biggest fears is exactly what’s going on right now – what happens when there’s a major event during a pandemic? It’s a perfect storm,” said Jan Gelfand of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. “If you have people who are evacuated, the risk [of infection] for those people goes up tremendously,” said Gelfand. “You don’t want to put people in more danger than they are already in.” More than 15,000 people have been displaced as a result of the earthquake, according to the national disaster agency. Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this story
Global immunisation: low-income countries rush to access Covid vaccine supply:	T here are triumphant scenes as lorries leave a vaccine plant in Pune, India, loaded with boxes that will prevent thousands of deaths. Adar Poonawalla, the owner and chief executive of the  Serum Institute of India , poses on the tailgate of a truck, making the most of his company’s “proud and historic” moment as the potential saviour of the nation – and even a large chunk of the world. Poonawalla’s factory, the largest vaccine manufacturing complex in the world, is the best hope for immunisation for people in Africa and some low-income countries elsewhere – which could save them from the ravages of the coronavirus pandemic. The Serum Institute has been contracted to supply the UN-backed Covax initiative, which subsidises low-income countries, with 200m doses of Covid-19 vaccines with an option on 900m more. For a heart-stopping moment last week, it seemed that vaccine nationalism within India might slam the door. On 4 January, just after the Serum Institute got approval from the Indian regulator for the vaccine – made under licence from  AstraZeneca  – Poonawalla was reported as saying there was a condition attached, which was that only India could have the vaccine for the time being. The following day, he clarified the “confusion in the public domain” on Twitter, saying “exports of vaccines are permitted to all countries”. But the lorries are headed across  India  for now and the episode underlines the tension as every country with cash wades into the fight for vaccines, putting manufacturers under unprecedented pressure to deliver for them. As affluent Europe and North America scramble to deploy the Covid vaccines they have pre-bought – amid accusations that immunisation programmes are too slow and the wrong people are getting the jabs – there has been not a single shot in the arm in many countries elsewhere. Three vaccines have been approved in the west. Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna are expensive and need long-term storage at -70C.  Pfizer  offered to sell the vaccine to South Africa at a 50% discounted price of $10 a shot, but was told the cost was still prohibitive. But Oxford/AstraZeneca’s vaccine is stable at fridge temperatures of 2-8C and AstraZeneca has promised not to make a profit for the duration of the pandemic. It aims to provide 3bn doses this year, made in factories around the world under licence. It is the mainstay of  the Covax initiative , which has now bought a total of 1.97bn doses of four different vaccines to distribute when they become available. The AstraZeneca vaccine accounts for most of it. The Serum Institute has promised to make 100m doses for Covax of the AstraZeneca vaccine and a further 100m of the Novavax jab – if and when that is approved. Covax has an option on a further 900m doses of one or the other of those vaccines. Deliveries could start as early as February, said a spokesperson for Gavi, the vaccine alliance which is a partner in Covax. “We anticipate being able to provide each participating economy with the first tranche – enough to protect approximately 3% of the population – in the first half of 2021. This process could begin as early as February, pending favourable regulatory outcomes and the readiness of health systems and national regulatory systems in individual participating economies. “In terms of which vaccines will be rolled out to which countries, as well as timeframes, we hope to be able to share more on that very soon.” Seven countries have now given emergency authorisation to the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine or the Serum Institute version: the UK, India, Argentina, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico and Morocco. The Carlos Slim Foundation in Mexico is licensed by AstraZeneca to supply 150m doses to Latin America. These countries could take delivery right away. But other countries without a regulatory body will be waiting for the  World Health Organization  to give the green light, which is said to need data from the Serum Institute. In what sounded like a nudge, the director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said on 11 January it looked forward “to Serum Institute of India submitting full datasets for rapid assessment so WHO can determine whether we can recommend their AstraZeneca vaccine for international use”. The AstraZeneca vaccine will also be manufactured by SKbioscience in Korea, BioKangtai in China, Siam BioScience and the local conglomerate SCG in Thailand and CSL Behring in Australia. The Fiocruz Institute in  Brazil  has signed a deal for 100m doses of the Serum Institute vaccine, which it will put into vials in a process known as “fill and finish”. In an attempt to queue-jump, the Brazilian president,  Jair Bolsonaro , wrote to the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, on 9 January. “To enable the immediate implementation of our national immunisation programme, I would appreciate … the supply to Brazil, with the possible urgency and without jeopardising the Indian vaccination programme, of 2m doses,” Bolsonaro wrote. Brazil is also now buying 10m doses of the Russian Sputnik vaccine. It is late to the party. At the very end of last year, Argentina took delivery of 300,000 doses and has been immunising healthcare workers. The Russians claim it is 92% effective, but the data has not been published. A few middle-income countries have started vaccination programmes using the Pfizer/BioNTech jab. Mexico took delivery of 3,000 doses in December. Chile and Costa Rica have also started using the vaccine. Mexican officials have been to talk to their counterparts in Argentina about buying Sputnik. Chinese vaccines are also beginning to be used. Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates both gave emergency approval to the  vaccine made by Sinopharm  in December, which the manufacturers say is 86% efficacious, although – as with the Russian vaccine – the full data has not been made public. Turkey has bought the Chinese vaccine, and Morocco, Egypt and Nigeria have all been in discussions. There are other promising jabs on the way. Novavax aims to make 2bn doses for global use – but has not yet finished its trials. Covax has an option on 500m doses of the Janssen vaccine, which has the advantage of being one shot, but although  results from phase 3 trials  are expected within weeks, there are said to be manufacturing delays. It could be a major player, however. “Johnson & Johnson aims to provide global access to Janssen’s Covid-19 vaccine candidate, if proven to be safe and effective. We have committed to producing 1bn vaccines doses a year starting in 2021 and have expedited manufacturing scale-up to reach this goal,” said a spokesperson. “We are leveraging a global supply base for our vaccine candidate, including facilities in the United States, Europe, Asia and Africa.” David Salisbury, associate fellow of Chatham House’s global health programme and director of immunisation at the Department of  Health  until 2013, said that even if the amount of vaccine distributed across the world increased, not all countries would be able to run vaccination programmes for everyone who needed it. “There’s a huge gap between a desire to have vaccine and political statements that your country will have vaccine – and actually having contracts either in place yourself or on your behalf and the ability to pay for it – and much more, the ability to implement it,” he said. The vaccination against Covid-19 is not like running childhood vaccination programmes, but more similar to the effort to immunise against the seasonal flu. Most low-income countries do not have enough clinics or databases to tell them how to access those at risk. Countries that get enough vaccine for 20% of the population, which is what Covax hopes to provide eventually, will not be able to stop transmission. They will be in an “endless cycle”, said Salisbury – vaccinating health workers and those most at risk of dying, with more people getting older and moving into the at-risk groups all the time. The coronavirus is not going away, especially in low income countries. It could be argued the vaccines are just a temporary fix. “Predicting the future for vaccine campaigns in all parts of the world is something many of us are already thinking about. Will this become institutionalised as an annual vaccination programme for industrialised countries? Unless this virus goes away I think the answer is yes,” said Salisbury. “But what will the appetite be in low-income countries for resources that are already under huge pressure to be used for prevention of coronavirus?”
India begins world's biggest Covid vaccination programme:	India  has begun one of the world’s biggest Covid-19 vaccination programmes, the first major developing country to roll out the vaccine, marking the beginning of an effort to immunise more than 1.3 billion people. The first dose was administered to a health worker at All India Institute of Medical Sciences in Delhi, after the prime minister,  Narendra Modi , kickstarted the campaign with a national televised speech. “We are launching the world’s biggest vaccination drive and it shows the world our capability,” Modi said. He implored citizens to keep their guard up and not to believe any “rumours about the safety of the vaccines”. It is not clear if Modi, 70, has been given the vaccine like other world leaders as an example of its safety. His government has said politicians will not be considered priority groups in the first phase of the rollout. India has registered more than 10.5m coronavirus cases, the second highest in the world, and 151,000 deaths. The government has been preparing for the vaccine rollout for weeks, and over the past few days shipments were sent to more than 3,000 sites set up for injections. The Indian health ministry has drawn up plans for 300 million people, almost the equivalent to the population of the US, to be vaccinated by August. Frontline healthcare workers, police and the army have been given priority, with those over 50 and with co-morbidity conditions to follow, all free of cost. Maharashtra, home to Mumbai and the state worst hit by coronavirus, plans to vaccinate 50,000 healthcare workers on the first day of the vaccine rollout. Across the vast country, more than 200,000 vaccinators and 370,000 team members have been trained for the rollout. Large-scale trial runs have been conducted in at least four states and authorities have readied 29,000 cold storage units to transport and hold the vaccine safely. Two vaccines have been given emergency approval for India’s immunisation programme; the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, known in India as Covishield, and a domestic product, Covaxin, developed by the pharmaceutical company Bharat Biotech. The approval of Bharat Biotech’s vaccine, which was co-sponsored by an Indian government body, has proved controversial. Covaxin is still in phase 3 human trials and a full dataset on its efficacy has not been released or peer-reviewed, unlike the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine or the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines which have been authorised in the UK and the US. India’s drugs controller general, VG Somani, insisted Covaxin was “100% safe”. The government has ordered 5.5m doses of Covaxin and 11m doses of Covishield. Boxes of Covishield were dispatched bearing the message “may all be free from disease”. Significantly for ease of availability and low cost, both vaccines will be produced domestically. The Serum Institute of India, one of the world’s biggest vaccine makers, has already produced and stockpiled around 50m doses of Covishield. The institute has billions in pre-orders from countries around the world also desperate for the vaccine. The Indian government is negotiating how much stock to release for export, given fears that it could lead to a domestic shortage. The government faces another challenge of growing vaccine opposition in India. According to a survey of more than 8,000 people carried out by Local Circles, 69% of Indians are hesitant about receiving the vaccine.
Trump saw the economy was his ticket to a second term – then Covid struck:	No time to waste. That was the message from Joe Biden as he announced plans for a $1.9tn (£1.4tn)  stimulus package  only days before his inauguration as US president next week. Combatting the health and economic crises he will inherit from Donald Trump will be top of the agenda for his administration. The latest jobs figures highlight the problem. In the latest week, the number of  new unemployment claims  rose by 181,000 to 965,000, the highest weekly figure since August. Record Covid-19 infection rates during the winter months have led to curbs on activity being strengthened, partly as a result of action by individual states and partly because individuals have become more cautious. As a result, growth has slowed and the improvement in the labour market that followed the initial pandemic shock last spring has gone into reverse. Biden has some experience of this sort of situation because the economy was in similarly poor shape when he became Barack Obama’s vice-president in 2009. Certainly, the economy Trump bequeaths to Biden bears no comparison to the one left to him by Obama. Trump had seen the economy as his ticket to a second term. At last year’s  World Economic Forum  in Davos he told assembled members of the global elite: “America is thriving, America is flourishing, and yes, America is winning again like never before.” Most incumbents tend to be re-elected. Before Trump, the only presidents since the the second world war to have won one election but not a second term were Jimmy Carter and George Bush senior. Sitting presidents who preside over even a moderately well-performing economy tend to win with some ease. And that’s the way it looked like panning out for Trump when he pitched up in Davos. At that point, with unemployment at its lowest since the US was first putting men on the moon in the late 1960s, few would have put much money on Biden capping a long political career with the presidency. Trump’s determination to focus on the economy meant he downplayed the seriousness of the virus and action to prevent its spread was delayed. But by March, businesses were closing, unemployment was threatening to return to the levels of the 1930s and the markets were crashing. As a result, the economy under Trump was divided into two parts: the generally successful first three years followed by a disastrous 2020. By the time he lost to Biden in early November, the US had actually recovered most of the ground lost during the early stages of the pandemic but by then it was too late. In Trump’s first three years in office, growth averaged 2.5% – a solid if by no means exceptional performance. Despite Trump’s assertions, the  US economy  had been growing steadily under Obama from the middle of 2009 onwards, with an average annual expansion of 2.25% a year. If the big boost to defence spending under Trump is put to one side, the growth rates under the last two presidents would be pretty much identical – up to the end of 2019 at least. Figures are not yet in for 2020 but the US looks to have contracted by about 4.5%. The jobs picture looks similar. Under Obama, the jobless rate had more than halved and it was assumed by the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve, America’s central bank, that it could go no lower without inflation picking up. Trump was sceptical about this view and was proved right. Unemployment continued to fall, reaching 3.5% by the end of 2019. The number of jobs created each year was slightly slower than in Obama’s second term, but a tighter labour market meant firms had to pay higher wages and offer jobs to those who had previously found it hard to find work, such as those with poor skills or disabilities. The black unemployment rate fell below 6% for the first time since modern records began in the early 1970s. Real household median income – one guide to living standards – rose by $6,000 in the first three years of Trump’s presidency. In the previous decade and a half it had gone up by little more than $250. These trends ended abruptly with the onset of the pandemic. The unemployment rate surged to 14.7% and while the trend is once again downwards, at 6.7%, the jobless rate is still almost double its pre-crisis level. There are about 5 million more people unemployed than when Trump came to office. All of which opens up a new chapter in the “what if” school of history. What if the election last November had been held a year earlier? What if the battle for the presidency had been put back a year to November 2021? Would the result have been different? The fact that the election was so close suggests it might well have been. Trump secured almost 47% of the vote and would be on course for a second term had a few thousand members of the public in a handful of swing states switched their votes to him. But he could not prevent Covid-19 from causing serious damage to the economy and he could not delay polling day. Had he accepted defeat gracefully, Trump might have been viewed as a president who, with the benefit of vaccines and the expected strong recovery in 2021, could have turned things round for an autumn election. He might have been seen as an unlucky president rather than a bad loser.
Japan's suicide rate rises 16% in second wave of Covid, study finds:	Suicide rates  in Japan have jumped in the second wave of the Covid-19 pandemic, particularly among women and children, even though they fell in the first wave when the government offered generous handouts to people, a survey found. The July-October suicide rate rose 16% from the same period a year earlier, a stark reversal of the February-June decline of 14%, according to the study by researchers at Hong Kong University and Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology. “Unlike normal economic circumstances, this pandemic disproportionately affects the psychological health of children, adolescents and females (especially housewives),” the authors wrote in the study published on Friday in the journal Nature Human Behaviour. The early decline in suicides was affected by such factors as government subsidies, reduced working hours and school closure, the study found. But the decline reversed – with the suicide rate rising 37% for women, about five times the increase among men – as the prolonged pandemic hurt industries where women predominate, increasing the burden on working mothers, while domestic violence increased, the report said. The study, based on health ministry data from November 2016 to October 2020, found the child suicide rate rose 49% in the second wave, corresponding to the period after a nationwide school closure. Japan’s prime minister, Yoshihide Suga, this month issued a Covid-19 state of emergency for Tokyo and three surrounding prefectures in a bid to stem the resurgence. He expanded it this week to seven more prefectures, including Osaka and Kyoto. Taro Kono, administrative and regulatory reform minister, told Reuters on Thursday that while the government would consider extending the state of emergency, it “cannot kill the economy”. “People worry about Covid-19. But a lot of people have also [killed themselves] because they have lost their jobs, they have lost their income and couldn’t see the hope,” he said. “We need to strike the balance between managing Covid-19 and managing the economy.“ In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email  jo@samaritans.org  or  jo@samaritans.ie . In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at  www.befrienders.org .
Pelosi says lawmakers may be prosecuted if they 'aided and abetted' US Capitol riot – as it happened:	Today’s recap, from me and Joan E Greve:  Donald Trump  is expected to leave the White House as president on Wednesday morning, just hours before Joe Biden’s inauguration, flying off on Air Force One to his beachside home in Florida. Trump’s post-presidential plans have been clouded in uncertainty. But several US news organisations reported on Friday that Trump intends to live at  Mar-a-Lago , his Palm Beach resort. His daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushner are expected to join him there, at least for some of the time. Trump has  said he will not attend  Biden’s inauguration. He is expected to leave Washington on the morning of 20 January,  Bloomberg reported,  citing two people familiar with the matter. The Associated Press, citing a person familiar with the planning, said there would be a departure ceremony at Andrews air force base, with a military band, red carpet and 21-gun salute under discussion. Several White House staff are likely to work for Trump and his family from their new Florida base. According to  the Palm Beach Post , Melania Trump recently visited a private school in Boca Raton that the couple’s teenage son, Barron, is due to attend. Read more:  The president-elect has tapped Eric Lander, a geneticist and pioneer in mapping the human genome, to lead the agency. Lander previously served on Barack Obama’s council of science advisers.  Biden also picked Maria Zuber, a planetary scientist, and Frances Arnold, a Nobel laureate and chemist, to lead the agency. He named Alondra Nelson, the president of the Social Science Research Council and expert on social inequalities in science and technology, to serve as deputy director for science and society. Sound science will touch every aspect of what the Biden Administration does–from new policy, to addressing social inequality, to the implications of new technologies. As Deputy Director for Science and Society, inclusive and trustworthy science will have a place in government. The appointments, and elevation of the agency, come as the US continues to battle a pandemic that has killed nearly 400,000, amplified structural inequities in health and healthcare, and been amplified by rampant misinformation and mistrust of medical science.  The council “will help the Biden-Harris administration confront some of the biggest crises and challenges of our time, from climate change and the impact of technology on society to pandemics, racial inequity and the current historic economic downturn”, the Biden transition team said in a statement.  The NRA announced that it has filed for bankruptcy and will look to incorporate in Texas after the New York attorney general sued the gun-rights group for diverting donations to fund the lavish personal expenses of organization executives.  “The move will enable long-term, sustainable growth and ensure the NRA’s continued success as the nation’s leading advocate for constitutional freedom – free from the toxic political environment of New York,” the NRA said in a statement. The influential group has long weathered accusations of questionable spending. Its longtime executive  Wayne LaPierre  spent vast amounts on clothing, travel to the Bahamas and Italy, and other luxuries.  The New York attorney general  Letitia James , a Democrat, said that her office would not allow the organization to use its bankruptcy filing to evade accountability.  The  @NRA 's claimed financial status has finally met its moral status: bankrupt.   While we review its bankruptcy filing, we will not allow the  @NRA  to use this or any other tactic to evade accountability and my office’s oversight. NPR reporter Tim Mak, who has extensively researched the organization, explains that New York would still have jurisdiction over the NRA, so long as it continues to operate in the state, even if it incorporates elsewhere. The geographical move seems to be “a way to mask the more important story, which is that they’re filing bankruptcy”, Mak writes:  There remain some serious legal questions about whether the NRA can just up and leave New York. THREAD here:  https://t.co/SMuNlcg5Ll From  Kari Paul ,  Luke Harding  and  Severin Carrell :  A far-right website that was among the platforms used to organize the deadly violence at the US Capitol has again been forced to find new internet service protection after a shell company owned by two Russians and registered in Scotland cut ties with the platform’s internet host. The website 8kun, previously known as 8chan, has long been one of the preferred platforms of the far right and followers of the baseless conspiracy theory QAnon. It was used by rioters ahead of the 6 January attack to mobilize other “patriots” to “help storm the Capitol”, with some on the message board debating which politicians to kill once they got inside. In the aftermath of the riot, users continued to post content fomenting violence, including maps of government buildings to target and combat techniques for a proposed civil war. It wasn’t the first time the platform had been linked to acts of violence. Its predecessor site, 8chan, was linked to a series of white nationalist terrorist attacks, including the massacres in  Christchurch, New Zealand , and  El Paso, Texas . 8kun has faced significant hurdles to remain online since at least 2019, when the  El Paso attack  occurred. All websites are kept online by a network of services including web hosts and domain name registrars. 8kun has had a loyal internet provider in the Washington state-based VanwaTech, whose CEO has repeatedly defended its connections to the hate site in the name of freedom of speech. 8kun was used by rioters ahead of the 6 January attack to mobilize other ‘patriots’ to ‘help storm the Capitol’.Photograph: Ahmed Gaber/Reuters But the site cannot function without platform protection services that prevent DDoS attacks, or distributed denial of service attacks, and few providers have been willing to work with it. Following its removal from the infrastructure company Cloudflare, 8kun, throughVanwaTech, worked with the Oregon-based CNServers LLC for DDoS protection. That company, too,  cut ties  with 8kun when it was alerted to the site’s violent history. Since October 2020, 8kun had received DDoS protection from DDoS-Guard, a company that provides protection to a number of controversial websites, including the neo-Nazi site the Daily Stormer. 8kun’s ties to DDoS-Guard were first reported by the security researcher and journalist  Brian Krebs . This week, DDoS-Guard became the latest company to cut ties with 8kun’s hosting company, VanwaTech, following inquiries from the Guardian. Read more:  Prosecutors asked Michel Cohen, the president’s former attorney and fixer, questions about his business dealings and Trump’s relationship with his longtime creditor Deutsche Bank, the Associated Press reports:  New York prosecutors conducted an hours-long interview on Thursday with  Michael Cohen , Donald Trump’s former attorney, asking a range of questions about the president’s business dealings, according to three people familiar with the meeting. The interview focused in part on Trump’s relationship with Deutsche Bank, his biggest and longest-standing creditor, according to the people, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The interview, at least the second of Cohen by the Manhattan district attorney, comes amid a long-running grand jury investigation into Trump’s business dealings. District attorney Cyrus Vance Jr has been waging a protracted legal battle to get access to the president’s tax records. The US supreme court is expected to rule on Trump’s request for a stay and a further appeal after he leaves office 20 January. The  New York  investigation is one of several legal entanglements likely to intensify as Trump loses power – and any immunity from prosecution he might have as a sitting president. The Manhattan-based grand jury has been continuing work despite the coronavirus pandemic, which has curtailed many court operations. The Republican president also faces a civil investigation, led by New York attorney general Letitia James, a Democrat, into whether his company lied about the value of its assets to get loans or tax benefits. Cohen is cooperating with that inquiry too. He previously told Congress Trump often inflated the value of his assets when dealing with lenders or potential partners, but deflated them when it benefited him for tax purposes. Read more: Under the Biden plan, pharmacies would also be “activated” to distribute vaccines through appointments.  That prompted CVS, one of the largest chains in the country, to say it was ready to distribute 1 million shots per day through 10,000 locations. Biden also said states would have more transparent tools to plan for the number of doses to be delivered. Biden’s administration also needs to approve new vaccines to solve supply shortages and improve supply chains for the personal protective equipment health workers need to safely do their jobs. Gloves, for example, have been in short supply for months. To solve these shortages Biden pledged to use the Defense Production Act, which allows the government to direct private suppliers to produce goods, in order to make protection gear, vaccines and vaccination supplies. Another major challenge of the vaccination effort has been convincing Americans to take them, as Trump has sown misinformation and confusion throughout the pandemic. Biden said his administration would undertake “a massive public education campaign” and increase transparency to help Americans understand the vaccine. Importantly, Biden also called on Americans to “mask up” for 100 days, an effort he said could save 50,000 lives if Americans universally commit to wearing face coverings. In spite of the new B117 variant, scientists believe human behavior remains the most powerful tool to bend the curve of new infections. “Our administration will lead with science and scientists,” said Biden. To successfully roll out the most complex and logistically challenging vaccine campaign in the nation’s history, Biden’s administration seeks to confront vaccine hesitancy, a burned-out workforce, a lack of clear information on vaccine distribution and vaccine demand that far outstrips supply. “Get more people vaccinated for free,” said Biden, listing his goals. “Create more places for them to get vaccinated. Mobilize more medical teams to get shots in people’s arms. Increase supply and get it out the door as soon as possible. “This will be one of the most challenging operational efforts ever undertaken by our country – but you have my word, we will manage the hell out of this operation.” Trump will leave the Biden administration with a complex, multi-layered crisis caused by the coronavirus and worsened by the Trump administration’s mishandling of it. In nearly every instance, the Trump administration sought to leave Covid-19 response to the states, distancing itself over fights for protective gear, supplies, tests and now confusion over vaccine supplies. Biden called the effort so far a “dismal failure”. Biden’s goal to vaccinate 100 million people in his first 100 days would double the pace currently set by the Trump administration, which pledged to get 20 million people vaccinated by the end of last year. So far, only 12 million people have received shots. However, even as vaccines are rolled out, many more Americans are expected to succumb to the disease, in part because a new, more transmissible variant called B117 is expected to overtake dominant strains in the US in roughly eight weeks, and further fray health resources. “Things will get worse before they get better,” said Biden, later adding: “The policy changes we’re making will take time to show up in the Covid statistics.” It often takes weeks for infected individuals to be diagnosed, hospitalized or die from Covid-19. Biden’s incoming chief of staff, Ron Klain, said he expects Covid to claim 500,000 American lives by February, because “we haven’t fully funded the Covid response”. Already, the virus has killed more than 390,000 Americans, and left 25.7 million Americans unemployed as the economy backslides amid rising cases. Biden laid out a more ambitious, and expensive, plan to take control of the coronavirus than any undertaken by the Trump administration. One analyst at the left-leaning Center for American Progress called it “a sharp departure from the Trump administration’s fend-for-yourself approach”. Biden pledged to set up 100 federally funded vaccination sites at places like school gymnasiums and sports stadiums; to “staff up” the centers with “thousands” of workers; and to establish community vaccination centers in hard-to-reach and hard-hit places. “We commit to making sure communities of color, rural neighborhoods, and those living with disabilities and seniors are not left behind in our vaccination plans,” said Biden. He also called the disproportionate impacts of Covid-19 on minorities and marginalized Americans, “unacceptable, unconscionable”. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. A Washington Post photographer captured a picture of  Mike Lindell ’s notes as he met with  Donald Trump,  and they include some ... interesting suggestions. @MyPillowUSA  CEO Michael Lindell shows off his notes before going into the West Wing at the White House on Friday, Jan 15, 2021 in Washington, DC.  pic.twitter.com/AY6AyJNSyE The notes of Lindell, the CEO of MyPillow and a Trump loyalist, include phrases like “martial law if necessary” and “Move  Kash Patel  to CIA Acting”. Patel, another Trump loyalist, currently serves as the chief of staff to  Christopher Miller,  the acting secretary of defense. The White House pool reporter spotted Lindell outside the West Wing about an hour and a half ago, and he refused to answer questions about his visit with Trump. Lindell has helped spread Trump’s baseless claims of widespread fraud in the presidential election, and he initially said the violent riot at the Capitol, which resulted in five deaths, was just “peaceful protests”. As  Joe Biden  walked away from the podium after wrapping up a speech on coronavirus vaccine distribution, the president-elect responded to one shouted question from a reporter. Biden was asked whether he felt safe about the inauguration next week based off the intelligence he has received on security concerns. “Yes,” the president-elect responded. The inauguration is now just five days away. Joe Biden  reiterated his request for Americans to wear masks for the first 100 days of his presidency, which starts on Wednesday. “I know it’s become a partisan issue, but what a stupid, stupid thing for it to happen,” the president-elect said of mask-wearing. Biden also criticized the Republican lawmakers who refused to wear masks as they sheltered in place during the Capitol riot last week.  “Quite frankly, it was shocking to see members of the Congress, while the Capitol was under siege by a deadly mob of thugs, refuse to wear a mask while they were in secure locations,” Biden said. He added, “What the hell’s the matter with them? It’s time to grow up.”  The president-elect also offered this pledge to the American people on distributing coronavirus vaccines: “You have my word, we will manage the hell out of this operation.” Joe Biden  acknowledged that it would take time for the country to get onto better footing in the fight against coronavirus. “It may take many months to get to where we need to be,” Biden said, adding that there will likely be “stumbles” in his administration’s pandemic response. The president-elect asked Americans to “keep the faith and keep following what we know works,” such as wearing masks and socially distancing.  Biden noted he previously asked Americans to wear masks for the first 100 days of his presidency, which could save as many as 50,000 lives.  “This is not a political issue,” Biden said of mask-wearing. Joe Biden  criticized the  Trump administration  for how it has handled the rollout of coronavirus vaccines so far. “The vaccine rollout in the United States has been a dismal failure thus far,” the president-elect said. Biden previously said he wants to distribute 100 million doses of vaccines in his first 100 days in office, but some of his advisers have reportedly expressed skepticism about hitting that goal. Joe Biden  is now speaking in Wilmington, offering details on his plans to distribute coronavirus vaccines. The president-elect noted that the country’s coronavirus infections and deaths have reached alarmingly high rates in recent weeks. “Truthfully, we remain in a very dark winter,” Biden said. “Things will get worse before they get better. The policy changes we are making will take time to show up in the COVID statistics.”  The president-elect also emphasized the need for the country to unify in order to effectively respond to the pandemic.  “Unity is not some pie-in-the-sky dream,” Biden said. “It’s a practical step to getting things done.”  Donald Trump  has reportedly requested information about the 10 House  Republicans  who voted to impeach him for a second time on Wednesday. The Wall Street Journal  reports :  Mr. Trump, who had feared an even larger number of defections, wanted to know who the lawmakers were and whether he had ever done anything for them, according to people familiar with the meeting. He also inquired who might run against them when they face re-election in two years, the people said. The president has grown increasingly concerned with defections against him within his own party, aides say. Now, he must plot his defense in  a second Senate trial  that will hinge on  his level of GOP support , with far fewer legal and political allies than the last time he was impeached. Mr. Trump has called several Republicans on Capitol Hill in recent days to seek their advice on who he should recruit, as the personal attorneys who defended him last time and White House counsel,  Pat Cipollone , have made clear to associates they don’t intend to serve on his team, according to people familiar with the discussions. Advisers have urged the president not to tap  Rudy Giuliani , his personal attorney who—to the chagrin of several Trump advisers—led the campaign to overturn the results of the election, telling Mr. Trump that he needs a sophisticated attorney who can stick to the facts. At her press conference today,  Nancy Pelosi  would not provide clarity on when she will transmit the article of impeachment to the Senate. The trial of the president is expected to conclude after he leaves office. Mike Lindell,  the CEO of MyPillow and a loyal supporter of  Donald Trump , was spotted outside the West Wing moments ago. Since the presidential election, Lindell has helped spread baseless claims that  Joe Biden  won because of widespread fraud, despite no evidence to support those accusations. Lindell also dismissed the Capitol riot, which resulted in five deaths, as “peaceful protests” as the violence unfolded. As rioters stormed the Capitol, the My Pillow guy falsely claimed, “The riots you’re seeing on TV, it’s a joke. My nieces were down there. They said, 99.99% was, it was just peaceful protests.” Today, he’s at the White House.  https://t.co/A9ro72wHTa The leaders of the Senate intelligence committee are also sending a letter to the current director of national intelligence,  John Ratcliffe,  requesting information on how the intelligence community is preparing for the inauguration. The acting Republican chairman,  Marco Rubio,  and the top Democrat on the committee,  Mark Warner,  said in the letter, “In light of the recent violence at the United States Capitol on January 6, 2021, we request that you provide the Committee with a detailed description of how the Intelligence Community (IC) is supporting relevant customers in the Congress, Executive Branch, and state and local law enforcement in preparation for the inauguration on January 20, 2021.” The letter comes amid intensifying concerns about potential violence ahead of  Joe Biden ’s inauguration.  The confirmation hearing for Avril Haines, Joe Biden’s nominee to serve as director of national intelligence, will now be on Tuesday. The Senate intelligence committee had planned to hold the hearing today, but it was postponed, reportedly because a member objected to holding the hearing virtually. “Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Acting Chairman Marco Rubio (R-FL) and Vice Chairman Mark Warner (D-VA) will hold an open nomination hearing on Tuesday, January 19, 2021 at 10:00 AM EST for Ms. Avril Haines,” the committee said in a statement. “The open hearing will be a WebEx Hybrid. Committee leadership and Ms. Haines will be joining in person, while some Members may join via WebEx. The open hearing will be followed immediately by a closed hearing.”
Barefoot in thorns: Gaza through the eyes of a Palestinian photographer:	W orking as a journalist in  Gaza , says Palestinian photographer Jehad al-Saftawi, is like walking barefoot in a field of thorns. “You must always watch where you step. Each neighbourhood is composed of its own intimate social network, and travelling through them with a camera makes you a significant suspicion. “You’re caught between the two sides of the conflict: the rulers of Gaza limit what you can photograph and write about, imprisoning and torturing those who disobey. At the same time, the Israeli army sees you as a potential threat that must be eliminated, as has been the fate of many Palestinian journalists.” The beach is the only place where Gaza’s nearly two million residents can feel a sense of space Now living in the US, Saftawi’s book My Gaza is a very personal account of an upbringing in a difficult and violent environment, with abuse from inside his own family as well as life in a conflict zone. “I’ve put my memories and dreams into these pages. I’ve shared the view from my window. Everyday scenes in Gaza: residents of Shuja’iyya carry what can be salvaged from their evacuated neighbourhood; one of the Rafah tunnels; flooding; waiting in line to fill up propane tanks “For years, I clung to the idea of fleeing my country for the western world. In 2016, I managed to leave Gaza for New York, and soon after began the process of seeking asylum in California. People wanted to know how they could help my wife and I, aside from offering financial assistance. Then I received the opportunity to publish my photographs. It’s an opportunity so many of the refugees arriving in the US every day aren’t afforded: the chance to share one’s experience. “My story is in part the story of my father, Imad al-Saftawi, who raised me with violence and fear, and who, after his 18-year imprisonment in Israel, was set free in December of 2018. An injured person is carried to the al-Shifa hospital. Civilians played a key role in transporting the injured during Operation Protective Edge “My parents cared for their children and wished us the best, but we were constantly berated. My siblings and I were made to feel guilty about our soft hands. We were threatened and punished if we didn’t go to the mosque for the five daily prayers. We were forced to wake at 5am to go with my father to pray the Fajr (dawn prayer). Young people have to make the most of their lives: playing on rubble; burning steel wool to celebrate Ramadan; rollerblading; celebrating Mohammed Assaf winning Arab Idol Palestinian protesters on Gaza’s eastern border with Israel, holding mirrors to force Israeli soldiers to witness themselves shooting and reflect sunlight to confuse their vision “I’m now seven thousand miles away from him, from Gaza, and I walk as a free man. A Palestinian shepherd tends to his sheep near the buffer zone in the northern Gaza Strip. He says he has had many near-death encounters with the remote-control machine guns mounted on some of the Israeli watchtowers “Standing behind the camera, your hands shake as you document the suffering. Rainbow flags; Alaa Habib, nine, whose school was badly damaged during Israel’s Operation Protective Edge; my 13-year-old sister Leen from our apartment in Gaza City; my wife Lara connecting with the world through her phone Queuing for permission to leave Gaza – my wife and I had to pay an Egyptian officer to get our names on the list “These photographs are visual memories that explore the lives behind the headlines. This work is dedicated to all those trapped in the hardships of this life, surviving in the hopes of a better tomorrow.” Showing her colours Jehad al-Saftawi is a documentary journalist, photographer and videographer dedicated to social justice and human rights storytelling. His work has been featured by Reuters, BuzzFeed, AJ+, Mic, Al Jazeera America and the Huffington Post. He arrived in the US from Gaza in 2016 and is currently seeking asylum. He is internationally recognised for setting up one of the few livestreams documenting the 2014 Israeli offensive in Gaza
Journeys of hope: what will migration routes into Europe look like in 2021?:	I n 2020, tens of thousands of migrants crossed desert and sea, climbed mountains and walked through forests to reach what has become an increasingly inhospitable Europe. Many of them died, overwhelmed by the waves, or tortured in the  detention centres of Libya . More were displaced after the  flames of Moria refugee camp  in Greece burned everything they had. As a new year begins, so do the journeys of tens of thousands more people seeking a new life overseas. The Guardian has spoken to experts, charity workers and NGOs about the challenges and risks they face on the main migration routes into  Europe . Migrants walk in protest to the Serbian-Hungarian border near Kelebija, Serbia, in February 2020. They seek a passage to the EU. Photograph: Bernadett Szabo/Reuters In July last year, seven north African men climbed into a shipping container in a railway yard in Serbia, hoping to emerge a few days later in Milan. Three months later, on 23 October,  authorities in Paraguay found their badly decomposed bodies  inside a shipment of fertiliser.  Violence from security forces in the Balkan states  has pushed people to take even greater risks to reach Europe. After the Serbian border with EU countries became virtually impassable in 2018, refugees began trying to reach Croatia via Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) instead. The path usually begins in Turkey, from which migrants attempt to reach Bulgaria or Greece, then North Macedonia or Serbia, then Bosnia, Croatia and Slovenia, from where they can finally reach Italy or Austria. The final leg of the Balkan route, which crosses mountains and snow-covered forests and lacks facilities for migrants, is one of the most perilous and gruelling, made worse by the  brutal pushbacks  carried out by squadrons of Croatian police who patrol the EU’s longest external border. Between January and November 2020, the Danish Refugee Council (DRC) recorded 15,672 pushbacks from Croatia to BiH.  More than 60% of cases reportedly involved violence . The humanitarian situation for those entering Bosnia and Herzegovina remains unacceptable and undignified “The onset of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 has decreased migration flows along the western Balkan route,” says Nicola Bay, DRC country director for Bosnia. Last year, 15,053 people arrived in BiH, compared with 29,196 in 2019. “But in the absence of real solutions the humanitarian situation for those entering BiH remains unacceptable and undignified.” In December, a fire destroyed a migrant camp in Bosnia, which had been built to contain the spread of Covid-19 among the migrant population. The same day the International Organization for  Migration  declared the effective closure of the facility. The destruction of the camp, which was strongly criticised by rights groups as inadequate due to its lack of basic resources, has left thousands of asylum seekers stranded in snow-covered forests and subzero temperatures. When countries in the region begin to ease Covid-19 restrictions this year, Bay says it is highly likely there will be a surge of arrivals to BiH, which remains the main transit point for those wanting to reach Europe – a scenario for which the EU and the region remain unprepared. Carrying children and their few possessions, migrants flee in Moria camp on the island of Lesbos, Greece. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images On the night of 8 September, the Moria refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos, the biggest of its kind in Europe,  burst into flames . The government announced a four-month state of emergency on the island, as thousands of vulnerable asylum seekers were displaced. “This was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece,” says Stephan Oberreit, head of mission for Médecins Sans Frontières in Greece. “The combination of violence, Covid pandemic and the continued harmful policies of containment on the islands have led to several breaking points and eventually to the fires that have destroyed Moria.” 2020 was one of the most terrible years for asylum seekers arriving in Greece After the blaze,  the EU said there would be no more Morias . But more than 15,000 men, women and children are still trapped in miserable conditions on the Greek islands and the policy of containment continues. People using this route generally come by dinghy from the Turkish town of Ayvalik, aiming to reach Lesbos. Oberreit says that while arrivals have decreased this year, reports of illegal pushbacks have increased “in a concerning way”. “But let’s be realistic, people will continue to try to cross and risk their lives in the absence of other safer and legal options.” Oberreit says the pandemic “has been used by Greek authorities to accelerate their agenda to create closed centres on the Greek islands and to increase the border controls”. It’s hard to predict what will happen this year, “but the signs we have today give us little hope that the situation for the people who manage to arrive on the Greek islands will improve. Or that the EU will abandon its approach based on deterrence and containment,” he says. Migrants are rescued by members of the Spanish NGO Proactiva Open Arms after leaving Libya on an overcrowded dinghy in November. Photograph: Sergi Camara/AP In mid-November, four shipwrecks in the space of three days  claimed the lives of more than 110 people  in the Mediterranean, including at least 70 people whose bodies washed up on the beach of al-Khums, in western  Libya . Taking advantage of good autumn weather, people smugglers sent hundreds of migrants to sea. Many of the journeys ended in tragedy. Last year, at least 575 people died taking the central Mediterranean route. The  International Organization for Migration  (IOM) says the real number is considerably higher. People using this route usually depart from Tripoli or Zuwara in Libya, or from Sfax in Tunisia, and make for the Sicilian island of Lampedusa or Malta in small boats. At the start of the pandemic, Italy and Malta declared their ports closed. Rome established “quarantine boats” – ferries on which migrants are placed under quarantine for 14 days, which have been  criticised by human rights groups . There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries ... human rights are practically revoked “There is not the adequate medical care on the ferries that these people badly need and not even legal assistance,” says Oscar Camps, founder of Proactiva Open Arms. “In such a situation, human rights are practically revoked.” Open Arms is now the only NGO rescue boat operating along the central Mediterranean route. Many other rescue boats are blocked in Italian ports because officials refuse to  authorise their departure . Camps says he would like to see a planned civil or military rescue operation along the route this year, similar to  Operation Mare Nostrum , which Italy ran in 2013–2014. “It should be an operation aimed at dismantling Libyan armed groups, falsely called coastguards, financed by the EU, whose only mission is to intercept boats and bring them back to a country at war,” says Camps. “However, considering the way things are going, we would settle for them stopping the criminalisation of rescue operations carried out by humanitarian ships.” A migrant climbs into the back of a lorry bound for Britain at the entrance to the Channel tunnel in Calais, November 2020. Photograph: Denis Charlet/AFP/Getty Images Several thousand people attempted to cross the Channel to reach Britain last year. London has repeatedly pressed Paris to do more to prevent people leaving  France . In November, the home secretary, Priti Patel, and her French counterpart, Gérald Darmanin, said they wanted to make the route unviable and signed a new agreement aimed at curbing the number of  migrants crossing the Channel  in small boats. More than  8,000 people  made the crossing in small boats last year, up from almost 1,900 in 2019. “The difficulties faced by women, men and children will in many ways remain the same as before,” says Steve Valdez-Symonds, Amnesty’s refugee and migrant rights programme director. “Clearly, there is no will among the two governments – particularly not the UK – to directly address the needs and circumstances of these people to ensure they have access to asylum.” Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France on family reunification is uncertain According to experts, the future of the Channel migration route is linked to the continuing pandemic lockdowns and whether the UK participates in EU migration policies, specifically the EU family reunification programme. “Whether the UK will secure some agreement with the EU or with France in relation to this particular matter is uncertain,” says Valdez-Symonds. “All that can be said, as things stand, is that almost the sole formally sanctioned option for at least unaccompanied children with family in the UK to seek asylum here is  about to close .” Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
'Not enough work, not enough money': can this Kyrgyz village survive without tourists? A picture essay:	I t has been over a decade since Umar Tashbekov saw his opportunity. His village, Sary-Mogol in  Kyrgyzstan , at an altitude of 3,600 metres, is close to   Lenin’s Peak, a popular mountain destination for tourists. If they were already hiking there, why not attract them to visit his village too? Sary-Mogol is a three-hour drive from the nearest city of Osh, in the country’s south-east. Life here is not easy – short summers and unfavourable growing conditions make it hard to grow much more than potatoes and barley. The main source of work is the large livestock market in town. Others find employment as teachers or in the nearby coal mine. Out of its 5,200-strong population, about 500 people have left for Russia where companies welcome factory workers. Clockwise from top left: A view of Lenin’s Peak and Sary Mogol village in south-east Kyrgyzstan; a girl carries bottles to fetch water in the village; clothes and other goods are sold at a weekly market, while men trade livestock An upside to traditional village life, with grandparents, parents and children all living together in the same small houses, has been the slow spread of Covid-19. Because homes are already crowded, people mostly meet up out in the street. That, and the overall government lockdowns, helped keep infection numbers low. Lake Tulpar-Kul, in the Chon-Alay mountains But if there has been limited impact on health, the impact on livelihoods is deep. In 2019, more than 1,300 tourists passed through Sary-Mogol. This year, it was fewer than a dozen. In the last decade, tourism has grown so that almost everyone here is connected to the industry in some way. Receipts from the export of tourism and travel services, which represented almost 6% of GDP in 2018,  have been forecast to almost disappear in 2020 . Revenues are predicted to fall by as much as 90%. Left: a sign indicates the yurt camp near Tulpar-Kel lake. Right: yaks roam in a field near the village Tashbekov opened the village’s first guesthouse in 2007, and invited other villagers to work with him. His company, CBT, soon became an “incubator” for the industry – almost everyone working in tourism has at some point passed through its doors. Soon after, he also opened the area’s first yurt camp, where tourists can stay in 12 traditional Kyrgyz lodgings out in the mountain valley. They enjoy the unique feel of the village – the old Soviet Uaz cars, the ancient  ulak  tartysh  horse game, the markets selling traditional crafts. The traditional sport of  ulak-tartysh  in the village of Taldy-Suu, near Sary-Mogol Then, Tashbekov’s son, Abdilla, took over the business. The 31-year-old has been a guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse, and was in the process of building a new one. He is always reading and researching on the internet, earning his reputation as the “studious” one. His vision has led to new ideas to develop the town and the family business. He and his father opened a bigger office, which serves as a gathering place for guides, workers and tourists. He organised ski training with other guides to move into winter tourism. In 2015, he had the idea to start the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. The entire village attends, either as participants or spectators. Ticket sales bring in revenue for villagers working at the festival – cooking and selling traditional foods, performing traditional music and dancing shows, managing the yurt camp and competing in the games. Abdilla and his family have lunch at home in Sary-Mogol. Abdilla has been a tour guide for more than 10 years. He built his own guesthouse for visitors and initiated the village’s horse and yak games festival and fair. All of that momentum has been lost in the wake of the pandemic. Abdilla and his family have felt the economic pain. “The tourist season is dead,” he says. “We had to close the office, yurt camp and guest houses this year.” His wife works as a music teacher, and they are living off her income, with two children to support. “If tourism does not improve, I will have to go to Osh or some other place to look for work in construction,” he says. That might bring its own set of challenges: the construction sector may soon be another difficult area in which to find jobs. The UN development programme (UNDP), which this year has launched a set of measures to strengthen adventure tourism in Kyrgyzstan, published a survey that found  the most-affected sectors of the economy in Kyrgyzstan will be trade and consumer services and construction , each of which can expect 20% contraction. Abdilla Tashbekov at the empty office of the CBT tourism company. He took over the business from his father in 2012 but coronavirus has stopped the flow of visitors Tashbekov’s other son, Ali, 23, began working in the family business at 13, before going to Osh to study logistics and welding. His training has come in handy during the pandemic. When the flow of visitors to the village stopped, he was able to find work as a mechanic in the mine. But he loved working with tourists, meeting people from all over the world. “It was a good time,” he says. “Sometimes I didn’t have time to come home. After [guiding] one tour, I immediately went with other tourists back to the mountains.” Ali Tashbekov has been working as a welder at the coalmine during the pandemic instead of in his usual role as a mountain guide. His wife Aizirek Avazova, pictured bottom, has had to stop working in the family’s guesthouse It was also a healthier job, he says, being outside in nature all day. Now he worries about the effects of the quarry gas he breathes in regularly. But as his wife worked in the now closed guesthouse kitchen, this is the only income they have. With his father recovering from a broken leg, a mother with Parkinson’s disease requiring expensive treatments, a one-year-old child and another on the way, the family’s resources are stretched to the limit. They are not the only ones feeling the strain in their village. Midinov Almazbek studied languages on his father’s advice, which allows him to teach English at the local school. During the summer, Almazbek also works as a guide. He took out a bank loan a few years ago to build a guesthouse, which he successfully opened, but in February he took out another loan to expand his business. He expected a normal summer, but with no tourists coming, he is now struggling to pay it back. Midinov Almazbek and his brother enclose their veranda with wooden planks in Sary-Mogol. Midinov is struggling to repay a loan he took out to build a guesthouse a few years ago “It’s been a hard year,” he says. “There’s not enough work, and not enough money.” Buunisa Termechikova, 58, also expected a normal summer. The entrepreneur opened a guesthouse and is skilled at crafts, especially the traditional Kyrgyz woman’s hat. Her new Ethnographic Museum, built by her son in July, is full of local products and historical artifacts. In the absence of foreign visitors, she is using the space for workshops for fellow villagers. Buunisa Termechikova opened the Ethnographic Museum in Sary-Molog in July. Since visitors dried up during the pandemic, she has been offering workshops in traditional crafts, such as making doll’s hair, to people living in the area But villagers here still play volleyball in the gym, and take part in horse games, held to celebrate events such as the completion of a new house or the birth of a baby. Maybe it is this energy and spirit that makes the village attractive to those who visit. Two years ago, a Korean engineer had such a good horse-riding holiday that he funded an initiative upgrading the water infrastructure so that villagers no longer had to carry water from the river. Everyone in Sary-Mogol looks forward to sharing their energy and spirit with visitors again. Buunisa Termechikova eats pilaf with her daughter and other guests at home in Burgan-Suu village Sign up for the Global Dispatch newsletter – a fortnightly roundup of our top stories, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues:
