Sanskaari Babuji Rap Song Featuring Alok Nath Goes Viral in India! Rapte Raho Beta:	Who does not know this man from India who came into fame first time from the famous television serial “ Buniyaad ” in 1987. Alok become popular in big screens when he got an opportunity to play Bhagyashree ( Actress ) father in the popular movie “ Meine Pyar Kiya ” in 1989 and since then this man has never looked back and became Babuji of  Bollywood who holds a personality of a  good natured person.  Alok nath trolled on internet  with jokes and meme based on his character from first week of Jan 2014. Few famous jokes on Alok Nath’s babuji character are brought together in a humorous way to create a Rap song featuring Alok Nath itself explaining how to live life Sanskaari way. The creative team who turned all the jokes against Alok Nath to such a wonderful video deserves an high five. Video  and featured image source: Youtube  via  OneLifeNetwork If you love Alok  Nath Rap song, don’t forget to share it with your friends.
10 Happy Surprising Moments In Life Which Can Make Anyone Smile:	Who doesn’t like surprises but some of these pleasant surprises are just exceptionally beyond your expectations. They could be super exciting but then they are very very hard to trust upon!! image source   image source image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source image source   image source   image source   image source image source
22 Govindaa Dance Moves That Can Seriously Get Us Killed Laughing Our Heads Off:	There is nobody else like Govindaa. There isn’t actually. Who else can you imagine making these most ridiculous but ultimately comical faces?And carrying out these bizarre  dance moves that are so aberrantly laughable?!! He is definitely the God of the all things whimsical. Look at some of his seriously animated dance manoeuvres which will really make it hard for you to not laugh! image source   image source   image source     image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source  /  Featured Image Source
You Won’t Believe How Much Pains Do Music Directors Take To Copy Music For Their Next Hit!:	Yes we all love Bollywood songs. No iPod, no smartphone, no PC and not even our festivals and weddings can be complete without the energetic and mesmerising music from our Indian movies. But  most of the times these melodies are carbon copied. Yes, that’s right… Many a times, our music directors don’t even use their akkal to do the nakkal . We could never have guessed where all our Bollywood music is copied from. And even more shocking..even your favourite music director could be a pincher! Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via #HollyShit
28 Bollywood Movie Posters Which Prove That Originality And Creativity Have Gone To Hell:	Necessity is the mother of all inventions and creativity, however google is acting as the fuc**r of all inventions. As an avid movie watcher we feel totally cheated and led down when we see such white lies by the creative teams of bollywood production units by releasing plagiarized movie posters. You need to scroll down till the end to believe this. image credits: Eros International Ltd. & Red Chillies Entertainment/Warner Bros. Pictures image credits: Eros International/Columbia Pictures TriStar Pictures image credits: Vishesh Films/Nordisk Film Distribution (Denmark)  IFC Films (US)  Artificial Eye image credits: Eros International Media Ltd./Paramount Pictures/20th Century Fox image credits: Pritish Nandy Communications/ Sony Pictures Television image credits: Buena Vista Pictures/hiss movie image source: Eros Entertainment/ Sony Pictures Classics/ BBC Films/ Endgame Entertainment image credits:  IFC Films / Venus Records & Tapes image source: Warner Bros. Pictures/ Warner Bros. Pictures/ Wide Frame Pictures image credits: 20th Century Fox/ Fox Star Studios image credits: UTV Motion Pictures/ Island Records image credits: UTV Motion Pictures/ Brillstein-Grey Entertainment/ WCG Entertainment Productions image credits: madmagazine.com/ HR Musik image source: Showbox/ Phoonk 2 image source: Vishesh Films/ CBS Films (USA) image credits: Mukta Arts/ Embassy Pictures (USA) image credits: Om Films Pvt. Ltd./ Paramount Pictures image credits: Illuminati Films/ Eros Entertainment/ Universal Pictures image credits: Adlabs Films Ltd./ Gramercy Pictures image credits: Yash Raj Films/ Studio Canal image credits: Vishesh Films/ CJ Entertainment image credits: Eros Entertainment/ Warner Bros. image credits: Bhoot movie/ New Line Cinema image credits: Walt Disney Pictures/ Eros International Ltd./ Red Chillies Entertainment image credits: HR Musik Limited/ Warner Bros. Pictures/ Roadshow Entertainment Now, lets look at some classic one’s which will leave you stunned!! image credits: United Seven Combines/ TriStar Pictures image source: 1 , 2 image credits: AA Films/ Buena Vista International [mashshare]
Journalist Lost Her American Accent As The Argument Developed..She Shocked Everyone With Her Answers:	Bollywood celebrity Mallika Sherawat effectively left a lady journalist at no more questions state with her answers when being questioned about her statements on “India being a regressive country”. Mallika did the right thing and as a woman she said all truth which doesn’t need to hidden so that more and more people can come to know about it and fight against it. Watch her answers here: Video and featured image source : Youtube by  BollywoodCIA If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends
On His Birthday Today You Can Chat Live With A.R. Rahman!!:	For all the music lovers out there, the two time Academy Award winner, A R Rahman is no less than our very own Mozart from Madras. And this maestro has a little something to make his birthday a special day for all his fans as well. Yes. It’s his birthday today and surprisingly he has a gift in store for you all instead. He is all set to chat live with his fans all over, on Facebook . image source So do not forget to log on to Facebook tonight, when AR Rahman will answer all your questions. Hosted by singer-songwriter Salim Merchant , this event will unfold itself between 8-9 pm today. Do not forget to tag @myqyuki on Facebook and #HBDARR on Twitter to be part of this Live Chat. image source Come celebrate your favourite music composer’s birthday tonight between 8-9 pm. Happy Birthday Rahman Sir !!
3 Reasons Why We Can Say Parineeti Chopra Is A Second Hand Personality:	There are many instances we find in her busy movie promoting jigs itself that scream of her second hand personality. Take for example, Alia Bhatt’s singing debut in Highway. And though they may be showing the sister act in public and media, we better know the cold cat fight. Then, how could Parineeti, who is a B.A. in music swallow this? Came down the blow, and she took the chance of her film Daawat-e-Ishq’s trailer launch to express her dearest wish to sing in her movie. Video Source: YouTube via Telugu Filmnagar But as evident poor miss bubb… Oops… Parineeti couldn’t get the chance. Don’t be sad honey, time will be on your side one day. And yeah, time did come on her side. OK, not really, but at least she got the chance to take on Alia. It was on the sets of Comedy Nights With Kapil where she had come with the handsome Aditya Roy Kapoor to promote her movie Daawat-e-Ishq. As, Alia had went on to sing on the very same set before, how could Parineeti leave behind? She, also sang a track from her movie. You can watch the full episode here . Video Source: YouTube via Comedy Nights With Kapil Another straw in the hat for this “original” lady, would be the instance when she tried to play a prank on the sets of BigBoss 8 after perhaps watching Sharukh Khan and Amitabh Bacchan successfully pull a gig on the sets of Comedy Nights with Kapil earlier. It however, proved to be her poor judgement to play a such a sick prank on inmate Ali Quli Mirza. It obviously backfired and she had to apologise publicly along with Salman Bhai. After all, accusation of sexual harassment is a serious issue, not something to wave off in laughter. You should have know better Parineeti. Video Source: YouTube via Bollywood Scanner Anyway, seems there’s nothing going well for her these days. Perhaps she would do better by trying to be herself and doing something new and not something tried and tested by others. Featured Image Source
12 Bollywood Movies That Could Better Replace The Apps In Your Phone:	We are all crazy about our phones. The second they are away from our sight, our heart comes in our throats. One, because of all our dirty secrets are in that Pandora’s box and second because you just can’t imagine surviving without all those apps you have in there. Now, what if your other love, the love for everything born with silver spoon, Bollywood could replace all these ultra vital applications in your cell?!! Replace your Lose It! or other Yoga and nutrition check apps with your Mary Kom… The way she trains for her tournaments, you will not only get motivated but lose some flab tires too! image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   When a flesh eating giant gorilla is at your heel… it better be the flying Sikh to beat him! image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   They are angry, they are blood thirsty and they ain’t no afraid to shoot… image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Cook it up with Lunchbox… get inspiration to make a new dish every day to please that appetite! Mmm… yummm…. image source / Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures (India)-  Sony Pictures Classics  (International)   Nothing says ‘kill’ better than  Go Goa Gone when it comes to shooting the the pain in your ass undead zombies from Zombieville… gear up! image source / Eros International   Do we even need to explain this app? It is what is th essence of cricket in our land.. what better way to enjoy cricket on your mobile than this?!! image source / Sony Entertainment Television (India)   If you are an Indian, you definitely need this. If not for your daughter, for your cousin’s son and even if not for him… you definitely need it for the poor 20 something girl whom you met at your brother’s saala’s son’s wedding. image source / Eros International   The football fever is rising up in the country… what better way to satiate it but by playing an indigenous game of soccer right on your mobile! Dhan Dhana Dhan! image source / Ronnie Screwvala   Job hunting?!! No need for those boring apps of past. Download 3 Idiots.. for this is the only app that tells you what is the best  career for you… Not engineering? You will do better in wildlife photography.. or even in medicine! image source / Reliance Entertainment   Throw away your old dictionaries and even those Rapidex English speaking course… English Vinglish is here to rescue you! image source / Eros International image source / Eros International   Brand conscious? Aisha is perfect for you then… browse through the fashion enthusiast’s handbook to get the right dress and right look just for you! Oh Ferragamo! Here I come! image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   Are you a pair of travelling pants? Better not look ahead… to appease the wandering soul.. we have just the right app for you to inspire the globetrotter  in you! image source / Eros International
From Tea Vendor To Prime Minister, Check Out New N.A.M.O Youth Anthem:	Narendra Modi who used to help his father selling tea near railway station in Vadnagar during childhood is now  one of the most popular politician in India and abroad with one of the highest number of follower on twitter and facebook worldwide. This time we witnessed lot of creativity In marketing of political parties during Elections in India due to growth of social media and creative agencies. Check N.A.M.O anthem created by  Sugavanam Krishnan   for Narendra Modi as a token on appreciation.  Video source: Youtube  via  Sugavanam Krishnan , Featured image source If you like this story, don’t forget to share is with your friends.
MH17 Flight Passenger Posted A MH370 Joke With Picture On Facebook Before Takeoff:	Malaysia airlines MH17 flying from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpurwas  struck by a ground-to-air missile and crashed right outside the Ukrainian city of Donestsk  on 17th July 2014. The facts are convincing that one of the passenger  Cor Pan  took a picture of the flight and posted a joke with picture on facebook which he never imagined to happen in reality. Fiction joke posted on facebook which turned into reality: In case we go missing, here’s what it looks like. Picture source: Facebook The user was one of the 295 people onboard in the flight MH17. Its still unclear how many people have been killed in this heart breaking crash. But our wishes and prayers are with all 295 on board and their family members.
13 Footballers Who Can Make A Complete Indian Family:	Juan Mata is a Spanish footballer who plays for English club Manchester United and the Spain national team. image source Igor Pita is a Portuguese footballer who plays for C.F. União as a left defender. image source  Nana Ofori Twumasi is a professional footballer who plays as a defender for Yeovil Town in the Football League Championship. image source Nani is a Portuguese footballer who plays as a winger for English club Manchester United and the Portugal national team. image source We could not miss sharing this deadly celebration by NANI image source Kaka, is a Brazilian football attacking midfielder who currently plays for Italian Serie A club Milan and the Brazilian national team. image source Baba Diawara is a Senegalese professional footballer who plays for Levante UD on loan from Sevilla FC in Spain, as a striker. image source Eugène Dadi is an Ivorian football striker who plays for Manado United in the Liga Primer Indonesia. image source Luís Boa Morte is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Hampshire Premier League Division One side Four Marks. image source image source Mamadou Diallo is a former Senegalese football striker. image source Getty Images. Mami Yamaguchi  is a Japanese football player image source  Getty Images. Messi is an Argentine footballer who plays as a forward for Spanish club FC Barcelona and the Argentina national team. image source image source If you like this story, pass it on to your friends on facebook.
10 Sure Shot Signs Of Girls Who Are Engaged:	Midway between your maiden and married status, engagement fills your world with happiness and colors! Read on; to find out the 10 signs that you have got engaged. image source: tumblr.com image source: dailypop.in image source: travelnewszone.info  image source: tumblr.com image source: wifflegifs.com image source: tumblr.com/ viralstories.in archive.  image source: tumblr.com image source: bollypop.in  image source: bollypop.in  image source: tumblr.com Featured image source [mashshare]
This Is What Happens When You Have To Explain Your Dad What Is Twitter.LOL:	It’s really difficult to make our parents understand and learn what are these new generation social media platforms and how they work! The poor things are so innocent and clueless that they make it a living hell for us, while we fruitlessly try to explain to them wtf is Twitter, Facebook, E-mail, Whatsapp etc. etc. all about?!! Each day a new query, each day a headache for us. Please excuse me pops! Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via TheViralFeverVideos
Love Changes Your World. Question Is, ‘Should It?:	Love is a magical feeling, without any puns intended and without any fancy (or borrowed) attempt at making it look all dreamy and wonderful; because it actually is. Those who have been down this road will agree to it. When you are in the right relationship with the right person it is what it feels like, spellbinding! But can we say love changes your world? Or let me reframe the question, should you let love change your world? The answer to the former question we all know. It does change your world. The moment I asked this all must be dancing inside screaming delightfully ‘Yes it does’. But when I asked the second one, you either fell silent or trying to make yourself sound smart, answered ‘No’, because as you are so intelligent you instantly figured out that the right answer must be ‘No’. Well, you are correct. You shouldn’t let love change your world but unfortunately when you are madly in love you are actually just that, ‘mad’ and forget the very meaning of love. It is something that makes your life more beautiful but often you mistake it to be your very life. All you do is be in love. No, I’m not saying you spend sleepless nights or stop eating like how they claim in movies. But with a little twist, you spend sleepless nights talking and chatting with your bae till 3 am. You either rush through your food so that you can resume your attempt of causing your thumbs an overuse injury or conveniently bring on your chatting fiasco to the dining table itself, behaving as if either you are invisible or those at the table with you are. Even when outside of house its no different. All you talk about is your SO and all you hear is the message tone when he sends you an another text, blocking out all the live noises of your colleagues you are hanging out with at the lunch break. You start declining the days’ old plans with your bestie because your boo just called and told you to get ready for a movie. But don’t be embarrassed (as yet) since you explained to your friend how you are so down with a sudden stomach ache due to the rajma your aunt brought, so she wouldn’t feel so bad at you cancelling your BFF time. You may think this is so natural and common when you just enter a relationship and though unhealthy, it cures with time. Sure, that is. But it would have been okay if it were just that. Most of you don’t even realize when your beaus emotionally manipulate you into not hanging out with some or the other friend or making you hang out or talk with them a little more instead, without you even realizing when you completely changed from a free, socially active and a true blue family person to a commodity with an exclusive right of their beaus over them. Has ever any of your friends contacted your bae to ask about your whereabouts? Well, then it proves. I’m not blaming your beau for anything. They are as much in love as you may be. So, the thing to give a piece of brain to is that, even you do the same to them and again unconsciously. Any relationship, pardon me, any healthy relationship needs space.  When you become his and he yours life, things get messy. Then truly your world changes and that’s definitely not for the good. You had so many things you adored that you may have abandoned due to the lack of time because all your time when you are not with them has to be spent on studies or work. Or did I wrongly say it around. Ehh…. Now, this is when it becomes alarming when you can add to it, ‘or vice-versa’! If you love to travel, love to paint, have dozens of other friends whom you constantly hung out with or left the dinner time singularly for your family, don’t break the chain just so you are in a relationship now. Your love life must be a part of your life not your life itself. Though hard it may sound, you need to carefully juggle with your time, energy and priority for all the people and the things you enamour. Don’t turn yourself into a ghost of your single self. Be in love but don’t let it change your world. Featured Image Source
A Noble Deed Or Wastage Of A Precious Resource? This Video Demands An Answer.:	Video and Featured Image: YouTube via  Teen Pathar
13 Traditional And Famous Dishes Of Himachal You Must Definitely Try Once:	Himachal Pradesh apart from being blessed with breathtaking natural beauty, is also a tasteful blend of exquisite pahari cuisine that gives any traveller more than just one reason to fall in love with this beautiful mountains dotted state. Himachali or pahari  cuisine has a unique aroma and flavour to it due to the usage of a lot of yoghurt and cardamom and cooking on slow flame. One can clearly see that the Himachali dishes have a lot of influence of Punjabi and Tibetan style of food. The availability of vegetables is a challenge in the hilly and cold terrain of Himachal Pradesh hence, most of the traditional dishes are either non-vegetarian, make use of different types of lentils in them or both. The use of varied spices like chillies, cardamom, cinnamon, turmeric and coriander powder is common and make the food rich and spicy; very much to the delight of the tourists that flock to this part of the country almost all year long. The pahari folk also use a lot of dairy products, especially buttermilk, curd and ghee to make their food even more delectable. There are a lot of restaurants all over Himachal Pradesh which serve authentic pahari food for you to enjoy and imprint on your minds. So, if you are planning to go to the land of the majestic Himalayas for your next vacations, you should definitely give a try to these amazing dishes from Himachal Pradesh. No festivities of Himachal are considered complete without Dham. It is a dish prepared by the Brahmins of the regions of Chamba by cooking red kidney beans ( rajma ), green lentils (moong daal ) and rice in curd. It is served teamed with mash daal , boor ki kari and sweet and sour sauce made from tamarind and jaggery ( gur ). It is traditionally served on plates made out of leaves. image source   Mittha as the name suggests is a local dessert of Himachal Pradesh. It is prepared with sweetened rice mixed with a generous helping of raisins and other dry fruits. image source   Sidu is a local bread made from wheat flour. The flour is kneaded and set aside for some hours for the yeast to settle and the dough to rise. This dough is put on direct flame of bonfire to be par-cooked and then later steamed to complete the cooking. This distinct bread is usually enjoyed with ghee or butter alone or can be savoured with mutton or daal as well. image source   Babru is like a Himachali variation of the popular kachoris. It is made by stuffing soaked and ground black gram daal paste to kneaded dough patties. These patties are then rolled and deep fried and served with tamarind chutney. image source   Madra is a form of yoghurt and chickpea flour based gravy popular in pahar cuisine. Chana Madra is one such dish made with kabuli chane or white chickeas cooked in the gravy seasoned with  assorted spices, ginger, garlic and onions. image source   The name itself brings a tangy taste in our mouths. Khatta is indeed a very sumptuous dish made with pumpkin cooked in a spicy and tangy madra gravy and dried raw mango powder or amchoor along with other spices .  Other popular vegetable preparations of the region are Sepu Vadi and Gucchi Mattar. image source   Another of Himachali delicacy, Chha Gosht is a dish that is made with marinated lamb meat cooked in a gravy of gram flour, yoghurt and spices such as cardamom, red chilli powder, coriander powder, bay leaf, asafoetida and ginger-garlic paste. image source   Mash daal or kali daal is made with split black lentils or ma ki daal. It is soaked overnight, pressure cooked and then simmered in a heavy bottomed pan along with thinly sliced onions, ginger, garlic and spices shallow fried in hot mustard oil to give the comforting mash daal. image source   A popular breakfast dish of Sirmour district, Patande can rightly be called as Indian pancakes. Ladle full of smooth batter made from wheat flour, milk and sugar are poured on a ghee laden hot griddle and a thin pancakes like those resembling dosa(s) are cooked to make sweet and yummy Patande. image source   This fish delicacy made with marinated trout shallow fried in mustard oil with spices is a much loved dish of the Kullu region. Cooked in minimal spices, the dish brings out the natural flavours of the delicious trout. image source   Akotri is a typical delicacy of the Northern Hills. It is a type of cake made with buckwheat mixed with wheat that is usually prepared on occasions of festivities. image source   A type of pulao, Tudkiya Bhath is made with rice cooked with lentils, potatoes, onions, ginger, garlic and yoghurt and spiced with bay leaf, cardamom, cinnamon, red chilli powder etc. This spicy rice dish is usually served with mash daal. image source   A unique dish made from the lotus stems, it is truly a scrumptious. The stems are thinly sliced, washed and boiled then stir fried with onion, ginger-garlic paste, gram flour, cayenne pepper and other spices that renders the dish a distinct taste and texture. image source
10 Best Himalayan Trekking Trails from Bhutan to India:	Greatest Himalayan trekking routes in and around India for the adventure seekers.  image source The Everest Base camp has been a favourite place for trekking and mountaineering for trekkers from all over the world. And while this is a great option and indisputably the best one indeed, there are many other Himalayan trekking trails at over 24,000 feet rich in both beauty and thrill. Located in India and its neighbouring countries of Bhutan, Nepal, Pakistan and Tibet, sharing the mighty mountain range, these superb trekking routes in Himalayas are what every enthusiastic trekker should definitely explore. image source So, here are 10 of the best Himalayan trekking trails that anyone truly in love with nature must definitely explore. image source Nestled in western Himalayas, Bhutan is a mysterious country that remains veiled in clouds. As intriguing and winsome as it looks, this also leads to some very complex treks of the region, making for a challenging yet interesting experience. Also check “ How To Reach Bhutan from India ” on Thoamscook blog image source Begining in Paro Valley  and extending to the Chomolhari base camp (24,035 ft) which is Bhutan’s second highest peak. Being a sacred ground for Tibetan Buddhists, the trek has a lot of restrictions, which also means only a few trekkers have had the privilege of trekking along this gorgeous path bathed in pristine natural beauty and rich culture of Bhutan. Duration: 10 days Starts at: Paro Valley Best time: March to May, September & October Maximum Altitude: 15, 810 ft Fitness Level: Moderate Highlights: Mt. Jomolhari, Drukgyel Dzong, Jangothang, Taktsang Monastery (Tiger’s Nest)   image source One of the most challenging treks in the world, the Snowman Trek traverses along 11 passes forming the Himalayan spine that stretches from Bhutan to Tibet.  The only good time to set on this journey is the short period of three weeks of October, minus the snow or wet weather that is experienced the rest of the year. Duration: 25 days Starts at: Drukgyel Dzong near Paro Best time: October Maximum Altitude: 16,600 ft Fitness Level: High Highlights: Lingshi Dzong,  Thangkthanka, waterfalls, Himalayan wildlife including blue sheep, mountain leoppard etc   image source Situated in the midst of the Himalayas, the small country of Nepal is a beautiful and culturally rich country. It is the home to about 14 mountains which are over 26,000 ft high and host mountaineering and trekking for adventure seekers from all over the world. image source Needless to state, this trek is our absolute favourite Himalayan trek. The marvellous vista of the Everest along with some of the highest mountain peaks in the world, a superb trail and lovely tea houses for an unforgettable stay make this an unmatched trek for anyone. Duration: 14 days Starts at: Lukla Best time: March to May & end of September to November Maximum Altitude: 18,192 ft. Fitness Level: High Highlights: Mt. Everest, Pumori, Lhotse, Nuptse and more.   image source Painting a completely distinct picture than the rest of the Himalayan trekking trails, Upper Mustang trek offers a splendid desert terrain marked with beautiful mountains and ancient Tibetan culture of the region. The trek, opted by only about a 1000 tourists a year, requires a special permit and combines tea house stays and camping in the wild. Duration: 14 Days Starts at: Jomsom Best time:  March to November Maximum Altitude:  4,230 ft. Fitness Level: High Highlights: Forbidden City, Buddhist monastries, caves, tea houses   image source This trek is unlike any others. It starts at a low altitude of mere 1,427 ft to Makalu base camp, the 5th tallest summit, at 27,765 ft, hence lets you experience a gorgeous transition of environments as you trek higher. With pristine forests and alpine meadows lined along the way, camping is the only mode of accommodation during the trek. Duration: 16 Days Starts at: Tumlingtar Best time: March to May & September to November Maximum Altitude:  15,978 ft. Fitness Level: High Highlights: Rhododendron and cloud forests, alpine meadows, native inhabitants and local culture, a view of Mt. Everest   image source The Himalayas in India span across the winsome northern region of the country starting from Arunachal Pradesh in the north-east to Kashmir in the north-west. Skirting the base of the third tallest peak of Kanchenjunga, Sikkim serves as the ideal and a popular spot for trekking. The central parts of Himalayan trekking trails in India include certain regions of Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; while Laddkakh in the west, which is also the driest Himalayan region, makes for one of the best trekking trails in India. Often referred to as ‘heaven on earth’, Kashmir offers breathtaking views of Himalayas, but due to security risks, is not a preferred option for trekking. image source This Himalayan trekking route near Gangotri glacier, takes you to the origin of the the holiest river of India, the Ganges. Gomukh located at the base of the glacier is the source of the river and therefore the trek is also a famous pilgrimage of the country. Duration: 9 Days Starts at: Gangotri town Best time: May to June & August to Mid of October Maximum Altitude: 12,760 ft. Fitness Level: Moderate Highlights:  Mount Shivling, Gangotri temple, Bhagirathi mountain range, spectacular snow covered peaks, one of the largest central Himalayan glaciers   image source One of the most wonderful trekking trails in the Himalayas, this is trek paves its path along the frozen river of Zanskar. Connecting the quaint villages of Zanskar Valley to that of Chilling village on the road to Leh, the trek offers splendid beauty of the surrounding frozen in the below zero degree (-10 in the day to -25 degree Celsius at nights) temperature. Duration: 6 Days Starts at: Chilling village Best time: Mid of January to mid of February Maximum Altitude:  11,123 ft. Fitness Level: High Highlights: Icy peaks, walk on frozen river, icicles, natural caves and more   image source One of the wettest Himalaya treks in India, Goecha La trek of Sikkim is a popular and an unforgettable trekking route. What begins with a step along the muddy path amidst the dense rainforests, gradually makes way to alluring rhododendron thickets, mesmerizing views of mountains and azure waters of Samiti Lake. Duration: 10 Days Starts at: Yuksom Best time: March to June & September to November Maximum Altitude: 16,000 ft. Fitness Level: High Highlights: Mt. Kanchenjunga, Mt. Pandim, Dzongri Top, Samiti Lake, Thansing pastures & beautiful Rhododendron forests   image source Tibet is a land of mystifying beauty and culture of Buddhism. The Himalayas here are much drier and colder than those in India or Nepal. Tibet offers some fantastic Himalayan trekking trails of which the one to Everest base camp is the most sought and is also the highest possible distance you can climbing sans a permit. image source The Kailash mountain is one of the most prepossessing mountains with a symmetrical layout. It is a sacred mountain for the Indians and is believed to be the abode of the Lord Shiva, which established it as Hindu pilgrimage as well. A highly difficult trek, the circuit involves a clockwise (for Hindus & Buddhists) or counter-clockwise (for Jains & Bonpo) trekking route. Duration: 3 Days Starts at: Darchen Best time: End of May to October Maximum Altitude: 18, 471 ft. Fitness Level: Moderate to High Highlights: Four faces of Mt. Kailash- Peacock, Lion, Elephant & Horse, gushing rivers, Tibetan villages, Monasteries, temples and snow capped mountain   image source The Everest Base Camp which is located in Nepal is the southern aspect of the mountain and the more popular one, while in Tibet the route can be traversed all the way to the camp by a vehicle. However, beyond the base camp is where the trekking trail gets interesting with challenging climb and a scintillating backdrop of the huge snow-white mountains. This route to EABC (Everest Advanced Base Camp) is the highest (20,795 ft) that one can get to on Everest, without a climbing permit. Duration: 15 Days Starts at: Lotingri Best time:  April to June & September to November Maximum Altitude: 20,800 ft. Fitness Level: High Highlights:  Tashilhunpo Monastery, Phalkot Monastery, Khumbum Stupa & panoramic view of the snowy Himalayas So, which Himalayan trekking trail are you planning your next adventure at? Let us know in the comments below. 
12 Exciting And Adventurous Things To Do In Himachal Pradesh:	Fun never ceases on a trip to Himachal Pradesh. From the beautiful snow capped mountains to the breathtaking verdant forests, Himachal has a lot to offer to its tourists. But it doesn’t end just there. Himachal has a lot more to offer even beyond the enchanting natural beauty and freshness of the countryside. Given here are some of the exciting things you must do while you are holidaying in Himachal Pradesh. The Tibetan Institute of Performing Arts was established in the year 1959 with the aim to preserve and promote the art and culture of Tibet. The institute holds a 9 days long festival which is the celebration of the traditional Tibetan opera or Lhamo. A lhamo can last as long as 6 hours. You can visit the institute to discover the art and enjoy their folk dance. image source   Best to take up in the months of June and October, a trek in the Pabbar Valley, Shimla is an experience to remember for life. The trek to Saru lake which is located at a height of 3600 m gives you a crystal clear view of the Gangotri range along with the striking vista of the natural carpet of the thick wooded valley and wild flowers. image source   Whether you play the game or not, it is a must to visit the expansive golf course at Tattapani that is surrounded by tall cedars. The course is tricky and the lands challenging so it is advisable to hire a caddy to know your way. You can enjoy drinks and snacks at the clubhouse bar even if you may be not playing. image source     Beas river provides the best river rafting experience in Manali with its white and gushing waters and rising waves. With guidance and proper instructions you can enjoy this thrilling sport in the months of April to mid of June. image source   The Ridge road provide amazing shopping destination for the tourists visiting Shimla. TheMall road and the Lakkar bazaar situated here, is famous for its brilliant wooden crafts to take back with you. Moreover, the Ridge is also a place for numerous restaurants, shops, shows and many other activities like ice skating for you to enjoy. image source   It is something else to fly in the powdery blue sky of Himachal and look at the otherwise towering snow covered Himalayas neck to neck. Heli Skiing at Hanuman Tibba will do just that for you and undoubtedly it would be a scene you will never forget in your lifetime. image source   Solang Valley has some exciting adventure sports to offer in its name both in summers and winters. While skiing is done only in winters, other sports such as zorbing, paragliding and parachuting are open almost all year round. image source   Experience the tranquillity and find your spiritual self at Tsuglagkhang Complex. Walk around in Kora Trail or ritual circuit in clockwise direction as the Tibetan Pilgrims. You would discover the prayer wheels, chorten collection and pictures of about 100 self immolated Tibetans after completing 1.5 km circuit of the prayer flags decorated forest trail. image source   The Mall road in Dalhousie offers the best possible sunset view that one can behold. From here you can clearly see the middle mountain ranges, viz. Pirapanjal range of Himalayas that provides an excellent sunset vista to enjoy with your loved ones. image source   Home to about 180 species of birds and some very rare species of mammals like the Himalayan Black Bear, the Musk Deer and the elusive Snow Leopard, the GHNP is spread in an extensive area of 750 sq km. The park also provides some wonderful trekking trails for an exhilarating forest trekking experience. image source   The Mohan Meakin Brewery, formerly known as Dyer Breweries after its founder Edward Dyer, was founded in the year 1855 and is the oldest operational brewery in the whole of Asia. Interestingly, though the brewery is now shifted to Solan, the distillery is still in operation and uses some of the originally established pots for the process. One of the most popular drink from this brewery is Old Monk. image source   It is sin to miss the journey of the toy train from Kalka to Shimla when in Himachal Pradesh. Crossing 864 bridges and channelling through 102 dark tunnels in addition to 20 small railway stations, the ride is worth enjoying every minute. The freshest possible air to breath in, smell of clear dew on plants and the mesmerising view of the countryside all add on to the charm of this 100 years old train, also known as the ‘Crown Jewel’. image source
9 Romantic Things To Do For Couples In Shimla:	Himachal Pradesh has unparalleled splendour that makes it one of the most sought after tourist destinations in India. And the capital of the state, Shimla by all means lives up to its reputation. The place boasts of being irrevocably magnificent and rich with the bountiful nature, superb architecture dating back to the colonial times and the brilliant sight seeing spots in and around the city that  makes it a romantic’s paradise. So, if you are looking forward to spend a romantic vacation in Shimla, you need to make the best of this place to make your holidays even more unforgettable. Here’s how. image source The power of a simple and humble walk with the one you love cannot ever be undermined. And then when it is the intimidating Shimla, with its profuse natural beauty all around, a small walk is all you need to rev up the romance. The Ridge The ridge is a vast open space running from east to west of Shimla. It is ideal to take long leisurely walks with your sweetheart forgetting all the worries of the world. The grand view of the snow capped mountains it offers makes it even more alluring. Walk down to Taradevi temple The walk is soothing and the company pleasing. With every step you take together towards this ancient temple located at a short trekking distance of 4 km at a hilltop, you will find yourself binding even closer. The heavenly enviroment just does that to you.   image source The dense forests, the mellifluous birds and the enigmatic beasts, all are perhaps out of a fantastic fairy tale full of romance and love. It is hard to express in words but only when you visit these sanctuaries will you understand what an enchanting, almost bewitching effect it has on your relationship to make it even more romantic and stronger. Dharanghati Sanctuary 150 km away from Shimla, this sanctuary was established in the year 1962. It is spread over an area of 167.40 sq. km and is counted as one of the top tourist destinations of Shimla. Himalayan Nature Park Situated in Kufri, 19 km from Shimla, Himalayan Nature park is the home to some very rare animals and birds of the mountainous region; like the barking deer, musk deer, monal, pheasant etc. Just watching these beautiful creatures in their natural habitat will make you warmer from inside.   image source Love itself is a marvellous adventure. Ans when you are in Shimla, where adventure sports are so easy to come by, you must definitely give a try to impress your girl. Ice skating at the Ice Skating Club, Shimla Swirl around and lose yourself gliding together hands in hands on the natural snow rink. But if you don’t know how to skate, it’s even better. Falling silly and being given a gentle hand by your beau to help you get up; isn’t that a call for the blush he loves so much? Enjoy ice- skating at the Mall road in Shimla to truly experience that bliss. River Rafting at Tattapani Love has ups and downs and to make it live up to your still standing strong love, give the adrenaline pumping, river rafting a chance. This thrilling sport that starts at Chabba and ends at Tattapani will surely make your hearts start racing fast and there won’t just the gushing white water to blame. Fishing at Tattapani Situated at a distance of 51 km from Shimla, Tattapani even has provision to help you spend solitary hours together trying playfully your hand at fishing. Maybe bet your partner who’s going to catch a good fat one enjoy the fun that follows. Skiing at Kufri Snow has something magical to it that makes couples fall in love over and over again. Enjoy the sport of skiing with your sweetheart at Kufri and build those memorable moments of fun and togetherness to last a lifetime.   image source A visit to any place is incomplete without tasting the local food of that place and it becomes even more pressing when you want to spend a romantic holiday with your beau. So, given here are some exceptional options for a yummy adventure. Quila With mouth watering food served in the ambience with a warm and rustic touch, Quila is a place to dine in style with your beloved. Situated at the Mall road it is ideal for a wonderful dinner date for couples. Street food galore It is always an enticing proposal for couples to roam about carelessly with your beau’s arm interlinked to yours and stealing away the fun of casually eating out at a local street food junction. So, let your feelings melt like butter with a treat of scrumptious butter bun and a cup of warm tea at the famous Kewal Ka Dhaba at Thandi Sadak, Chawda Maidan or enjoy the freshness of Himalayan fruits at a yet another popular vendor Bihari Lal Sharma Stall at Takka Bench, Ridge. Lobby Lounge What’s the best thing about this charming little cafe is that apart from brewing some heavenly coffee, it remains open 24 hours. So, you can spend some serene moments of quiet night sipping a hot cuppa and whispering sweet nothings in her ear to see her blush.   image source A cosy romantic nest is the most essential part for any romantic getaway. While the options for a comfortable stay are many, below are some top romantic sojourning options in Shimla. The Oberoi Cecil Tucked away in the scenic surrounding of tall trees and high mountains, Oberoi Cecil gives you the opportunity to stay in the most romantic ambience you dream of. With antique furniture, wood panelling and sheer curtains giving the room a soft and warm romantic feel, as a couple you will truly enjoy your stay here. Woodville Palace This palace turned hotel provides the perfectly romantic stay for a couple who enjoys warm ambience in proximity to the nature, homely touch and friendly hospitality. To make things more enticing, there is a private woodland of the hotel where you can take long leisurely strolls for a lovely romantic evening. Radisson Hotel, Shimla The right blend of modern facilities for comfort and the loving ardor of the nature around, Radisson hotel can prove to be a great place to stay for a romantic vacation in the mountains.   image source What couple most look forward to when being in Himachal Pradesh is the tons of opportunities the state gives you for a mystical escapade of camping in solitude and giving each other unperturbed attention that you can’t achieve in the hustle bustle of urban life. Shimla has loads of such opportunities for you to avail. Trekking and camping at Chail There is something magical about walking among the thicket of oaks, pine and cedar trees towards the Chail Wildlife Sanctuary. While sharing the exciting experience of watching the rare fauna with your loved one is special in its own unique way, camping with them and spending the night under the clear blue sky of Himachal with them along is even more beautiful and dream like. Camping at Shoghi Located 16 km from the city. This place is bestowed with nature’s flawless beauty and serenity. It’s truly a spectacular place to camp together and feel yourself getting closer.   image source Sometimes what the words can’t express, the eyes do. In fact, it is always a heart warming affair when you as a couple just hold hands and lose yourself in the tranquillity of the atmosphere. Shimla has so many places where you get to live such moments. Summer Hill The Summer Hill or the Potter’s Hill is the place where the word ‘poignant’ gets a new meaning. Just hold hands and soak in the breath taking sight of the sprawling greenery and the town nestled peacefully amidst it. You will never have felt more connected than now. Scandal Point Famous for the scandalous romantic meetings of the Viceroy’s daughter with Maharaja of Patiala, this quaint spot at the west end of the Ridge has a history of undying romance. Why not relive those moments and write your own story here? The place no doubt is as enchanting as can be; every reason to make you to turn into a hopeless romantic.   image source The perfect recipe to win your love’s heart? Take her shopping. Mall road and the adjoining Lakkar baazar has unlimited options for shopping for goods to take back with you along with the sweet memories. While Mall road has everything to offer you under the sun from shawls to souvenirs to trinkets; Lakkar baazar as the name suggests is famous for its artisan wood work. Buy a pretty box for your lady to hold those trinkets in or grab a hand crafted centre table to furnish your love den.   image source Excursions are another way to stay closer and experience something exciting and new as a couple. Shimla is an ideal tourist destination that has many great places around the city for excursions that allows you to weave beautiful remembrances together. Narkanda Narkanda is located at a distance of 60 km from Shimla and is an excellent place for couples to go on an excursion. Far away from the maddening city life, the place has a calming aura to it. You can enjoy skiing and other adventure sports here at the Narkanda Ski resort. It also favours trekking and has a splendid trekking trail up to the Hattu Peak with a delightful view of the mountains and the green valley all along the way. Chadwick Falls Chadwick Falls, about 7 km from Shimla and only 45 minutes of walk away from Summer hill are uniquely rejuvenating. Waterfalls have always been synonymous with everything romantic and this is your easy chance to grab that opportunity to spend some quality time with your love. The melodious sound of gurgling falls and the dense green forests around set the perfect backdrop for a romantic rendezvous. Naldhera 22 km away from the main town of Shimla, Naldhera is one of the best places around for some good excursion. The clear blue skies and picture perfect natural surroundings makes you fall in love all over again. You can both go test your skill at golfing at one of the highest located golf courses in the world here. You can relax and renew your energies at the Naldhera Hill resort and watch the sunrise from here which undoubtedly one of the most beautiful things one can witness.
Try India’s Crunchiest Waffles for an Unforgettable Brunch This Weekend:	High on brunch? Well, if you too adore your weekend brunch routine as much as we do, then you definitely must try India’s crunchiest waffles in the capital city. Crepe-fe, started by Shourrya Sachdeva who graduated from Les Roches International School of Hotel Management Switzerland which is one of the top Hospitality University in the world. Located at multiple locations in Delhi NCR region, Crepe-fe is pro at its waffle game. You are sure to find here the crunchiest ever waffles for a crisp, stimulating and energizing beginning to your day. Delhi Outlet : A-3 Pamposh Enclave,Greater Kailash-1 GK-1 Virohaa Hotel New Delhi 110048 Gurgaon Outlet : Baani Square Sector 50 Gurgaon Golf course Outlet: 357 Golf Course Road, Basement, Sector 28 Branch If ever a cafe can risk delivering waffles to be eaten as they are meant to be- crunchy, smooth and melt-in-the-mouth, then it definitely can only be Crepe-fe. Keeping waffles crisp for long is a tricky job which the cafe has mastered in, thanks to the extensive experimentation with 65 different batters for 25 long days! Phew! Moreover, since they pack the various sauces and toppings that go with it separately, it ensures you are treated wit exemplary waffles every single time! Crepe-fe takes extra care about the delivery, they deliver gelatos with dry ice so you can be sure about your order reaching to you in intact condition. From the simple and classy PNB Waffle to the kicking Maple Apple Cinnamon Waffle, you will find here a dozen of exciting waffles to choose. Give your tummy a scrumptious treat with delectable crepes, croissants, bagels, shakes and more at Crepe-fe. You can indulge yourself in sinful deserts too with exceptionally yummy gelatos and handmade chocolates too. Crepe-fe may be one of the hippest places to spend lazy mornings or mid-mornings but it is also the quintessential spot to satiate that hunger striking at ungodly hours! As the cafe operates from 11:00 am to 4:00 am everyday, it gives you the perfect excuse to wallow in good food anytime you want. If cleanliness is what remains your primary concern whenever eating out, let us tell you this, “It’s not just clean but Monica clean”! Crepe-fe has the most hygienic and transparent kitchen which ensures not just the most appetizing dishes but a healthy ambience as well. Crepe-fe received an award from zomato for the best dessert outlet. They have A-Team, their head chef has international exposure. It is also India’s most transparent food brand with the best hygiene rating in Delhi NCR. Products they serve are: Bagels, Gelatos, Gelatos shakes, Chocolates, Brownies. Best part is that everything is made from in house resources. Gelato machine used is from Italy and the raw materials used for chocoates are also sourced from Italy. Good enough reason to make the brand special for customers. Tried Crepe-fe’s waffles yet? Let us know of your experience in the comments section below. 
This Luxury Suites Resort and Spa In Munnar Will Make You Plan For A Vacation Now:	Elixir resort is an exotic place with beautiful landscape and located amongst amidst tall trees and dense forest of 220 acres offering you a peaceful and relaxing experience. Giving you a full forest like experience in the lap of nature. Elixir Resort is a perfect blend of nature and luxury in Munnar which you just cannot miss visiting! The swimming pool with a view, bird watching, day hikes, Ayurvedic SPA, nature walks are the best recreational activities that will give you tons of memories to reminiscence once you are back home. image credits The first thing that will make you fall in love with Elixir resort is the gorgeous reception Elixir resort has genuinely stood up to “the first impression is the last expression”, and their beautiful reception is Instagram worthy. Very few resorts in India build their reception with leisure and love. The location and the interior of Elixir Hills have something special which will keep you happy though out your stay. The charming rooms will bring life to your holidays: Being on holiday cannot be better than having a wonderful room to stay. Elixir resorts have a total of 46 rooms, out of which 32 rooms are with Jacuzzi while the remaining 16 are without Jacuzzi. Elixir resort is surrounded by thick rainforest which will captivate your heart with its beauty, and you can spot many four-legged animals like the deer and elephants in the woods. Nature walks take you to a waterfall within the resort – a beautiful way to spend a lazy afternoon in Munnar. The pool is right next to the restaurant. You can have a sumptuous breakfast and dinner by the poolside: Elixir resort has a beautiful arrangement for lip-smacking breakfast and dinner by the poolside. Breakfast is something which everyone look forward to when they book a stay. Elixir Hills Resort offers a vast variety of options for breakfast. The live counter is also open during the breakfast to order. When you are in Kerala, you will definitely want to try a South Indian breakfast – you will love it at Elixir. You can also inform the Elixir staff about your special day and be surprised with a candlelight dinner in a gazebo. The entire service for making your day special is commendable! You will fall in love with the resort and your partner for such a pleasant surprise. Elixir resorts aim at relaxing and rejuvenating the guests who come to visit here through multiple indoor games like pool, chess, table tennis and its spa and sauna which will calm your mind and relax your body. You can grab these for your breakfast, lunch or dinner and enjoy your time with your partner. These unique designs look very beautiful in the evening are definitely worth a lot of Instagram pictures 🙂 After you are done with your dinner, you can move to this bonfire area next to the poolside for a relaxing time with your loved one. Rediscover nature and fall in the lush green beauty surrounding it. Book your rooms at Elixir Hills now by calling at +91 9809993286 Happy Holidays!
This is the Best Place for Waffles in South Delhi. Here’s Why:	Ever woke up in the morning with a growling stomach, craving for a scrumptious breakfast? If you just rolled your eyes (Duh!?), then you need Crepe-fe in your life. Located in GK-1 area of Delhi, this amazing cafe is perfect to give your day a fantastic beginning with a hearty breakfast of waffles, pancakes, crepes and much more. Crepe-fe, started by Shourrya Sachdeva who graduated from Les Roches International School of Hotel Management Switzerland which is one of the top Hospitality University in the world. Once you get a taste of Crepe-fe amazing waffles you will be coming back for more for sure. But its crunchy waffles aren’t the only thing that draw you to this day and night cafe. Here are the 7 top reasons why you would love this place. Take a look! Of course when you put in such an exhaustive effort that takes 25 days of extensive experimenting with 65 different batters, you are bound to get the perfect crunch that lasts a loooooong time. Your lazy mornings cannot get any better that this. For a wholesome brunch, you don’t need to drag yourself out of your bed but simply get this heavenly food delivered at your doorstep. But if you are worried about waffles getting soggy, do not worry. The specialists at Crepe-fe pack the toppings and sauces separately to ensure crunch in every bite, even after an hour! From dreamy hazelnut to the addictive caramel cinnamon waffles, you can never get bored eating waffles at this contemporary cafe. It surely is the best place for waffles in South Delhi. Take your pick from scrumptious Bagels, Gelatos, Gelatos shakes, Chocolates, Brownies and best part is that all are made from in house resources Get your fill of this sinful treat in a range of Swiss hazelnut, white and dark chocolates. Whether you have a sweet tooth or not, it is definitely a must try. Food isn’t the only praiseworthy thing about this lovely place but its squeaky clean and transparent kitchen is another plus point. With opening hours from 11:00 am to 4:00 am, Crepe-fe takes care of your hunger pangs no matter when they strike. Small on pocket, big on taste! Crepe-fe received an award from zomato for the best dessert outlet. They have A-Team, their head chef has international exposure. It is also India’s most transparent food brand with the best hygiene rating in Delhi NCR. Products they serve are: Bagels, Gelatos, Gelatos shakes, Chocolates, Brownies. Best part is that everything is made from in house resources. Gelato machine used is from Italy and the raw materials used for chocoates are also sourced from Italy. Good enough reason to make the brand special for customers. So, when are you going for some of the best waffles in South Delhi?
Singapore – Of Art, Architecture and Antiques:	If you ever want a glimpse into the future, pack your bags and head to Singapore. A city of convenience, Singapore seamlessly blends in contemporary modern structures, lush green spaces and cultural dedications that are timely connected by its nervous system, the public transport. Unlike most metropolitans, in Singapore you do not have to worry about being late, it instils a deep sense of order and discipline in its citizens. This is one of the many things that make the city of the future, unique. Among the other developing nations in Asia, Singapore has taken the bullet train to advancement, technologically, structurally and organically. Being one of the more popular travel destinations, you would imagine the travel would become too heavy for your pocket. But supported by the law of economics, there are some airlines that provide cheap air tickets to priority destinations like Singapore. In order to get a sense of how fast Singapore has evolved, here are some of the most enchanting and exciting evidences of this fact. image source Three towers, 56-stories high, connected by an astounding 340m-long platform known as the Sky Park, the Marina Bay Sands is one of its kind. The highest infinity pool in the world, offers a view of the structural complexities of the city. The deck is one of the most photographed places in Singapore. It overlooks the majestic Marina Bay or previously known as the Marina Reservoir that has completelytransformed, now being one of the focal points of the city. The waters of the Marina Bay reflect the gleaming lights of skyscrapers in the Central Business District. In Singapore, stainless steel buildings and innovative technologiesthat form a glass menagerie makes up its commendable skyline. The Art and Science Museum located a stone’s throw away from the steel spectacle is another structural accolade of its own. Dedicated to creative minds and insightful spirits, the building resembles a cooked artichoke blooming with vision and creativity. image source , 2 Singapore has embraced its green spaces with passion, leading to numerous lustrous constructions of nature’s splendour.  If you want the perfect description of Gardens by the Bay, just picture Alice’s Wonderland on steroids. Its 21 st Century botanical garden is a 101 hectare of domes, high-tech bi-spheres, supertrees and other whimsical structures. There are domes dedicated to particular themes, such as the Flower Dome that replicates the Mediterranean climate. This is a unique feature of the Dome since more greenhouses aim to maintain heat and humidity for plants to flourish. However, in the Flower Dome, by replicating cool Mediterranean climates, the olive trees from Italy thrive alongside other temperate plants. The OCBC Skywalk is a pathway lit by the glittering tunes of Garden Rhapsody.Heritage Gardensembrace the cultural diversity of this futuristic city. These themed spaces are dedicated constructions to Chinese, Malay and Indian cultures. Continuing in the city of green gardens is Singapore’s Botanic Gardens, a 74-hectare wonderland titled as a UNESCO Heritage Site. This is one of the city’s most gripping attractions. With perfectly arched walkways of green, the Botanic Gardens are home to some of the prettiest Orchid gardens. image source , 2 Home to three prominent cultures namely, Chinese, Malay and Indian, Singapore unlike many other developing nations has been very accepting and appreciative of its cultural diversity. The city has devoted areas wherein these cultures can thrive and feel at home. Little India is a vibrant, exaggerated district of Singapore, with spice traders and colourful temples, flea markets bustling with garlands, antiques and close to authentic Indian food. Entering Singapore’s dedicated Chinese district will give you a hit to your senses. With the strong pungent smell of authentic Chinese food, the vibrant red and gold elements that decorate the streets and the hustle with hawkers will enthuse you. With lavish temples, crowded street markets, art museums, and galleries, the Chinese have embraced their culture and exhibited it in full vigour. image source , 2 , 3 Singapore is a kaleidoscope of development, culture and diversity. It is truly one of the most unique cities with respect to its out-of-the-box structural monuments, its large-scale shopping malls and heritage sites. A city so vast you never feel like you have seen it all, yet so small and intimate, it is easy to call it home. Ensure you’ve made your flight bookings in advance to plan your trip to this ultramodern city.
Seven Most Wanted Things to do in Mashobra:	Before you kick start 2020, get on a roll with an adventurous trip. Mashobra in the district of Shimla is a fantastic place to visit and is one of the most offbeat places to visit this year. The fresh surroundings with beautiful valleys covered with thick trees of pine, oak and deodar. There are numerous things to do in Mashobra, which will make you pack your bags right away! An offbeat place in the Himalayas, Mashobra is known foradventurous activities and has something in store for everyone, no matter whatgender or their age is. Let’s have a look at the 7 of the best things to do inMashobra: Do you love biking on challenging mountain trails? Then,Mashobra is the place to visit. The route of Mashobra is surrounded by pinetrees, and you will thoroughly enjoy the gushing wind on the bike. There aremany resorts in Mashobra which can help you arrange biking along thetreacherous stretch of Mashobra. The Himalayas has been known for trekking for thepicturesque view of the hills, pleasant chirping of birds along with fantasticweather. There are many trekking options around Mashobra including thebeginners. You can also go around for leisure walks with your spouse/friends,and this is one of the best things to do in Mashobra. The breathtakingsurroundings amongst the pine trees will leave you in awe. Did you know that Mashobra is known for an incrediblevariety of bird species? Mashobra has the largest Asian watersheds which, alongwith the cool weather and lush greenery, attracts a huge number of birds. Youwill enjoy catching a glimpse of Partridges, Himalayan eagles, Pheasants andChikor. Mashobra is the perfect place to get into the arms ofnature. Camping offers several things to do in Mashobra such as bonfires,adventure activities, food and more. Summers are the best season to camp inMashobra. Riding bikes in water is now possible at Mashobra, Shimla.You will enjoy your quad biking with your squad on the river of Tattapani. Manyresorts in Mashobra offers an arranged session of quad biking. Do not go backhome without getting on a quad biking. Playing with snow is thrilling for all – skiing, snowfights, snowman are the most loved activities that the tourist looks up towhile visiting the Himalayas. Being uncrowded, Mashobra is one of the bestskiing destinations in India. River Rafting is one of the best things to do in Mashobra, Shimla in Tattapani. The freshwater stream lets you enjoy this adventurous activity thoroughly with the splendid view of the river landscapes. One of the most amazing activity to do with friends and you wouldn’t want to miss it which lasts no longer than 30 minutes, especially if your hotel in Mashobra offers that, isn’t it? By now, you know one of the best places to visit near Shimlais Mashobra, which is just 11 km away from the central city. Mashobra is knownfor thrilling activities and selecting a hotel which offers a package for theseactivities can be more fun. The Nilaya is one of the best hotels in Mashobra, Shimla offering hospitality not less than perfection, lip-smacking food, rooftop restaurant for you to catch a glimpse of hills drenched in mist. A customer winning feature of this resort is that it offers arrangement for activities to do in Mashobra. Here are some beautiful pictures of the Hotel The Nilaya which will leave you with no option but book it for your next vacations! Aren’t these pictures beautiful enough, these are just few, you should check out on The Nilaya website on what makes it the best hotel in Mashobra. 
Spice up your Love Life at the Best resort for couples in Kufri:	Kufri, a hill station in Shimla, is a trendy destination inHimachal Pradesh frequented mostly by couples. Located among the Himalayas, ithas excellent panoramic scenery and receives snow throughout the year. Forthose couples in need of a romantic getaway spot far from the crowded cities,there is no better place than Kufri. Woodays resort is one of the best resortsfor couples in Kufri. Woodays resort, located at Kufri, Shimla has the distinctionof being the best resort for couples in Kufri. It is also ideally suited forsmall destination weddings, bachelorette parties or pre-wedding functions. Woodays resort, located at the heart of Kufri with itscomfortable Nordic styled wooden huts will captivate you. It provides a perfectsurreal setting for couples to spend some nice romantic moments together. Woodays resort has been receiving excellent reviews, and italso has been awarded a five-star rating by Booking.com besides being rated asa super host by Airbnb. A holiday at Woodays Resort will provide couples with somemuch-needed bonding time and also help them to reconnect with nature. The picture-perfect landscape of Kufri amidst the hills isthe best place you can spend quality time with your special companion. Nothing can be more romantic than a wooden cottage locatedamong thick Deodar forests with a spectacular view of the snow-clad Himalayanpeaks. The serene cottages are ideally located to provide the much-neededseclusion from unwanted crowds. The comfortable cottages made from high-quality timber and equipped with all modern amenities come attached with a balcony. They are also provided with a private washroom with an enclosure for showers. The staff is very polite and hospitable, attending to all your needs with great care. You can explore the panoramic locales with your companion by your side taking in the fresh, crisp mountain air that will completely refresh you and melt away all your worldly worries. Get warm near a bonfire at the open sitting area provided at Woodays resort and take amazing pics of you and your partner with the spectacular hills as a backdrop. Take your partner for a nice romantic dinner and dig intothe mouthwatering authentic Himalayan food or other multi-cuisine recipesprepared by the fantastic chefs at Woodays resort. You will enjoy some quality time with your companion at thewell-maintained beautiful gardens and explore the many varieties of plants andflowers there. Take part in the complimentary games provided like carom,chess, or badminton, or you can even bond together outdoors going horse orbicycle riding. The resort provides a great range of rooms to select fromand consists of comfortable standard as well as duplex rooms at reasonablerates with provisions for extra mattresses if required. The rooms are providedwith all luxury amenities like 24/7 hot or cold water, an in-room safe to keepyour valuables, free WiFi, and parking facilities. As can be undoubtedly seen, Woodays resort is the best resort for couples in Kufri , specially for those who need to spend a quiet and beautiful romantic time together away from the chaotic and stressful city life.
Enjoy Mist Bathed Himalayan Peaks at This Best Hotel in Mashobra:	All of us look forward to vacations, and with so many choices of places and hotels, we often get excited and overwhelmed. To get relaxed and peaceful, selecting the best hotel becomes a priority. Luxury hotels are no more an option for the celebrities or wealthy but for all as they have become more affordable in India. There are many hotels in Mashobra which have got the luxurious amenities which is also wallet-friendly. Mashobra is a small town located in Shimla where you find the mountains bathed with mist and covered with clouds. This tiny town in Himachal has become one of the most preferred destination owing to its Himalayan peak views, deodar forests, apple orchards and adventurous activities. The hotel industry has transformed to a great extent, and they are not just about a room, but it has become about amenities and activities they offer. Hotels need to serve people in a way that they not only relax but also enjoy their stay thoroughly. Holidaying in Himachal can be more fun if you choose the best place to stay. Mashobra hotels such as The Nilaya hotel offers amazing view along with amazing features which will give you not only quality time while you are here but also memories once you leave. Spoiled with choices, there are many Mashobra hotels, and you must pick the best hotel that provides a wide range of activities along with a beautiful surrounding to rejuvenate yourself. Here are some reasons which will make you book your stat at The Nilaya, one of the best hotel in Mashobra. Indoor Actic: The Nilaya has a huge room dedicated to carom, pool table and many board games, which will be a total family or friends time. In-house library: If you are a book-lover, you will totally enjoy your time here as the library is stacked up with books of different genre. Nature Walk : The Nilaya offers a complementary nature walk to the nearby areas to all its guests which can be the most exciting part of the trip Stargazing: Visiting Shimla with your spouse? Then, nothing can become more beautiful than gazing at stars, planets with your partner at 11 pm in the night. If you are lucky, you can catch a sight of shooting stars. Personalized Adventurous activities: Enjoy thrilling activities of Mashobra such as Trekking, Biking or River Rafting with The Nilaya’s staff who are ready to arrange it all for you. The Nilaya offers spectacular, amazing, stunning, heavenly view of the Himalayan peaks covered with a layer of cloud. The picture speaks it all With all the fun and activities, we all wait to get on the cosy hotel beds in a well spacious rooms. Nilaya has rooms with a beautiful back view and valley view, which can make all your mornings a great start. When in Himachal, do not miss on relishing Himachali dishes and thali which are completely exotic. The Nilaya offers one of the best buffets, and you will instantly fall in love with the taste of the food. They also serve continental, oriental and North-Indian cuisine. Along with food, they have a well-stocked bar with wines, spirits, beer and liquors. What can get better than delicious food with breathtaking views of the surroundings. The Nilaya has combined these two with their design of Rooftop Restaurants for their guests to completely enjoy their stay. With everything in place and trained staff, The Nilaya is one of the best hotel in Mashobra for a beautiful vacation in the hills!
Stop Binge Eating Which Has Been Ruling Your Life:	Whenever you are hungry, you grab a snack, isn’t it? Sometimes, a packet of chips or popcorn or biscuits! Binge eating, mindless eating is how you get involved with fried and unhealthy food products. And, if you love watching movie or Netflix, then the amount of snack you consume is all your tiny secret! So, how does that snacking leave you with energy or makes you lazy or want you to have more of it? If it makes you lazy or sleepy, then you need to change your snacking options? It is quite natural for any of us to feel a drop in our energy levels, especially during the early afternoons or evenings when we are at work or home. After eating food in around two to three hours, our body again needs something to maintain its energy levels. Whenever we experience an energy drop or feel the need to have a quick bite, we instinctively reach out for a ready to eat packed product. That tasty bar of chocolate does seem to solve our energy crisis, but is short-lived. You tend to grab a piece of find which is in your vicinity. And, does that lead you focus and energy? Most probably no, right? It makes you feel sleepy and you tend to lose your mental focus, isn’t it? And you cannot work in a corporate, feeling sleepy and drizzy? If that has become a big reason why you should avoid having a snack, then look into what needs to be changed. Although, snacking restores the body’s energy levels and fuels you up in the middle portions of the day. A quick snack every time you feel an energy drop will boost your energy levels and bring you back on track. But, many a times overeating snacks leave you with guilt! Get over the guilt binge eating and start exploring new options for your snacking time. An increase in blood sugar levels causes the sudden rise in energy and also crashes immediately. It is because of the sugar plummets down lower than before. It can be seen that eating sugar-rich candies or chocolate bars is not an ideal solution. Similarly snacking on deep-fried foods like potato chips can also be harmful in many ways. Fried snacks are mostly made in processed vegetable oils and on heating, the oil can convert into trans fats. Trans fats are not good for heart. They are the main reasons for creating blockages in the blood vessels and causing heart diseases. Become choosy with the food you eat – look at the calories, ingredients – they speak the best about the product. And, oh yes, do not forget to see if you will love the flavor of these energy snacks! There are many best energy snacks in India which are a mix of flavoured and roasted nuts, dried fruits, and seeds. One such brand is Nutlings! Packed in pouches, it can be easily carried anywhere with you and eaten anytime you feel hunger pangs during the day, leaving you energetic. NUTS!!! They are energetic, healthy and the best choice for snacks. Nutlings are a nice tasty mix of nuts and seeds packed hygienically without a compromise on taste. Each variety of Nutlings are carry a unique flavor note with a different set of spices to add variety to your liking. Nutlings offer four varieties of product range in different combination of nuts, seeds and flavors. Make these energy snacks as a part of your routine. 
These Healthy and Tasty Snacks in India Are Definitely Healthier Than A Bag Of Chips:	Are you the one who picks up a bag of chips when hungry – be it in the evenings or in the midnight or when you are just bored? These bag of chips are deep fried, calorific and not just healthy. Yet, you are unable to resist the temptation? Probably, because you don’t know if there are healthy and tasty snack options! With expansion of snack markets, a lot of innovation is leading to the development of healthy and tasty snack products. These products are not only yum but energetic too. So many times, you indulge in mindless eating habits which is deteriorating your health and also physique. Who likes that? Are you constantly struggling with tasty yet healthy snack shopping? Then, you should limit your power to purchase unhealthy snack. When you wont have an unhealthy snack with you, you will not eat whatever you grab. How do you limit the power to purchase these calorific bag of chips? Simple, just check the the ingredients and nutritional value of the products you intend to buy. They will give you a reality check and you will not what to buy and what not to! With sweet tooth, struggle is to get a toned body and also avoid those sweet snacks? A hard choice to make! But, all you have to do is stop having those products which contains sugar as their major ingredient. Being spoiled with choices, today even popcorn comes loaded with sugar! They are no good for your health. Look around for the healthy and tasty snack options which can serve all the purposes – hunger, taste and fitness! Are you confused about what snack should you buy then? Well, you must pick up the which contains nuts as they are low calorific, more energy generating and overall very healthy. Grandmothers and mothers keep asking us to have dried fruits like almond, cashews, walnuts regularly. Did you ever think why? Because, they are highly nutritious and powerful food products you can ever grab! If you do not like the plain taste of the nuts, then don’t worry, Nutlings got some nuts which your taste buds will love! Nutlings offers an impressive variety of delicious snack products which is revolutionizing the snack industry of India. Their products contain raisins, cashews, soya bean nuts, almonds blended with incredible flavours of garlic, mango powder, cumin powder. Coupling of healthy stuff with flavors can never be avoided. They are tempting, nutritious, energetic and overall a WOW product. The snacks product comes with colors, preservatives but Nutlings have gone beyond and above. Nutlings have curated their snack products with all-natural ingredients. You will not find any sort of chemicals added in any form to their products. Be it preservatives, colour or flavour – Nutlings have stayed away from using them in their product range. Nutlings currently offers four ranges of healthy snacks, and it is incredibly beneficial for those who are keeping a watch on their weight. Grab on!! These snacks are one of the healthy and tasty snacks in India as they are tumbler roasted and well balanced with the right flavours to suit your taste. Designed with a lot of precision, these snack products are definitely going to be your new bae! Do not skip your mid-day or evening snack as you now have one of the most healthy and tasty snacks in India.
8 Hill Stations in Uttarakhand to Escape from the Mundane City Life!:	Just as they say that beauty is in the eyes of the onlookers, Uttarakhand proves this to be true. With more than fifty beautiful hill stations that will give you a treat to your eyes, it is one of the most sought-after travel destinations in India. Nestled between Tibet, Nepal, and Himachal; Uttarakhand is a gem of the nation. Home to beautiful snow-covered mountains, charming lakes, rumbling waterfalls, and a bloom of flowers; Uttarakhand is no less than a wonder at every nook and corner. There are many hill stations in Uttarakhand that will satisfy the wanderers and adventure seekers. With many snow sports activities and recreational activities that act as a cherry on the top, this beautiful state is a true treasure of the country. 	 Sl. No. Hill Stations in Uttarakhand 	 1 Mussoorie 	 2 Almora 	 3 Auli 	 4 Bhimtal 	 5 Naukuchiatal 	 6 Sattal 	 7 Chamoli 	 8 Nainital Image Source Often referred to as the ‘Queen of Hills,’ Mussoorie is the pride of Uttarakhand. Located in the lap of the beautiful Himalayas, Mussoorie holds a very special place in the tourism of Uttarakhand. It is one of the hill stations in the state that you need to visit at least once in your life. Be it the snowy mountains or the rumbling waterfalls, everything about this place stand up to its name. Known for its scenic landscapes and rich heritage, Almora in Uttarakhand is one of the most sought-after destinations in the country. Home for the hill temple and many other ancient temples in the state accompanied by stunning landscapes and weather, Almora is one of the best hill stations of Uttarakhand. Image Source If you are a snow baby, then Auli is the perfect choice for you! Be it skiing or snowboarding, Auli is the ultimate destination for all the snow sports activities. Offering panoramic views of the beautiful mountains at freezing temperatures, Auli will transport you to a different peaceful world. This mystical place is sure to give you utmost peace and relaxation. Image Source Known for its pristine lake, Bhimtal is one of the gems of Uttarakhand. Surrounded by magnificent hills and lush green borders, the lake of Bhimtal offers some scintillating views enough for your lifetime. Image Source Regarded to be the most unpolluted area of Uttarakhand, Naukuchiatal is one of the best hill stations to visit in Uttarakhand. Be it the beautiful sceneries or the utter silence, everything about this place attracts people from various parts. Image Source Home to a cluster of seven lakes, which breed many migratory birds, Sattal offers you a different kind of experience. If you can manage to visit the hill station at the right time, you can witness some amazing birds that you might not find in any other part of the country. Image Source Nestled in the Central Himalayan region, Chamoli is a great place to spend your holidays. It hosts a great range of activities like trekking in summers and skiing in winters for all the adventure seekers. It is one of the rarest and unpolluted gems of Uttarakhand that surely deserves a visit. Apart from this, Chamoli is also the home for some ancient temples for all the people who admire art and history. Image Source Words can never suffice the beauty of Nainital. Be it the Naina Devi Temple or the beautiful Naini Lake, Nainital has got a charm of its own. One of the most popular tourist destinations, Nainital is a place that should definitely be on your bucket list of places to visit. Stunning landscapes, panoramic views, and gorgeous lakes make your visit to Nainital worth every bit. If you love snow and some adventure added to it, then pack your bags and head over to Uttarakhand. Every place you visit here deserves to be on your bucket list, and is sure to never disappoint you!
This Temperature Controlled Swimming Pool Resort With A View in Mcleodganj is A Must Visit:	Fed-up of the 9-5 city life or the noisy traffic that makes you feel like you might go insane someday? If you are reading this article with a hope that you will find yet another cliché holiday content, wanting to make you pack your bags; then you are absolutely wrong. Because today we are talking about a place that is more than just an escape from the monotonous life back in your city. We are talking about Mcleodganj and One Of The Best Resort With A View in Mcleodganj. I’m sure you must have if you are interested in looking about places. Nevertheless, if you haven’t, let me tell you a little something about this wonderful place. This cute little town in the lap of Indian and Tibetan cultures, the beautiful Mcleodganj is a place of harmony and peace. It is often referred to as the ‘Little Lhasa’ of the bountiful hills bearing idyllic vibes and giving us yet another escape from the traditional hikes and trails across the country. All these historical and natural eye candies exist in the beautiful town of Mcleodganj, giving you all the reasons to visit the place. However, what is the fun in visiting a place when you don’t enjoy the luxury that is offered there? Making its place as one of the Best Family Resort in Mcleodganj, the Asia Health Resort promises you everything you need to stay comfortably in this conglomeration of vibrant cultures. Located at the lap of the pristine hills of Mcleodganj, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa is a synonym for luxury in hills. These resorts give you an amalgamation of 4-star facilities and beautiful views, that make it one of the Best Resort With A View in Mcleodganj.  What more? They even have the unblemished Dal Lake located a few minutes away, giving you yet another place to check out. Let us look at some other things that this place offers us: The fact that separates the Asia Health Resorts and Spa from the other places for stay in Mcleodganj is the stunning views it offers. When you take time out of your hectic schedules, the views should obviously be worth it, right? Waking up to this view in the morning from your room is nothing less than heaven! Just. Imagine. Only resort in this region offering a temperature controlled swimming pool, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa take comfort to the next level. You can access this pool either in cold winters or hot summers. Temperature is maintained as per the climate by the resort. Offering an elegant, yet intimate space for you to dine with your family, this resort’s restaurant is a beauty in itself. Extended to the restaurant is a perfect place for clicking pictures and enjoying the views of Mcleodganj, the terrace garden, which is an added advantage to the beauty of Asia Health Resorts and Spa. An extension of the wonderful restaurant, this terrace gives a stunning view of the Pong Dam lake alongside Kangra Valley. Enjoy the exotic views of Mcleodganj as you tipple over your favourite drink at the Bar Lounge in the Asia Health Resorts and Spa. They offer an exclusive collection of wines, tipsy cocktails, and a lot of other spirits coupled with the perfect snacks to make your day better! Alongside, they also have a nice music system for setting a mood for relaxed day with a fire-place, that will make you feel comfortable, setting the mood for a relaxed evening. Have any event to host? Then the Asia Health Resorts and Spa is prfect destination for you to spend your party or any other function amidst the beautiful mountains and soothing views from the Banquet Hall and Terrace. They have a seating arrangement depending on your requirement. You can comfortably organise your meetings, functions, or parties here alongside fine dining facilities. Serving you a scrumptious choice of barbeque, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa wins on this one! Offering you an opportunity to gorge on some light barbequed food at the restraunt . You can also get live barbeque for the events you organize there. Relax your muscles by indulging your body in a wonderful spa session offered by the resorts. This will make your holiday even more special with the additional relaxation that you get offered. Here is a brief description of what is offered at the Spa: Body Massages, Foot and Head Massage, Body Wrap, Body Polish, Hand and Foot Spa, Facial. What is a good spa without sauna and steam bath? Taking this into notice, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa also offer you a steam bath and sauna that will take you to the relaxation heaven and put you to sleep like nowhere else. Equipped with the one of the best of gaming facilities, there is a complete package of entertainment offered in the games room of the resort. Have some fun time with your family on vacation by playing with both adults and the kids. Some of the games offered here are: Pool Table, Air Hockey, Play Station 3, Carroms, Chess, Ludo, Fuss Ball. Apart from all expected amenities like refrigerated minibar, LCD TV, Tea Coffee maker etc you also get free access to temperature controlled swimming pool which makes the offering of Asia Health Resort unique choice among other resorts in Mcleodganj. With all these facilities here, is there any place else you want to be on your holiday to Mcloedganj? If your answer to this is a NO, then what are you waiting for? Visit http://asiahealthresorts.com now and book your rooms before you are left on the waitlist!
This Luxury Resort is the Best Resort with a View in Dharamshala?:	Dharamshala is a place that’s no news for travelers looking for break from the everyday life, in the mighty Himalayas. The breathtaking beauty and peace diffused seamlessly in its air does magic on you, reviving you from the inside out. To make this wonderful love affair with the nature, culture and inner-self happen, all you need is a good hotel for a comfortable stay. Nibaana Resort located here offers you this perfect opportunity. Surrounded by snow-clad mountains, lush greenery and unparalleled natural vistas, it is certainly the best resort with a view in Dharamshala. But that’s not all that goes into making it the best. There are many things which make Nibaana Luxury Resort one of the finest options for a memorable stay in the hill station. Here’s why you need to s A truly spectacular view of snowy mountains Fresh and clean mountain air serenading your senses Close proximity to nature Calm and peaceful atmosphere Nibaana resort offers luxurious and cosy rooms to make your stay a memorable stay in the middle of the nature. Nibaana resort has the best staff offering impressive hospitality and services to all the guests. They ensure to warmly welcome their guests, attending them at the earliest and offering the best services for them to relax and rejuvenate in their hotel. Another plus point of this resort with a view in Dharamshala is the tasty and delicious foods. Be it breakfast, lunch or dinner, they have sumptuous menu for their guests. Nibaana resort offers various fun and adventurous for all the members in the family. They have some amazing activities like bonfire, couple dates, get-together, picnics, walk in the hills and games for kids. Spend an entire day in this beautiful resort and see how well you will enjoy the place, the surroundings, the mountains surrounding it, the activities, the food – name it and they have all for you. You can also try Paragliding at Bir – this is one of the biggest reason of increasing tourism in Dharamshala. The bird eye view of hills while paragliding will astonish you! If you want rekindle the romance, then you must surely visit Nibaana resort – one of the most romantic resorts in Dharamshala. They offer candle light dinner activity under the starry sky which will captivate your heart and bring you close to your spouse. Who doesn’t want to grow close to the spiritual and cultural activities of their vacay place? Nibaana will bring you close to Dharamshala by organizing sight seeing tours. Dharamshala, is the home of Dalai Lama and Nibaana takes you one of the amazing spiritual venues where you can interact with the Buddhist monks. You will experience spiritual peace and this spiritual tour will be a lifetime experience for all the guests at Nibaana. With so many facilities and amenities offered by Nibaana Resort – one of the best resorts with a view in Dharamshala, you must definitely visit this place for your stay. Undoubtedly, you will enjoy your stay here with great hospitality services and the clean surroundings. 
10 Offbeat Destinations Of Himachal Pradesh For The Real Traveller In You:	If you are tired of the same tourists infested places, why not explore the rather untouched and unspoiled Himachal? These offbeat places in the soothing realm of the Himalayas is sure to give you the much needed break from the monotony of life and bring you closer to the nature and yourself. So, given here are 10 such wonderful offbeat destinations in Himachal Pradesh that you must visit on your next get away. image source One of the biggest villages of Kinnaur district, Kalpa is best known for its plush green pine nut forests and the spectacular landscape that the snow covered Kinnaur Kailash paints against it when they are bathed in the morning sunshine. The numerous apple orchards, apples being the main cash crop of the region, only add to the breathtaking colour palette the nature offers. image source The sacred Kailash Shivling rock that changes shades with the different times of the day can be beheld from here. At a distance of 11 km from Kalpa a temple devoted mainly to goddess Chandika is situated. The finery and uniqueness of the architecture of the temple makes it a must visit spot when here. It is unlike that of any other temple in the city and the goddess' idol, placed in tghe central shrine is instilled in gold which makes it magnificent as is.   image source In addition to being a positively beautiful place, Barot also prvides one with ample opportunities of outdoor activities. The river Uhl that bears it on its shoulders to sustains the life of the inhabitants, foliage and wildlife of the region, also serves as the breeding centre for the fishes, primarily trout and has several fishing farms which popularize for angling as well. Across from the river is located Nargu Wildlife Sanctuary which is the home a variety of unique Himalayan beasts including Himalayan Gorals (from the goat family), Himalayan Black Bears and a many different pheasants. image source The valley has evergreen forests with Deodar trees in abundance. With many trekking trails, with one that cuts through the sanctuary to Kullu, makes it very popular among the tourists for hiking and trekking. The temple of the local deity of rain, Dev Pashakot that makes for a fine place to visit, is situated across the river Uhl.   image source Chitkul is a small hamlet in the Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh, perched undisturbed on the Indo-Tibetan border. Interestingly, it is the last inhabited village on the border and the last destination in India that can be traversed to without the need of a permit. One can comfortably stay at Sangla and make a one day trip to Chitkul. The river Baspa runs all along your small journey making for a splendid companion. image source The valley provides one with a striking vista of the tempting fruits laden orchards, mustard fields plush green vegetation against the stark white of the Himalayas as the background. The valley is famous for its fine quality peas and potatoes. The weather up here is quite harsh and cold and usually unpredictable so it's advised to be prepared. image source A homage to the goddess of Chitkul who resides in a 500 years old temple is a must by the Parikrama Pilgrims. A must visit indeed.   image source Hidden from the overbearing crowd of the rest of the world, Malana is a small village asleep peacefully in the Kullu district of Himachal Pradesh. The most intriguing fact about this offbeat destination is that its people are believed to be the direct descendants of Alexander the Great. In fact, this place has its own set administrative laws and practices that closely resemble that of the Greek administrative system, language, social framework and their notion of purity. image source The local deity, Jamlu rishi is can be thought of as the one responsible for the origination of this village as well as formation of its society, its laws and ways. The Chandrakhani and Deotibba peaks lumber over the village as if to protect it from the outside world.   image source Alive with it's beautiful apple and cherry orchards, Thanedar gives unparalleled  joy to the nature lovers. You can enjoy plucking the fruits from the myriad trees that supply lakhs of cartons full of juicy apples all over India and abroad and biting into them or can savour the chewy slices of apples that the localites dry on their roofs. There are many resorts overlooking the plush orchards that give one the experience of staying close to the nature. image source The nearby places that you must visit are the Nag Devta temple, standing along the Tani-Jubbar lake, St. Mary's church which also happens to be one of the oldest churches in India and Hathu Peak that provides mesmerising vista of the snow clad peaks of the Himalayas. image source Unblemished by tourism, Shoja provides one a fine place to relax and breathe in the fresh mountain air away from the maddening city life. image source Located in the Seraj Valley, it is famous for its Serloskar Lake, that is known for its striking vista at the sunset. One can take a leisurely stroll around or find their way into the refreshing meadows of the region. It is only a short walk to the waterfall here, where they can take a chilling bath or just soak in the sun while enjoying a drink.   image source Nicknamed Trout Country because of the abundance of Trout fishes found in the Tirthan river, makes Gushaini a great place for fishing. Besides, for those tourists whose idea of the perfect holiday is camping and spending time in the lap of mother nature, Gusahini offers the perfect escape. One can set up a portable tents on the banks of the river to enjoy a vacation of solitude and self searching with the melodious music of the flowing water in the background to rejuvenate them. image source About 20 km from here, is situated The Great Himalayan National Park where one can find a huge variety of flora and fauna since the denizens of the park include a good 30 species of mammals and 300 species of birds. A walk into the park by the way of cedar woods is highly recommended and is sure to make one’s trip memorable.   image source Undoubtedly one of the best trekking trails, Jalori Jot is a bestowed with nature’s best. One can stay up at Shoja and drive down to Jalori Jot to continue on hike to the popular Sareyol Lake adjacent to the Jalori Jot temple on the left from the main street or can take the right towards an ancient fort; both spots being equally ecstatic. A word of caution though; one must wear good pair of trekking shoes for this trail to ensure better gripping and higher safety since the trail often tends to get slippery especially in the monsoons. The hiking trail is good 4  km long before one reaches the lake. Thankfully, there is a good dhaba that one come across just before they reach the lake that’s good to get one’s batteries recharged for continuing further. image source Adjoining the lake there’s a temple giving tribute to the Old Serpent Queen who is much worshipped by the locals.   image source Tucked away in the quaint Parvati Valley in Kullu district, Kheerganga is one of the most beautiful offbeat places of Himachal Pradesh. To reach here, one needs to go up to Barsaini from where they have to take a four hours long trek to Kheerganga. image source It is said that Lord Shiva meditated in this region for thousands of years. However, the most spectacular feature of this place is it’s hot spring, where one can truly unwind and get rejuvenated after the long journey; since this spring is also believed to contain healing properties.   image source The Rakcham valley is yet another unspoiled and unexplored terrain of Himachal Pradesh which is surrounded by silvery mountains and mesmerizing verdure of vegetation. With the river Baspa meandering by its side, Rakcham is like the path to heaven lain halfway between Sangla and Chitkul. image source Since, the Indo-Tibetan border lies not far off, Rakcham as one would expect is a blend of Hindu and Buddhist ideologies with two Hindu temples and a Buddhist temple concurring in the same town. Although the soil here is quite fertile making for the growth of a huge variety of cash crops, still the town is less flourished than the other Himachali towns, with only a handful of stores to provide for the basic necessities of its inhabitants.The region around is alive with a number of mountain animals, including Musk Deer, Goral, Brown Trout, Blue Sheep, Himalayan Black Bear, and Leopard.
Iconic Winter Destinations Near Delhi – Self Drive Road Trips:	Winter is the best time to see the Himalayas in their glory. Imagine the setting sun blending a bright orange with evergreen pines on the foreground while sipping on a hot beverage. This would be just another day in the famed hill stations of North India. Delhiites love their weekend getaways and the coming months provide a good chance for people to take a break from the city life and head into the mountains. With a self-drive car at one’s disposal, an adventure full of pleasant surprises is in store. Here are some quintessential winter destinations for the eager traveller. Manali For the bohemian and the adventurer both, Manali has its many different attractions. A 12-hour road trip north from Delhi is completely worth it as one touches down in a place surrounded by ethereal beauty. Travellers can just unwind in the main town and dig into the tasty food available in the cafes, or they can make Manali a base for further exploration higher up. The wooden Hidimba Devi temple is a mystical place surrounded by thick forest while the Rohtang Pass is another place to visit if the roads allow it. Shimla Shimla is a town that blends natural beauty with a unique heritage. It was the summer capital during the British Raj and a lot of the buildings here reflect a style that is right out of the European countryside. Today, these buildings attract lovers of architecture from all over the country. Some of the most famous landmarks of Shimla are the Viceregal Lodge, known for its opulent Jacobethan building style and the neo-Gothic inspired Christ Church. DorjeDrak monastery was built using the Oriental, specifically Tibetan style of architecture and is known for its calm, soothing ambience. The viewpoints around Shimla are fun to drive to and travellers get rewarded with stunning vistas of the surrounding mountains. One of the most popular spots is the hilltop Kamna Devi temple. Mussoorie Mussoorie conjures nostalgic images of the quintessential Indian family vacation. The town is where many weary plains people come to experience snowfall but there are many more attractions here. The tranquil Mussoorie Lake is the centrepiece of the town while the Mall Road is a good place for a stroll and some surprise bargains. A drive up to the summit of Gun Hill is recommended. Choose Self Drive The best road trips are done on one’s own terms. For such scenic routes as the ones in Himachal and Uttarakhand, a sturdy well-maintained rental is the best. For those looking for a self drive car rental Delhi offers the top option. App-based platform Zoomcar boasts the latest hatchbacks, sedans, and SUVs suiting everything from a trip for two to a group jamboree. Affordable rates, complete privacy, and extra space make rentals ideal for long trips and 24/7 on-road support is another good assurance. The crisp air, the tasty winter snacks, and the amazing historical and natural sights are just some of the beautiful moments in store for those who venture up north. From behind the wheel, this experience becomes that much sweeter.
Offbeat Private Cottages In Munnar For A Perfect Family Vacation:	Munnar – mini Scotland, is a beautiful town located in Kerala, house many tea gardens making the entire hill station drenched in lush green beauty. This makes Munnar, a perfectly picturesque location and a popular destination for thousands of tourists in India and from abroad. When in Munnar, it’s very important to wisely select the location of your stay for making your holiday memorable. If you are looking for truly offbeat private cottages in Munnar , Deep Wood Munnar is the perfect location for you . Surrounded by masses and dense green forest, of cardamom fields and green forest, it will give you the feel of being into the lap of nature. It is an exotic resort which offers a perfect place to enjoy the serenity of the forest, finding peace of mind away from the hectic days of the city life. The green landscapes with the cool breeze surrounding the resort will add life to your real life, and this will be a blissful experience to you and your family and friends. A resort in the deep forest which has 11 number of offbeat private cottages is spread over 220 acres of land. Deep Woods, Munnar is so vast that they have made Bolero car arranged for pick up and drop facility from reception to cottages. Deepwoods Munnar is located 11 km from the town inside a forest and is spread across 220 acres of green forest which makes it a special place to stay when you are in Munnar. This resort will provide you with a blissful forest experience . The constant chirping of birds, tall trees, lush green beauty are enough reasons to make Deepwood perfect offbeat private cottages to stay in Munnar. As the sun sets, the insects sound intensifies, and in the chilly nights, the misty air with the feel of the forest will make your experience a lifetime experience. You cannot think to miss this experience! The staff of this one of the best private cottage in Munnar will take you on the nature walk through the dense jungle of Munnar where you can also spot elephants, deer, cardamom plantation, tea plantation and a few tree houses where locals stay. Isn’t that something you have always wanted to do? Don’t forget to wear your sports shoes and be ready to explore the nature walk through thick and dense jungle safely. Take a good bath under the waterfalls here and with a group, this activity becomes more fun! You can also spend some time in the Gazebos near the waterfall for a get-together. Trust us, you will have a wonderful time. Another excellent experience of relaxing in one of the best private cottages in Munnar is the bonfire arrangement made by Deep Woods Munnar. image source All you need to do is a request for the arrangement and have a good collection of music. Sit back and warm yourself during the chilly nights and campfire can add beautiful moments to your vacation. You can also request private BBQ at your cottage from the reception. image credits Being in South India, this is one of the best place to relish on lip-smacking dishes offered by Deep Woods, one of the best private cottages in Munnar. They also have room services if you are not in a mood to go to the restaurant here. They have a recreational activity club just above the restaurant where you can enjoy some indoor games as a pass time. Enjoy the indoor games after having lip-smacking dinner. Deepwoods have chilling weather, and the thrilling forest experience will make you fall in love with this beautiful place soaked in nature’s glory.  They have deluxe rooms, 2 bedrooms, 3 bedrooms and 4 bedrooms private cottages. For booking, you can all at 09809993286 and book your private cottage with DeepWoods, Munnar. 
11 Mischiefs That Every Indian Kid Did In The 90s, #9 Almost Everyone Did:	Being a kid was tough, especially when you had so many ideas for mischief’s and such a less time and even lesser targets! All of must have done it. Bunking school was considered cool then and those who were too afraid to take that risk or were too ‘studious’ were teased, calling them ‘padhaku’ and ‘darpok’! image source   Oh..the awesome feeling it gave. The hissing sound of escaping air from the tyres was simply enough to make you proud. image source   image source   Remember when you used to lock the doors of your neighbor’s houses from outside when everybody was taking a siesta in the afternoons and  the aunty had to call your mom to let open it. You got a good beating then, but it was all worth it; wasn’t it? image source   You took your ‘badla’ this way for the beating you received from your mom on her complaint. It was always as much fun to watch her leap startled! image source   Climbing on the trees was a challenge in itself and how can you not accept one especially when the reward was so sweet or rather tangy! Once you’ve had them to your heart’s full, you would also pluck some and throw them for your friends to ‘catch’! image source   Most common of your everyday adventures was breaking the glass panes and running like a ‘roadrunner’ and hide, leaving the poor dadu perplexed as to where did the chillar party vanish?!! image source   The best of all feelings is to watch somebody trip and fall! Isn’t it? And you made sure you got your daily dose of the fun! image source   You still just can’t get enough of this. Wasn’t it rude of the wretched person to sleep so peacefully in front of you? Now you’ve gotta do something about it, don’t you? image source   Your mom’s afternoon nap was the best opportunity you could get your hands on for all the mischievous plans spurring in your mind.  Loved to climb on kitchen slab to steal that tempting jam or Horlicks or those mathris and laddus mummy made. image source   What a proud feeling it gave us to pull off this one! All our classmates just had to look up to us for being able to sneak out of the class when the ‘miss’ was still teaching. Hats off! image source   Bored? Let’ bombard the unsuspecting passersby and hide! It was always the greatest lol moment to see the shocked and confused faces of the poor victims trying to figure out where the hell did the balloon come from?!! 😉 image source  / feature image source  / UTV Spot Boy / Salman Khan Productions
16 Most Wonderful Nursery Rhymes We Still Remember ‘By Heart’!:	It is pretty amazing how we forget what we ate in the breakfast this very morning, but remember it fairly well some things which we heard or saw in our childhood. Nursery Rhymes are one of such wondrous little things, which were so simple, enjoyable and joyous that we tend to remember them, no matter how old we grow. This one tops the list. Whenever we see the starry night sky, we still inadvertently remember these cute line. image source image source   Perhaps the most popular of all of the nursery rhymes which has even inspired all kinds of Indian versions ending in ‘ muh toh kholo … aak thooo ‘ or the latest Bollywood Johnny! image source image source   The funny little egg (or-looking man) who couldn’t climb back on the wall…. we still feel pity for it. 🙁 image source   Cutest poem ever. Hands down. We used to go nuts reciting and acting it out as kids. image source   We have all heard many of the suggestive naughty versions of this one. It only emphasises how popular it was when we were kids and even now! image source   Aww… what a cute pet lamb. image source   Eeekkk!! We can all relate to poor Miss Muffet. image source   Umm… Yummy hot delicious buns.. whose daughters won’t like them? image source   Once we all thought it was a cute thing to sing this. Now.. head turns! Sad! 🙁 image source   Baaa….! Loved those sheep didn’t we? image source   Another of the lovely poems we used to keep singing playing with our toys! Still love it so much! image source     image source   Mice will play when the cat is out…   image source   Next popular number from our sing-a-song list.   image source   Every little girls’ anthem. 😉 images source   My personal favourite. Perhaps because of the word ‘piggy’ being soooo damn cute! 🙂 image source   We all sang this the whole day when it rained all through… Spoiler alert! image source
14 Reasons Why This Resort Is The Best Family Resort in Jim Corbett:	Jim Corbett National Park is a perfect destination to explore the raw preserved wildlife in Uttarakhand. Approximately 240 k.m. from Delhi makes it an easily accessible destination for a perfect weekend gateway and a family vacation. When you are travelling with your family for a vacation, choosing the right resort for your stay which can offer you a list of new experiences is of paramount importance. But the million dollar question is still unanswered “Which is the best family resort in Jim Corbett?”. Well, let us unveil the suspense – The Golden Tusk Resort in Jim Corbett is one of the best resort for a perfect family vacation in Jim Corbett. Surrounded by the local villages gives you opportunity to explore the Kumaoni Culture. You can enjoy both indoor and outdoor recreational activities with your family and kids. The activities include: Rappelling, Wall Climbing, Flying Fox, Spider Climbing, Ladder Climbing, Badminton, Pool, Carom, Chess, Table Tennis and more. You can experience the soothing flute or live guitar performance every evening in the garden area. You can order your favorite snacks and drinks and enjoy the live music with your family. It is indeed a very soothing experience. A perfect dinner date with your wife or partner. You can inform the hotel staff and they will arrange the same for you at a cost which is totally worth it. Very few places in India offer you the experience of water dining and The Golden Tusk is one of them. This should be in your to do list for sure when you visit The Golden Tusk. This has probably every thing which you want to drink. Relax and have a sip of your favorite cocktail. image credits: goibibo image credits: goibibo The Golden Tusk Restaurant Chef is passionate to get delicious food of different cuisines for your breakfast, lunch and dinner to ensure you enjoy the taste. On top of it you can also enjoy live music during dinner from 8:30 p.m. in the restaurant. The Golden Tusk has an in-house naturist who will take you for the nature walk tour to explore the unique plantations and local village area. You will surely come back with a lot of new learning about the flora and fauna. Once you are done with the Nature walk, you can enjoy your breakfast and then relax for a few hours and then hit the swimming with your family and kids. The Golden Tusk has 7 categories of rooms – The Golden Tusk has an in-house booking system for the forest safari. You can just call the reception and they will guide you the rest. Icing on the cake – The Golden Tusk is a Pet Friendly Resort. You can visit with your pet and enjoy the vacation with your furry friend. Leaving you with some more pictures of The Golden Tusk Resort. Isn’t is beautiful? You can visit and book your stay on The Golden Tusk website .
20 Hindu Traditions and The Precise Scientific Reasons Behind Them:	One of the oldest and also the richest of religions, Hinduism has many such practices which we may follow just so because our mothers told so or because our nanis did so. And there are also many myths and superstitions attached to them. But to be truthful, they are not just some old bunch of crap that our ancestors made us do because they had nothing better to do themselves. You will really be surprised to know that our fore-fathers were way ahead of their times and knew a lot about the health and mental benefits of many things that we do not know so much about even today. They smartly moulded them in the form of customs for us to follow in the name of religion so that we anyway follow them and avail those much needed benefits even if in the name of rituals or worship. Namste is the way of the Hindus to show their respect and humbleness to the others. When we join our palms in the form of Namaste or Namaskaar , the pressure points located on the tips of our fingers are pressed together which activate them. These are the points that are connected to our eyes, ears and mind; hence increasing their health condition and help us to remember the person we are greeting for a long time. image source   The mid of the eyebrows, where we apply the bindi or tika , is the main nerve point in the human body. By putting the red kumkum dot there, we increase the level of concentration and retain our vital energy. It is also the point of Adanya chakra hence while applying the tika , we press the point, allowing more blood flow to the facial muscles. image source   Indians believe that piercing ears are a way to restraint speech and increase the calm composure leading to more listening and less speaking and hence, also saving energy. It is a way to develop intellectual power, enhance decision making skills and increase thinking ability. image source   Henna is not only a great way to decorate and beautify hands and feet but also has many medicinal benefits. It has a cooling effect hence, when applied to the bride it relaxes her tense and stressed nerves and prevents nervous breakdown, headaches and other stress related problems common during a wedding. image source   Wearing bangles increases the blood flow in the wrist area due to friction between the skin and the bangles besides since the blood vessels are more topically located there. This also regulates and reverts the electric waves generating in this area, back into our bodies since the bangles are round in shape  and do not have any end for the signals to lose to the environment. image source   Made by mixing grounded turmeric-lime and mercury, sindoor has two major health benefits besides being symbolic of a married woman. It regulates the blood pressure and increases sexual drive, owing to mercury’s intrinsic properties. This is why widows are prohibited using sindoor. Moreover, since it’s red in colour it also increses the sexual drive in both the partners; red colour knowing to exert that effect in humans. It also helps to relieve stress. image source   Generally worn on the second toe, toe ring is not just another jewellery that married women wear. It also has a scientific reason behind it. The silver metal of which the toe rings are usually made of are good conductors hence conduct the polar energies of the earth to the body. Another important reason being, the second toe has the nerve connected to the uterus and passes to the heart, hence, wearing toe ring on this toe strengthens the uterus and regulates the blood flow as well as the menstrual cycle. image source   The cross-legged position or the sukhasana as in Yog, is a pose that brings calm and relaxation to the body, as is clear from the name itself; sukh meaning happiness. Therefore, sitting in this position to eat, automatically triggers the brain to prepare the stomach for the digestion of food. image source   Spicy and tangy food triggers the digestive enzymes and ensure smooth digestion process of food. While sweet items being heavy on carbohydrates makes the digestion slower. Hence, in Hindu tradition meals are always commenced with spicy and ended with sweet dishes. image source   Fasting is not just a mode of showing our devotion towards God. It actually helps in aiding good health by promoting detoxification of the body and cleansing it from inside. After long periods of salty, oily and myriad other foods that we intake, the digestive system weakens due to excessive and continuous work. Thus, a regular or even an occasional fasting period gives it a chance to rest and therefore rejuvenate. image source   Suryanamaskar is the Hindu way of paying tribute to the Surya Bhagwan or the Sun God. By doing so, we help ourselves in two ways. First, we wake up early and make it our habit thus, incorporating a healthy lifestyle and second, the morning sun rays are good for the eyes, hence, it keeps them healthy and bright too. image source   We know that the earth has a magnetic field with an imaginary magnet aligned in the North-South direction. And our body too has a magnetic field of its own, pertaining to the heart and it’s blood flow. So, when we sleep with our heads towards North direction, the two magnetic fields become non-aligned and cause various health problems such as heart diseases, Alzheimer’s disease, brain degenaration, Parkinson’s disease etc. This can explain our mythical beliefs of inviting ghosts on sleeping with head towards North. image source   Hindus have a way of showing respect to the elders and the enlightened by touching their feet to seek their blessings. When we touch somebody’s feet, it marks the state of our reduced ego or shraddha  and when they accept this respect, their hearts are filled with a positive energy or karuna that completes a circuit of cosmic energy flow; letting it flow from their feet to reach our fingertips and thus, connecting our minds and hearts. image source   In Yog , Bhramarandhra is the highest or the 7th chakra of the body consists of the thousand petalled lotus of wisdom. The knotted shikha or choti at the Adhipati Marma , the highest and the most sensitive spot on the head where the nexus of all the nerves is located, helps protect this centre and preserve it’s energy or Ojas . image source   Peepal though useless in terms of strong wood for furnitures or bearing any fruits; it is still worshipped like God. Why? It is because, since the ancient times we had known that Peepal is one of the few trees that gives off oxygen even in the night time, thus, to protect this life enriching tree, we related it to God and religion. image source   Tulsi or ‘The Holy Basil’ is given the status of mother by us. It is so because the Vedic sages knew the importance of the plant. It is a great medicinal herb that has many health benefits. Tulsi when taken in tea or other wise, regulates body systems, prevents diseases, stabilizes health conditions and increases immunity. It is very effective in keeping away mosquitoes, insects and even snakes. image source   Idol worshipping is the basis of Hinduism. We stress on worshipping idols since they help in strengthening concentration. When you are free to imagine, you are more likely to wander off but when we have a specific idol to concentrate on, we are more easily able to meditate without any mental diversion and thus, gain spiritual energy. image source   Our temples are so built strategically as to have the positive energy flowing inside them. The Moolsthanam or the Garbhagriha where the main idol of the temple is situated is in the centre and beneath it is a copper plate buried, which attracts the magnetic field of the earth and let’s us absorb those waves when we walk round the idol in the form of Parikrama . This is however, a slow process, and with regular visits to the temple we are able to build a the reservoir of positive energy within us. image source   It is customary to ring the bell before entering the inner sanctum or the Garbhagriha of a temple. The sound of the bell is said to be pleasing to God and ward off evil spirits. However, scientifically speaking, the echo produced by ringing it, lasting at least 7 seconds long, creates a unity in the right and the left parts of the brain, enabling us to fully concentrate, disposing off any negative energy and thus negative thoughts and also activating all the seven chakras of the body. image source   Although, it is considered to be a devotional practice to pay homage to the God and also to bring one luck, it is however an ingenious design made by our fore-fathers to ensure adequate intake of copper by us. In the ancient times when there were only copper coins instead of today’s stainless steel ones, making it customary to throw coins in the river water ensured we take in enough copper in our drinking water. image source
17 Things Which Only Lazy People Can Relate To And Smile:	You know you are lazy when; image source / seniorgif.com   image source: giphy.com   image source: scoopwhoop.com   image source   image source / gunday movie   image source: bollypop.in   image source / yash raj films   image source / stupidgifs.com   image source / dharma production   image source image source: bollypop.in   image source: Yash Raj Films / Imaan Sheikh   image source   image source   image source / Redbus Film Distribution / Fox Searchlight Pictures   image source /Yash Raj Films Pvt. Ltd   image source   image source / featured image source: bollypop.in [mashshare]
13 Wardrobe Struggles Every Girl Has To Face On Almost Daily Basis (For 18+ only):	Every girl dreams of a wardrobe so big she could live in it… With dresses, shoes and matching accessories spanning the walls from foot to ceiling! Ooohhh…!! But somehow, this very wardrobe is the root cause of the intense headache she gets each each morning. It is a real struggle to find something anything wearable, perfect for the occasion and well, comfortable!! Sigh… I know its a far fetched dream.. image source image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source image source   image source / Nadiawala Grandsons Entertainment- Eros International   image source   image source   image source   image source / Adlabs Films Ltd.- Blockbuster Movie Entertainment- Viacom 18 Motion Pictures
15 Signs Your Wife Is A Typical South Indian:	There are a lot of stereotypes about various regions and the people belonging to them. Take for example Punjabis, Marwaris or Bengalis. The moment we hear their names, some or the other cliché’s storm our minds. South Indians are one such species that are favourite with the jokers. But those who know them , know them for their intelligence and calm and polite behaviour. And when you are living with a South Indian, you know how much. image source / Eros International   image source   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source   image source / Eros International     image source image source /UTV Motion Pictures   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source  / UTV Motion Pictures   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source / Dharma Productions   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures /  Featured Image Source
16 Things You Would Relate To About Christmas If You Studied In A Convent School:	Christmas is a joyous occasion. With the wonderful weather outside and festivity everywhere it is perhaps the most wonderful time of the year. And if you happened to study in a Convent school, it becomes an altogether more important and indispensable part of your life and memories. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source     image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
We Have Had Been Teaching The Wrong To Our Boys, Its Time We Start With The Right Thing Now:	All our lives we have been experiencing various kinds of stereotypical notions and biasing on the grounds of gender. Our elders need not be misogynist themselves but somehow all of our’s up-bringing has been such that we are forced to believe that somethings are meant to be done (or not) by only girls and other only by boys. Watch this superb video starring Madhuri Dixit, for Vogue Empower, that has a poignant message which will force us to rethink our teachings and adopt a new way of bringing up our kids. Its time to start with the boys. Video and featured image source: Youtube via  Vogue India
16 Things You Desperately Want To Say To Her On The First Date That You Probably Musn’t:	A first date is always special. But often your hopes of a wonderful evening with a charming and a beautiful girl turns out to be quite boring and annoying, everything that you had hoped not for. In that scenario when you can hardly stand her or her nonsensical antics, you are practically at a war with yourself when one side is trying to look all gentlemanly and interested and other half is dying to say these things to her! T-Series Films- M M Films   image source / Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Productions   UTV Motion Pictures   image source   Eros International Ltd.- Red Chillies Entertainment   Yash Raj Films       Eros International   Dharma Productions   image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / Sridevi Productions   Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures   Trimurti Films     Eros International     image source / Yash Raj Films   Featured Image Source / Fox Star Studios- 20th Century Fox
16 Things That Are Always A Huge Struggle To Deal With:	Some things are just plain vicious. They like to see us struggle and bear the agony. But what to do… these lifeless things are perhaps much stronger than us.. It is impossible to win over them. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source  /  Featured Image Source / Yash Raj Films
Difference Between Being In A Relationship When You’re 18 Vs. When You Are 30:	At each stage of life with get crushes, get into relationships, make them to last  a life time or break them up for good. But our relationships differ with our age? image source image source   image source   image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source
10 Things That You Will Understand If you Are The Only One Married In Your Group:	It’s hard to face your friends when you are the only married person in the whole of your group. image source / SLB Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Yas Raj Films    image source / Amir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / Eros International   image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Mukta Arts   image source / Amir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / ShowMaker Pictures   Featured Image Source
9 Things You Need To Do With Your Mom If You Are Soon Getting Married:	When it is the time of getting married nears, is when you realize what an awesome mother and and an amazing woman your mom is. You start feeling miserable you won’t be able to cry in her lap when you feel upset any more, won’t be able to get a taste of her famous gajar ka halwa whenever you want and much much more! 🙁 But girl, it isn’t too late. Make the most of the time you have now in your hand, and enjoy to the fullest with her!! You both deserve and need this. 🙂 image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
16 Signs Which Prove You Were Born To Travel:	When it comes to travelling, there’s nothing more you love. Out with your trekking shoes and that sleep bag you are always ready to see the world! What does it take to be a traveller then? Yes, mango sized mosquito bites, exotic diseases and stinky bathrooms may be a part of it but when travelling doesn’t remind you of those but words such as adventure, people, history and architecture than you are born to be a traveller! image source   image source / SLB Films   image source / Warner Bros. Pictures   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   image source   image source
Excellent Furniture Rental To Make A Home Away From Home:	Have you heard of online furniture rental services? If no, then have you moved to a new place and missed the essence of your own home? Moving out of a home can be a tedious task – especially when you are attached to that place, and you cannot move on quickly. That being said, setting up a new house can be both expensive and stressful. Finding the right furniture, home appliances, and other useful home decor is of paramount importance to make you feel like being at your dream home. Rentickle is a leading online furniture rental company that will make your home a dream home at the cost of almost nothing. Their main motto is to “make your house a home, with a little help from us” and they stand true to their words. Rentickle offers the right kind of furniture for all the rooms in your house right from the living room to the bedroom. Apart from that, you can also rent out appliances, room packages, purifiers, fitness supplies, cycles, and rentals for your kids to give your home a beautiful finish. You can get one of the best furniture for your home that will give you all the required furnishing right at your doorstep. Rentickle offers a wide range of furniture which you can choose from. The furniture look and feel is designed to give your home a fresh new look. You can rent a wide range of appliances online from Rentickle. From television, refrigerator, washing machine to air purifier, Rentickle has got everything under their offering! The first step to your perfect home is to select what you need to make it perfect. Go through the entire catalogue of Rentickle and choose all the products that you need. They will have prices attached beside the products that will help you decide if it fits in your budget or not. Choose or customise a package that will fit in all your needs and make a list of them. You will need to submit your ID proof and you are done! The documentation is hassle free. After the legible verification of your documents, your order will be will be dispatched in a maximum of 5-7 days. You can even return the products or exchange them easily with the website. 1. Free Delivery and Installation:  Rentickle is one of the best furniture rentals that offer you free delivery of your products and a free installation of products without any additional charges. 2. Free Maintenance:  Taking furniture on rent has its regular wear and tear. But fret not! Rentickle covers all of these wear and tear while using the products at free cost. 3. Easy Returns:  Don’t like a product? Then e-mail the details to Rentickle, and they will come and pick your products from your place. They have a policy that they “don’t like to impose.” 4. Quality Products:  Rentickle provides ideal packages for you to make the process easy and offers packages based on preferences. You can also pick and choose the products you like and place your order to get the best online rental furniture delivered at your home. Everything you take for rent at Rentickle are all intelligently designed to give you functionality alongside comfort and to make your home a great place stay. Rentickle is one of the best furniture rentals company in the market, offering you everything you need at your doorstep in Delhi, Gurgaon, Bangalore, Noida, Hyderabad. What are you waiting for? Book your furniture now at Rentickle and enjoy a home, far away from home. 
5 Fun Ways To Spend Father’s Day:	Aren’t our Fathers the best thing that has happened to our lives? As much as we love our mom’s, we can never imagine a life without our Dad, can we? In fact, If it weren’t for him, we would have never had the life that we have today. He chose time over money and you over anything else in this planet every single time. Yeah!! We know he might not show his love for you like your mom, but do you really expect him to do that. So this Father’s day let’s do something for the man who can take down any superhero with a single punch – your Father! Here are 5 fun ways you can spend this Father’s Day with your Dad. Remember the first time when our Dad took us to the nearest theatre and introduced us to this amazing thing called movies. Since then, we must have sat through hundreds of movies and have also started binge watching on weekends. So, it’s high time that you thank him by taking him out for one. But since its falls on Sunday, his only rest day, you can also choose to stay put and binge watch movies with him. I would advise taking turns while deciding on the movies to watch on Father’s Day . Take him out for brunch , and this time around let him choose from the menu. Nothing tops food and that is why we put this point right after movies. Also, as we suggested in the previous point, if you are planning to stay put with your Dad and binge watch movies, then do it the right way by ordering in some pizzas. We can bet that for most of us, it’s our Dad who taught us how to throw a ball or the dos and don’ts of your favorite sport. We think maybe it’s time we show our gratitude by spending this Father’s day with him, playing it. Also, remember to go a little soft on the old man. We are not asking you to lose but maybe not win this time. Come on, that’s the least you can do for him. Going through old photos: No! Keep your phone aside and take out the photo album from the closet. Trust us, we know that your screen is hi-res, but it will never strike you with nostalgia like an old photo does, that you thought you lost while moving forward in life. We are pretty sure that this is going to put a smile on his face. Or better, look back at some of his old pictures and see how great you Dad used to look. Tell him about the girl or boy you like, just kidding, don’t do that, unless of course, it’s the right time. But do you sit down for a coffee with your Dad anymore or tea, whatever floats your boat? Talk about those cherished memories or foolish memories and laugh over it?  This might get a little emotional, so we would advise keeping some tissues handy. Like we said at the beginning of the article, Every Father is a SuperHero , and we just cannot stress more on that. So, on this Father’s Day, let’s treat him like one.
Affordable Car on Rent Online at Rentickle:	When traveling to a new place, local commuting to visit places is a major challenge everyone faces. Going from one place to another in cabs can become stressful and expensive, right? To solve this problem, Rentickle offers you affordable car rental services in Gurgaon. Noida, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangalore. Guess what? It is at the cost of almost nothing! You get a wide range of cars from which you can select the one you want to drive Add a bit more luxury to your travel by selecting a sedan for your trip. The prices are such that you will not want to miss upgrading from hatch back to sedan. Give yourself a comfortable and spacious travel with a group of friends or family in your choice of SUV Look at the catalogue and choose the car that you want to take on rent. They have all different varieties of cars that can fit in all your needs. Right from small and compatible cars to SUVs, you name it and they have it. Like every legal renting, the car rent services at Rentickle also have a requirement to submit some basic documents to prove your credibility. You will need to submit a copy of PAN Card, Bank Statement of the last six months and an address proof to seal the deal. Once they are verified, you will confirm your order by making the payment. You will need to pay a refundable amount that you will receive once you return the car alongside the rent amount. After confirmation of your order, schedule the car for delivery on a comfortable date. They would deliver the car at your doorstep and pick it back as and when you want to return it. There will be no additional charges for the delivery or pick-up, which makes it all the more amazing. You can also relocate your location at a free cost. Enjoy your car rides and make the most of it while you take care of any extra cab rides that might rob you of your happiness in the city. The electronic products delivered home by Rentickle, come with a manufacturer warranty as given in the contract. All the items are of high quality and a manufacturing defect is an unlikely scenario. However, on the event of the same, there will be free repairs done by Rentickle during the period of your contract. As it is very clear about the prices of the cars that can be taken on rent, it is safe to say that the prices are very affordable and reasonable at this point. Apart from this, Rentickle also offers its free services that act as a brownie point for the cars. Get your wheels ready by the time you reach the city by booking a car on Rentickle at the best of rates!
Personalized and Unique Kids Products Online:	Namefame.in cordially works in spreading smiles to the kids by personalizing every item they use. Your bundle of joy deserves the best items in the world and Namefame.in is here to make your kids special. From personalized steel tiffin boxes to kids pillow to bags, everything can be personalized with the child’s name. Namefame.in offers branded personalized steel tiffin boxes, which are food-grade, airtight and comes with personalization. Personalization gives a personal touch which excites the kid, and these personalized lunch boxes can be a fantastic gift to the kid next door! Any day, the personalized steel tiffin box is safer than any plastic boxes. There are plastic boxes which come with a label of BPA free, which are considered to be safe, but they are not at all safe. The chemicals from the plastic steel box can interfere with the healthy metabolism of the children. Drinking water from personalized steel bottles is better than using plastic bottles. These personalized steel bottles are ever-lasting, free from dust and entirely safe for use. A personalized steel tiffin box is easy to wash, sterilize and durable, and anti-bacterial, which means you can maintain hygiene, these boxes can last for years and ensures complete food safety. You can always educate your children by using these eco-friendly objects as to how important they are to save and maintain out Mother Earth. Buy personalized steel tiffin box and bottles at Namefame .in Name any kids product, and Namefame.in will customize it for you. They have a range of fresh and funky bags which can be used during travel while schooling or heading to a picnic. Personalization of the bags with the name can help in easy identification and also brings happiness to kids. You can buy personalized school bags from Namefame.in online. Get your baby a smooth and comforting personalized ac quilt and pillow. You can track your baby’s growth with this cotton based quilt. These are personalized ac quilt and pillow to beautify your kid’s bedding. You can also check their milestone blankets on the website namefame.in Colorful bedding comes with a quilt and a pillow set which you can select along with your children. These can be an attractive décor to your bedroom too. Another wonderful personalized kids products offered by Namefame.in is Pillows and cushions. If your kid throws tantrums while sleeping, then you must get them these personalized kids pillow and cushion of their favourite colour. You can always pamper them with their pillows! These personalized kids pillow can enhance the beauty of the room and also you can gift them to the kids on any occasion like birthdays, school performance, Christmas presents. Namefame.in has got many personalised kids products to offer. Visit their website and have some fun time with your children while selecting the product range.
Best Website for Dads to be And Dads in India – What a found!:	Becoming a dad brings out a mixture of emotions – excitement, nervousness, anxiety and what not! With so many thoughts wandering about, dadtribe.in is the best website for dads to be and dads in India where you can find every single information related to paternal parenting, i.e. fatherhood and also on becoming an ideal husband! Every father has thoughts on daughter – about her wellbeing, happiness and safety. Fathers can go to any extent to make their daughter happy and cheerful. Dads cannot see their angel girls crying. Are we not, right? We all know this, and this fact cannot be denied anywhere in the world. Daughters are blessing to dads who bring a lot of joy and cheer in their life. The bond shared between is their prized possession. You can find good reads on  relationships between daughter and dad  – this will bring you both closer and create a healthier bond! Not all dads are the same as every man is different by nature, habits, interests, profession, and characters. So there are  different types of father  and which are you? The geek one – who loves and relates well to comics and characters or the sports dad who enjoys playing sports and would make sure to play with their child too. In today’s health freak world, every daughter wants their father to be fit.  High-intensity interval training  is a fat-burning process which dad can do it in their homes. We completely understand how difficult it is to take some time out, but we believe 15 minutes can be spared. So, for the love of a daughter, will you give in 15 minutes to get in shape? There are  different types of marriages  in India. Any disturbance in married life can affect your child’s mental well being. The best type of dad’s do not let their child suffer any emotional disturbance due to such family problems. These are the type of dad’s who bond with their son is like close friends. They gel with their son so well that there is full comfort between the two. These type of dad’s are always there for their son whenever they need them the most like a friend. Its almost like living the childhood again with his son. Dadtribe.in has a wide array of content, and you can find all your answers to questions. This is the best website for dads to be and dads in India where you can find everything from grooming techniques to parenting things to managing the marital relationship to celebrity blogs. Dadtribe.in is all about becoming a better father and husband, and this is how you can make your entire family happy and blissful.
6 Damn Good Reasons to Visit Kasol for Your Next vacation:	With a surge in the love for travel, thanks to the numerous influential travel bloggers and Instagram stars, there has been a steady rise in the number of backpackers and travellers looking for newer places to explore. One such newly spotted gem on the map is Kasol in beautiful Northern India. Located in Kullu district in popular travellers’ haven of cool and resplendent Himachal Pradesh, Kasol is a destination that leaves anyone and everyone who has visited it speechless with its natural splendour. It is a small village poised perfectly in the majestic mountains of the Himalayas, which offers its visitors numerous great attractions and opportunities for wonderful adventures. We can give you at least a score of reasons to visit this amazing destination, but here are top 6 of them that is enough to throw the light. image source Where: Malana village or Tosh village located about 21 km and 18 km resp. from Kasol Why to go: While Malana is a gorgeous village that’s famous for Malana cream and is one of the oldest democracies but still untouched by modernities, Tosh is an inimitably magnificent village with stunning views of sunrises and sunsets   image source Where: You can trek around Kasol to many spectacular places including Yanker Pass, Kheerganga, Sar Pass and Pin Parbati Pass or if you want something soother for your feet, try a walk up to Chalal, located 30 min away from Kasol. What to expect: Refreshing ambience with dense thickets and great a photo-op   image source Where: The Evergreen and The German Bakery situated at The Moon Dance What to eat: Trout, hummus with pita bread, bureka, chicken shipudim etc. plus baked deserts like lemon cakes   image source Where: Book a tent offered by the Forest Department of the area What to expect: Comfortable and well-maintained tents placed in a scenic area with fiercely flowing Parvati river beside it, and amazing vistas at morning and evening hours   image source Kasol provides the ideal spot to invoke your inner artist, thinker or author, or simply to give you the much-needed space to find yourself and relax through reading, singing, pondering or dreaming!   image source With time so accommodating and space so warming, Kasol gives you the ideal break to break-free and simply enjoy and please yourself. You can begin by playing a game of volleyball at Cottage Cafe or pitthu if arrived in a group, or simply carom while sipping coffee at Jim Morrison Cafe.   Laced with innumerable enchanting trekking trails, scenic vantage points, warm hospitality, delicious food and luxurious stays, Kasol is definitely a place worth exploring on your very next holiday. But don’t take our word for it. Better go and make buckets full of treasurable memories, discovering Kasol on your own.
Best Car Perfume In India That’ll Make Your Car Feel New Again:	A pleasant fragrance in the car can really keep you fresh and good mood during your busy rides to the office and even to long rides with your friends or loved ones. When you spend a lot of time driving your way to work and other things, the car interior gets exposed to a lot of things like food fragrances (more in case you accidentally spill), dust, sweat, heat etc. which can be a turn-off. You can have one of the best car perfumes in India handy with you, to rid off such an unpleasant smell. If you are one of those car enthusiasts who take care of their car really well – do not eat, smoke in the car, then listen YOU STILL NEED A CAR PERFUME because many a times car tends to attract road odours and it can be unpleasant. Every car has its own peculiar smell which can be masked off with a fresh fragrance and moreover, it can add the freshness of the scent. Enhance your driving experience and enjoy the pleasant smell in your car with Maxolen Perfumes. Maxolen Perfumes offer pleasant emitting fragrance which reaches the corners of the car and eliminates all kinds of odour present anywhere in your vehicle. These perfumes come in spray format, and thus it doesn’t get a pass over ventilation system. Hence, there will be a reduction in wastage, and it will last longer compared to the other perfumes. Maxolen Perfumes offer two varieties: Auto Perfume Carrisma and Auto Perfume Maximum. A Davidoff luxury perfume which can mask any kind of odour in your car – be it sweat, heat or food. It has a musky fragrance and can give a fresh feel to your vehicle. Spreading sweet smell of vanilla, fruits and spices, Auto Perfume Maximum will give your car a pleasant aroma of fruits and herbs. You will absolutely love the freshness and sweetness in your car coming from Auto Perfume Maximum. Car lovers love maintaining and welcoming car essentials, and you cannot miss car perfumes now after reading the wonders it can create to your driving experience. A good, soothing and pleasant smell with your favourite songs can uplift your mood and make you fall in love with your car – like never before.
Man Stabbed Right Through His Body With a Sword! You Can’t Believe What Happened Next:	Man Stabbed With a Sword! Extraordinary footage of Mirin Dajo being stabbed right through his body with a sword. He became famous in the 1940s for piercing his body with swords and all other kinds of objects. Apparently he did it without injury and he astounded the medics at the time. This film may make you feel queasy! Video source: Youtube  via  British Pathé Disclaimer: Don’t try this at home If you are feeling shocked watching this story, don’t forget to shock your friends by sharing it.
A Girl Did Not Get Change From An Auto Rickshaw Driver, But What Happened Next Gave Her Lifetime Solution:	Autorickshaw is a harmless topic but worth writing a thesis on!  They  play an important role in the public transport system; very important in busy cities like  Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore, Chennai, Pune etc  where people do not prefer taking their cars out due to heavy traffic on roads and parking problems . Though they are a boon BUT when they show us a helpless face saying ‘chutta nahi hai’ (no change) ; our BP soars (esp. in scorching heat!!) and we end up either fighting (mostly with no conclusion) or paying extra amount as we ourselves are short of change!….Wish we could also hand them a ‘toffee’ for the ‘chutta’ amount; like we get from tuck shops!…..would surely sweeten up everyone’s lives 🙂 This video by Pocket Films will show you solution for our daily issue of  getting change from Autorickshaw drivers. Video and featured image source : Youtube If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends
15 Things You Need To Prepare For If You Are Too Polite To Say ‘No’:	It is one thing to be polite and an altogether different to be a push over. But when you are too polite, you practically become incapable of saying ‘no’ to people…. And that’s when all the havoc befalls. Havoc for you, fun for others. It’s good to be polite and helping but it is also much necessary to be able to refuse too. Of course only if you don’t want these things to happen to you. People are going to give you their share of bus duties, coffee fetching or dog walking. One aunty of mine even gave me ‘raw mangos’ to make aam ka achaar for her. And believe it you will not be able to say no. image source   And you will still let them borrow your eye liner, your designer bag and even that cute dress that your boyfriend gifted you, which your friend will reason, it will look so good on her for her dinner date! image source / UTV Motion Pictures   And you will still allow people to cut in the line and get their Mc Aaloo Tikkis or one of the last left movie tickets to the back row seats. image source / Dharma Productions   And still you will take this unplanned route, miss on your favourite show and get them the exact same bag you carried in the last night’s party. image source / UTV Motion Pictures   And you will do it every single time even if their seat is a stuffy seat stuffed between to Yokkozunas or one that let’s you breathe the fresh air coming straight from the adjacent toilets. image source / UTV Motion Pictures   And yet you will go on with Chinese even if you wanted Pizza. image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   And yet you will sweep and dust and scrub and mop each day even if it’s your roomie’s girlfriends that wrecked a havoc in the house with their ‘who can drink the most’ challenge at the pajama party! image source / Dharma Production   And that accounts for even those times when you have your much begged and awaited appointment at the busiest parlour in the city! image source / UTV Motion Pictures   People will all be praises for good thinking and team spirit but the actual shabashi will be awarded to the most extrovert and ‘your buddy’ in the office. image source / ShowMaker Pictures   And yet you will be driving their mothers to and back from jagraate  and accompanying them to have them buy a discounted ‘ring’ for their girlfriends since your uncle would be the owner of the shop. image source   And yet you will be missing your movies and and accompanying Dhillon aunty to strange places for a ‘tea time gupshup ‘ session. image source   And so you will continue smiling and half listening to them for a chance to speak..but of course, you won’t get any! image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   And yet you will keep on telling them ‘sorry’ for not trying enough to get in contact, even if it’s her who abandoned you for two years and disappeared. All because, you can’t stand anybody staying mad with you for long. image source / Yash Raj Films   But still you will keep on paying even if sometimes only they will be eating and you will have a Somvaar fast! image source / Eros International   And the people around you, ‘please’!! 😉 image source  
4 New Year Resolutions You Must Take To Genuinely Respect Women:	Every single person on internet support social issues of women safety and respecting woman. We all become keyboard warriors and fight a virtual battle on social media in favor of respecting women. But did you ever think that making some small changes in the way you think about a women can make such huge difference.       images source: Ritu Khanduja
This Woman Wanted To Dedicate Something To Bangalore City, And What She Did Is Awesome!:	Ashwini Raghupathy a talented classical dancer from Bangalore went out of her way to give a beautiful gift to Bangalore city with her creativity in one of the eight classical dance forms of India “Odyssey”. Video’s like this deserves to be shared world wide to spread a strong message about Indian culture. See how many famous places you can Identify easily in Bangalore! Video and featured image source: Youtube   via  fstopro If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
This Beautiful Love Story Called “Speechless” Will Leave You Speechless:	A great film, neat script and no dialogues but still it grabs our attention. This short film was made in 48 hours for 48hfp Mumbai 2013, and went on to win 5 awards. Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  Srikant Kekare This short film is about the language of love. Hope you enjoy watching it! Spread the joy by sharing it with your friends.
These Famous South Goa Beaches are More Than You Can Ask for:	…and that’s why these famous South Goa beaches are the perfect recipe for a great holiday Featuring stunning rows of palm trees lined on pristine white sandy shores, South Goa beaches paint the picture of an ideal beach vacation spot. While the North has some spectacular offerings too, the South scores by being the less crowded sector without compromising on the festivity. If you too have planned to visit Goa on your next break from the monotony of life and work, why look elsewhere than the famous beaches in South Goa ? They have everything you can ask for from your perfect vacation- fun, adventure and relaxation. image source Known for: Light sand that’s perfect for hours of beach walk, lovely setting and bustling tourists Things to do: Beach walk, underwater fishing, oyster catching, eating at local cafes, swimming with dolphins etc.   image source Known for: Partying at Silent Noise at On the Rocks and extremely gorgeous sunsets Things to do: Dolphin Spotting, scuba diving etc.   image source Known for: Being a quaint contrast to Palolem beach, with lesser crowds and far lesser distractions Things to do: Sun-bathing, yoga treatments and surfing   image source Known for: White sandy shores dotted with profuse greenery that looks striking Things to do: Jet skiing, toddy tapping and digging into sumptuous seafood sold at the beach-side eateries   image source Known for: Dirt cheap beach vacation with a romantic setup that is perfect for mushy couples on a budget and the delightful lighthouse Things to do: Mingling with the local fishermen, enjoying yummy seafood, boat rides etc.   image source Known for: Being a secluded beach where you can enjoy your own company and other pleasurable activities in peace Things to do: Wind surfing, riding dolphins, meditation and hiking   image source Known for: Outlandish scenery, wooden fisherman boats, and shoreline bordered by delightful bushes and palm trees Things to do: Boat riding, dolphin watching, eating authentic Goan cuisine etc. image source Known for: An enigmatic and peaceful beach which is also the home of some most beautiful and exotic butterflies Things to do: Beach wandering, watching butterflies and boating   image source Known for: 700 m long coastline, glistening golden shore and crystal clear blue waters along with numerous islands giving off reclusive vibes. Things to do: Stay at romantic palm leaves and cane built homestay huts, swim, sunbathe and relax   image source Known for: Shipwrecks, coconut groves and for being a small beach that’s heaven of peace and beauty, located adjacent to a dainty village Things to do: Get diving lessons, windsurfing and enjoying Konkani dishes   image source Known for: A cooler beach lined with palm and coconut trees, it is also called Sunset Beach for providing the most breath-taking vista of sunset Things to do: Photography, stargazing, enjoy nightlife and beach walking   image source Known for: Being a romantic destination through and through with candlelit dinners and beautiful nights Things to do: Nightly beach walks, and adventure sports like paragliding or skiing   image source Known for: Being a sunniest beach, St. John Baptist Church and lovely craftsmanship of fishermen that adorns the church and the local homes Things to do: Windsurfing, jet skiing, boat rides and enjoying Konkani food   image source Known for: Being the perfectly romantic beach with immense natural beauty and tranquility on offer Things to do: Kayaking, sailboat cruising, shopping at nearby market, and eating at beach shacks Let us know which one of these famous South Goa beaches are you planning to go on a vacation to. 
This 2 Minutes Video About Forced Child Prostitution at Age Of 15 Will Introduce You To The Bitter Truth Of Our Country #dontlookaway:	The truth could never be as bitter as this one…In India, almost 40 girls under the age of 15 are forced into prostitution everyday. This film suggests a simple way by which we can help stop this inhuman practice. We close our eyes to the things that we don’t want to see, to the emotions we don’t want to feel.  Bachpan Bachao Andolan  has come up highlighting a grave part of our society. Watch it – Video and featured image source : Youtube It feels so real that I wish it wasn’t. Don’t forget to share this and bring this to notice to as much as possible and spread awareness about Child Trafficking and Child Prostitution
Top 14 Things to Do in Scandinavian Countries:	The term Scandinavian Countries is given to a group of European countries which includes Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Iceland. While it is established the whole of Europe is surpassingly beautiful, it is these Scandinavian Countries which hold the title of being the most gorgeous and enigmatic countries. Scandinavia is known for its remarkable legends, striking landscapes and engaging traditions and culture which don’t just attract the tourists but set them apart from the rest of the continent. Just to glimpse that celestial beauty and learn more about their fascinating culture and history, tourists flock to Scandinavia from across the globe. But what are the best and must things to do in Scandinavian Countries? Let’s find out.   Get a natural spa therapy dipped in its sulphur and other minerals rich water image source   And appreciate other modernist art pieces as well image source   image source   Two km long trail of unlimited fun and thrill image source   And embrace the Eskimo style of living you won’t ever forget image source   Feel yourself getting awestruck exploring the details of its sublime French architecture image source   You will find moss-covered grounds, beautiful forests and open meadows all across this 50 miles trail at the elevation of 1,100 ft. image source   Or try a humble Fika in Stockholm image source   Try Amager Beach in Denmark or Langholmsbadet and Smedsuddsbadet in Sweden image source   image source   Get ready to spot a variety of whales including minke whales, orcas, blue whales, humpback whales, sperm whales and more! image source   Explore the area’s lovely palaces, parks, events and activities. image source   image source   image source
35 Most Naturally Romantic Hill Stations Near Delhi:	For the couples residing in Delhi, life becomes the name of crazy travelling hours, maddening crowds and suffocating pollution. Now although the city has its more than fair share of fantastic restaurants, parks, malls and other such recreational outlets, they often crave for a peaceful and romantic getaway that can blow new renew their relationship. Luckily for Delhi couples, romance isn’t that far off from their cards. Being blessed with a superb location, Delhi shares a close proximity to many wonderful hill stations that are ideal for an amorous vacation in the cool mountains. Below are some of the most beautiful and naturally romantic Hill Stations in North India near Delhi that any Delhi couple would definitely want to explore. Bonus: Check these exciting handpicked India holiday packages.   h image source Distance from Delhi:    270 km Places to visit: Waterfalls, Mountain Points, Lakes, Mall and Heritage Buildings Things to do:  Nature Walks, Ropeway Rides, Boating, Trekking, Bird Watching, and Waterfall Tours Best time to visit:  March to June and September to November image source Distance from Delhi:    278 km Places to visit:  Visit Eco Garden Cave, Temples, Mountain Peaks, Lakes and View Points. Things to do:  Rock Climbing, Cable Car rides, Wildlife Tours, Boating and Trekking Best time to visit: March to June and October to February image source Distance from Delhi:    239 km Places to visit:  Tapkeshwar Temple, Robber’s Cave, Central Braille Press, Malsi Deer Park,  Rajaji National Park, Tapovan, Santala Devi Temple, Forest Research Institute, Wadia Institue, and Indian Military Academy Things to do:  Trekking, Wildlife Tours, Ice-skating and Sightseeing Tours Best time to visit:  All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  249 km Places to visit:  St. Mary’s Church, War Memorial, Santoshi Mata Temple, Tip and Top View Point, Picturesque valleys and sweeping vista of the Himalayas Things to do:  Trekking, Jungle Safari, Bird watching, Mountaineering, Boating and paddling Best time to visit:  All year round image source Distance from Delhi: 260 km Places to visit:  Paonta Sahib, Lytton Memorial, Dhaula Kuan, Fossil Park and Rajgarh, Suketi Things to do:  Wildlife Tours, Rock Climbing, Trekking, Mountaineering and Temple Visits Best time to visit:  December to March image source Distance from Delhi:  272 km Places to visit:  Dagshai, Sabathu, Kasauli and Pinjore Things to do:  Trekking, Cable Car Ride, other outdoor activities and sightseeing Best time to visit:  October to May image source Distance from Delhi:  283 km Things to do:  Boating, Fishing, Rappeling, Nature Walks, Trekking and Sightseeing Best time to visit: March to June and September to December image source Distance from Delhi:  300 km Places to visit:  Kodia Jungle, Tehri Dam, Shivpuri and Dhanaulti Things to do:  Trekking, Adventure Camping, Sightseeing and Best time to visit: All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  300 km Places to visit:  Sunrise and Sunset Points, Baptist Church, Christ Church, Monkey Point and Brewery Things to do:  Camping, Paragliding, Nature Walks, Trekking and Sightseeing Best time to visit:  March to November image source Distance from Delhi:  342.8 km Places to visit:  The Ridge, the Mall Road, Kufri, Jakhu Temple, , Sankat Mochan, Kalka Shimla Railway, Institute of Advanced Studies, Kuthar Fort, Green Valley, Naldeshra Golf Course, Dhilon Pond, Christ Church, Viceregal Lodge, Shimla State Museum, Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla Heritage Museum and Taradevi image source Things to do:  Sightseeing, Ice-skating, Skiing, Ride in Kalka-Shimla Toy Train, Mountaineering, walk at the Ridge, Hiking, Heritage walk and Trekking Best time to visit:  April to June and November to February image source Distance from Delhi:  474.5 km Places to visit:  Namgyal Monastery and Tsuglad Khang Complex, The Dalai Lama Temple Complex, Gyuto Monastery, Kangra Art Museum, Norbulingka Institute, Jwalamukhi Devi Temple, Masrur, Kangra Fort, McLeodganj (Also read: This Temperature Controlled Swimming Pool Resort With A View in Mcleodganj is A Must Visit ), Bhagsunag Falls, Naddi Village, Kareri Lake and Dal Lake. Things to do:  Monastery and Temple visits, Mountain Biking, Trekking, Adventure Camping, Heritage Walks, Paragliding, Sightseeing and Shopping Best time to visit:  September to June image source Distance from Delhi:  307 km Things to do:  Boating, Mountain Views, Jungle Walk Best time to visit:  February to April and August to November image source Distance from Delhi:  313 km Things to do: Sightseeing, Nature Walks, Boating, Angling, Shopping Best time to visit:  March to June and September to November image source Distance from Delhi:  341 km Places to visit:  Rani Jheel, Rama Mandir, Jhula Devi Temple and Army Museum Things to do:  Nature Walks, Trekking, Golfing, Fishing and Sightseeing Best time to visit:  March to October image source Distance from Delhi:  347 km Places to visit:  Chail Sanctuary, Highest Cricket Ground in the World, Gurudwara and Military School Things to do:  Sightseeing, Nature Walks and Short Treks Best time to visit:  April to July and September to November image source Distance from Delhi:  342 km Places to visit:  Mukteshwar Dham, Chauli ki Jalai and  IVRI Things to do:  Rock Climbing, Rappelling and Jungle Walks Best time to visit: All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  349 km Places to visit:  Temples, Zero Valley, Hills and Valley, Lal Bazaar and Museum, Things to do:  Trekking, Nature Walks, Temple Visits, Cultural Tours, Village Tours, and Sightseeing, Best time to visit:  March to November image source Distance from Delhi:  500 km Places to visit:  Badrinath, Tapova, Joshimath, Vishnu Prayag and Skiing Festival Things to do:  Skiing, Trekking, Pilgrimage and Cable Car Ride Best time to visit: All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  469 km Places to visit:  Kangra Valley, Chintpumi  Kareri Lake and Dal Lake Things to do:  Religious Worship, Trekking and Jungle Walk Best time to visit: All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  449 km Places to visit:  Gangotri Galcier, Duryodhan Temple, Dodital, Bannderpunch and Dayara Bugyal Things to do:  Trekking and Religious Worship Best time to visit:  November to March image source Distance from Delhi:  435 km Places to visit:  Tani Jubber Lake, Arya Samaj Mandir and St. Mary’s Church Things to do:  Trekking, Sightseeing and Apple Picking Best time to visit:  February to December image source Distance from Delhi:  423 km Places to visit:  Shikari Devi Sanctuary, Prashar Lake, Bir Monastery, Barot Valley and Panchvaktra Temple Things to do:  Trekking, Sightseeing and Shopping Best time to visit: image source Distance from Delhi:  402 km Places to visit:  Wildlife Sanctuary, Jageshwar Temple, Kasardevi Temple, Zero Point and Patal Bhuvaneshwar Things to do:  Village tour, Bird Watching, Nature walk and Wildlife walk Best time to visit:  October to March image source Distance from Delhi:  401 km Places to visit:  Anashakti Museum, Pant Museum, Tea Gardens and Rudradhari Waterfalls Things to do:  Trekking, Tea Plantation tour, Temple and Ashram Visits, Sightseeing Best time to visit:  July to September and December to February image source Distance from Delhi:  372 km Places to visit:  Kufri Fun World, Kufri Zoo, Mahasu Peak and Indira Tourist Park Things to do:  Yak Safari, Adventure Sports, Zoo Visits and Nature Tours Best time to visit:  November to February image source Distance from Delhi:  536.3 km Places to visit:  Tibetan Monasteries, Solang Valley, Rohtang Pass,  Beas Kund, Raghunath Temple, Hadimba Temple and Jagannathi Devith Temple Things to do:  Nature Walk, Zorbing, Rafting, Mountain Biking, Trekking, Skiing, Paragliding, Mountaineering, Cycling, Monastery and Temple visits and Sightseeing Best time to visit:  April to June and December to February image source Distance from Delhi:  583 km Places to visit:  Birthi Falls, Panch Nanda Devi Temple and Maheshwari Kund Things to do:  Nature Walks, Trekking and Mountain Views Best time to visit: All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  572 km Places to visit:  Rang Mahal, Chhatrari, Akhand Chandi Palace, Chaugan, Saho and Temples Things to do:  Rafting, Trekking, Temple Visits, Cultural Tours, Rock Climbing and Horse Riding Best time to visit:  April to October image source Distance from Delhi:  565 km Places to visit:  Baktora Hills, Subhash Baoli, Kalatope, Bara Pathar, Tibetan Market and Khajjiar, Things to do:  Trekking, Temple visits, Village Tours, Lake Visits, Cultural tours and Boat Rides Best time to visit:  May to September image source Distance from Delhi:  505 km Places to visit:  Sourabh Van Vihar, Tea Estates, Nature Parks and Temples Things to do:  Tea Plantation Tours, Paragliding, Trekking, Angling, Sightseeing and Picnics Best time to visit:  September to June image source Distance from Delhi:  809 km Place to visit:  Mughal Gardens, Indira Gandhi Memorial Tulip Garden, Shankaracharya temple, Jama Masjid, Nishat Bagh, Pari Mahal, Chashm-e-shahi, Hazratbal Shrine and Shri Pratap Singh Museum Things to do:  Shikara ride in Dal Lake, Gondola ride, Nature Walks, excursion to Gulmarg, Skiing, Mountain Views, Orchards visits Best time to visit:  August to October & December to January image source Distance from Delhi:  762 km Places to visit:  Mount Abu Wildlife Sanctuary, Honeymoon point, Trevor’s crocodile park, Nakki Talav, Guru Shikar, Achalgarh fort, Toad Rock and Achaleshwar Mahadev Temple Things to do:  Boating, Bird watching, Excursion to Dilwara Jain temples, Visit Sunset Point and Shopping Best time to visit: All year round image source Distance from Delhi:  547 km Places to visit:  Hot water spring at Manikaran Sahib, the Great Himalayan National Park, Raghunath Temple, Bijli Mahadev Temple, Hangoli Mata Temple, Pandoh Dam, Friendship Peak, Bhrigu Lake, Things to do:  River Rafting, Nature Walks, Paragliding, Snow activities at Rohtang Pass, Fishing, Trekking and Shopping Best time to visit:  April to June and December to February image source Distance from Delhi:  1,022 km Places to visit:  Pangong Tso Lake, Tso Moriri Lake, Shanti Stupa, Namgyal Tsemo Gompa, Leh Palace, Magnetic Hill, Nubra Valley, Spituk Monastery, Hall of Fame Museum, Changtang Wildlife Sanctuary, Phuktal Monastery and Stok Palace Things to do: Jeep safari in Himalayas, Bactarian Camel Safari, Trekking, White Water Rafting, Wildlife Walks, Mountain Biking, Village and Culture tour and Shopping Best time to visit:   April to August image source Distance from Delhi:  729 km Things to do:  Trekking, Mountaineering, Visit Tabo Monastery, Explore Tabo Caves, Village and Culture Tour, Temple Visits and Mountain Views Best time to visit:  April to June Liked the articles? Don’t miss reading this “ 10 Most Beautiful Hill Stations In North India ” at Thomascook Blog
Indulge in the Beauty of Famous Pykara Falls:	Pykara is the famous and beautiful getaway set at a certain distance of almost 21 km from Ooty. This is considered as one of the very well-known tourist places in Ooty. The lake is very scenic, and boating amenities are also available. The falls contain an entire series of small waterfalls that join together to form the vast Pykara Falls . Image Source Pykara is the beautiful village along with the voluble river that has a dam and a power plant. Because of the dam, the entire backwater forms a massive lake that is actually called Pykara Lake. At the end of the dam, the river falls from the height that is also considered as Pykara Falls. This is how Pykara turns out to be the picture-perfect picnic spot. The magnetism is all set amongst lush greenery along with the breathtaking sights that appeal people from different corners of the world. If you are a nature lover and want to explore lots of beautiful places, then Pykara Falls would be one of the exciting places to visit. Pykara has each and everything that a travel buff needs for the perfect vacation with your family and friends. People have the choice of enjoying the boat ride in the lake along with relishing stunning scenery around the lake. There is a beautiful boathouse where visitors can relish sumptuous food and relax. The place is absolutely a must visit for those who wish to relish some quality time amongst the beauty of nature and peace. Pykara Falls is one of the beautiful and stunning places that are loved by lots of tourism lovers. So, apart from the scenic beauty, you will be able to witness some fantastic activities over there. Golf lovers should not miss the massive golf course over there, which is set at the altitude of almost 7200 feet and it covers the arena of 193 hectares. You can also be the witness some beautiful and famous temples such as Elk Hill, dedicated to Lord Muruga, mostly prevalent for Thaipusam Festival. There are numerous activities to try around like Kamaraj Sagar Dam, a famous picnic and film-shooting spot on slopes of Wenlock Downs. You can also visit a picturesque botanical garden, rose garden, tea museum and more. The Pykara Falls is also known as the Queen of Hills, Ooty is a picturesque city that is basically encircled by the attractive Nilgiri Hills. The place has a charming climate all-round the year because of the perfect location. The winters in Ooty are also colder than the rest of south India. The most beautiful time to visit this attractive hill station is from the month of October to June. In these months, the temperature remains wherever around 25°C that provides the lovely climate. This is an absolutely perfect time for sightseeing and traveling. During these months, nights are also comfortable as well.
Mumbai to Goa ferry – The convenient way to Travel:	Are you planning to spend this vacation at the stunning beaches of Goa? Then you can quickly cover the entire distance within just 7 hours. Well, Mumbai to Goa ferry cruise service is going to give you a beautiful journey with their fantastic services. Now you will be able to enjoy the festivals with some exciting plans and then travel to the state of beaches and sunshine by the all-new ferry service! Image Source  This exciting service of Mumbai to goa ferry will help you all the tourists. The ferry will undoubtedly carry the travelers and tourists between two places. The entire route will be through the Arabian Sea and stops in Panjim. Goa vacation industry is actually going to boost even more. You can accurately reach the sunshine city of India in numerous ways from the Mumbai city. Some wishes to fly while other love road trips. Some may also love taking the overnight train or bus to be there. Soon ferries, as well as cruises, will turn out to be an extra mode of transport for all visitors. The Mumbai to Goa ferry service will start from Mazgaon in Mumbai, and it will have few stops in Raigad, Ratnagiri district as well as Malvan, before docking in Panjim. This cruise will actually leave from Mumbai port at 5 pm, and it will reach Goa almost at 9 am in the next day. This will return to the Mumbai port on alternate days. This cruise is also expected to be completely air-conditioned, and it can hold up to 300 passengers. Image Source Numerous ships have been just operating between the proper routes right through the years. One was the Scandinavian-built vessel, which took each and every traveller from Mumbai to Goa by the beautiful ship. If you love to travel, then this would be absolutely perfect for you. Eventually, the ships offer some fantastic services to the travelers. Image Source There are ample amount of ferry services available, which come along with the excellent facilities and amenities as well. But, as a matter of fact, Mumbai to Goa ferry service offers excellent facilities and amenities to their travelers. According to the tourists, the ferry might provide tiers for different amenities and rates along with food and drink facilities. You can also book the Mumbai Goa Ferry trips right through online just like booking for trains. This contains the kid’s activity area, open deck as well as first aid service.
7 Truly Romantic Places to Visit in Munnar:	Every place in a hill station seems romantic and then there are some places to visit in Munnar that turn you so The charming hill station of Munnar located in Idukki district of Kerala needs no introduction. The enthralling natural beauty of this destination is enough to draw thousands and thousands of tourists every year to spend some time in the lap of lush nature. However, it is the pleasant and romantic aura of this hill resort which attracts honeymooners and couples in love in the biggest number. So, for all the lovebirds out there, here are the top 11 romantic places to visit in Munnar which we highly recommend you witness with your bae by your side. image source Known for: Echoing of sounds within 3 seconds, spellbinding greenery and cool breeze and most importantly the rare Neelakurinjini flowers Activities: Nature walks, picnic or boating with your beau, trekking and camping   image source Known for: The hypnotic beauty of the fierce waterfall (especially during monsoons), that’s accessible only via a charming wooden bridge Activities: Jungle Trekking, nature photography and picnic with your beloved   image source Known for: Magnificent view of the hills around and the city below, rare Neelakurinjini flower and bluish hue of the atmosphere due to the extraordinary proximity of clouds Activities: Trekking, nature photography, hiking, camping and paying a visit to the Neelakurinji Sanctuary   image source Known for: A must place to visit in Munnar due to its unmatched natural grandeur with cascading Chinnakanal waterfalls, and sprawling tea plantations all around Activities: Trekking, hiking, taking a refreshing dip in the pool formed below the falls, and nature photography   image source Known for: The largest population of endangered Nilgiri Tahr, 26 different species of mammals and staggering vistas of Western Ghats Activities: Wildlife spotting, nature walks and wildlife photography   image source Known for: A vast variety of roses of almost every colour and an equally astounding variety of birds Activities: Nature walks, birdwatching, relaxing and nature photography   image source Known for: Bewitching natural beauty with crystal clear lake water and surrounding rolling hills Activities: Boating or riding in a lovely shikara Although there are a great many places to visit in Munnar, each one more beautiful or more engaging than the other, these seven places are the most romantic ones that every couple needs to visit on their tour to this amazing hill station. Have you been to any of these places? Let us know in the comments below.
9 Magical Honeymoon Places in South India:	Just as North of India is famous for its splendid hill station, the numerous beautiful and romantic honeymoon places in South India are the region’s glory. Couples are always looking for a destination that doesn’t just has a lovely weather and natural beauty but which also speaks to them letting their love grow more. The southern part of the country has the arsenal to rescue them on that front. With places like Munnar, Pondicherry, Wayanad, Coorg and many more, you can always be assured of finding that dreamy honeymoon place in South India that perfectly resonates romance, beauty, passion and serenity; everything that newlyweds and couples desire. So, here are the top 9 places in Southern India which are ideal to plan your honeymoon. image source Nearest Airport: Trivandrum International Airport Romantic Experiences: Leisurely stroll along the lighthouse, watching the stunning sunsets or basking in the sun at the beach, enjoy a candle-lit dinner with fresh seafood and try adventure sports like kayaking or water-skiing   image source Nearest Airport: Cochin International Airport Romantic Experiences: Spend memorable time with your beloved in a luxury houseboat, take a boat cruise which runs daily at Vembanad Lake, enjoy kayaking together, and take a romantic walk on the Marari beach watching sunset   image source Nearest Airport: Bangalore International Airport or Mysore Airport Romantic Experiences: Spend some quality time sightseeing architectural marvels of Mysore like St. Philomena Church, Mysore Palace and Jagmohan Palace; go for birdwatching at the lovely Karanji Lake etc.   image source Nearest Airport: Puducherry (Pondicherry) Airport Romantic Experiences: Walk with fingers entwined at the pristine beaches of Pondicherry like Auro Beach, Rock Beach and Promenade Beach; or explore Pondicherry riding a bicycle, enjoy delicious French cuisine, go for boat rides or adventure activities like scuba diving, canoeing, camping etc.   image source Nearest Airport: Cochin International Airport Romantic Experiences: Take pleasant nature walks around beautiful tea gardens, enjoy breath-taking sites of waterfalls and sunset points, and spend quality time together relaxing in its tranquil environment   image source Nearest Airport: Mysore Airport Romantic Experiences: Enjoy simple pleasures like vistas beautiful landscape, wildlife spotting at Bandipur forested area, walks along Kabini river, couple spas and watching sunsets   image source Nearest Airport: Mysore Airport Romantic Experiences: Trekking across tea and spice plantations, floating in a romantic coracle, birdwatching, visiting vantage points and waterfalls and enjoying activities like river rafting, camping or nature photography   image source Nearest Airport: Coimbatore Airport Romantic Experiences: Take romantic nature walks exploring the beauty of the place or go trekking along the hilly trails, and visit places like Doddabetta, various gardens and orchards   image source Nearest Airport: Visakhapatnam Airport Romantic Experiences: Find peace and spend hours just talking to each other amidst the spectacular beauty of the land, go for long walks hand in hand along the pretty streams and spend evenings watching beautiful sunsets  
Have You Heard About Lonar Lake? – A Crater With An Impact:	Whenever we look at the wonders of nature, it makes us realize how mysterious the universe is. No matter how much we claim to know and understand it, there are and will always be phenomena that are beyond our comprehension. One such wondrous gift of nature is the Lonar Lake, one of Maharashtra’s best-kept secrets. The product of a prehistoric cosmic event, the lake has attracted visitors for its natural beauty, historic significance and religious references. Lonar is a small village in Buldhana district of Maharashtra and is about 380 Km from Pune, 370 Km from Mumbai, and 140kms from Aurangabad. You can book an trustworthy taxi service from Pune and visit Lonar. The Lonar Lake and its neighbourhood is the highlight of its namesake village and make for a quaint combination of science, religion, and folk culture. The natural water body is said to be formed some 52000 years ago, when a meteorite, weighing 2 million tonnes, crashed on the earth’s mantle at an estimated speed of 90,000 kmph. The impact of this huge astral body was profound enough to create a 1.8 Km wide and 150 meters deep hole. The current diameter of the lake is 1.2 Km and the water level is 137 meters deep. Major research and development institutions like the Smithsonian, the United States Geological Survey, Geological Society of India, the University of Sagar and the Physical Research Laboratory, etc. have conducted endless and extensive studies of both the Lonar and the Amber Lakes and its perimeters, with the objective of understanding the level of its cosmic impact. Over evolution of the planet, natural vegetation and rain water fed the crater, turning the void into a serene and verdant zone. The lush landscape has been a paradise for nature lovers, trekkers, and geologists, each with their own search of comprehending this mysterious landmark. While travelers find this greenish water body visually delightful and make this their escape into nature, scientists seek answers to most pertinent questions. A National Geo-Heritage Monument, the Lonar Lake is the only known hyper velocity impact crater in basaltic rock anywhere on Earth. Also, it it’s the only water body to be found today which is both alkaline and saline at the same time which is believed to support micro-organisms that are not found anywhere else on the planet. Geologists have also discovered that some areas of the crater makes any compass or measuring device dysfunctional, adding to the enigma of this blue-green ecosystem. A small circular depression called the Ambar Lake, lies about 700 meters from the main crater, and is said to be caused by the splinter that created the Lonar Lake. Locally, this smaller water body is also known as the ChhotaLonar (small Lonar). You can also find a Hanuman Temple near the lake area, whose idol is believed to have magnetic properties. The two distinct layers of water (outer saline and inner alkaline) have their own flora and fauna, making it a complete natural enclave. This entire zone is a haven for numerous rare and exotic species of plants, animals, and birds. In cooler months like monsoon or winter, you can spot plenty of resident and migratory birds like the black-winged stilts, common and ruddy Shelducks (European migrants), Shovellers, teals, herons, red-wattled lapwings, rollers or blue jays, Baya weavers, parakeets, hoopoes, larks, tailorbirds, magpies, robins, swallows, and many more. There are also lots of peafowls, chinkara, and gazelles, roaming in the forested areas adjoining the lake. Very recently, the entire lake area was declared as the Lonar Wildlife Sanctuary, in order to protect its life forms. Visually splendid and naturally bountiful, the mystical and mysterious Lonar Lake has a lot more to unearth its secrets that are still lurking in its bed, even after thousands of years. Travellers from Mumbai can book a trust-worthy and cheap car rental service and explore this unique region.
Is She the Most Popular and Photogenic Cat in India – Plowythecat?:	You must have seen a lot of cat pictures and videos online. However, this cute furball named Plowy who is one of the most popular cats in India is sure to win your heart. Watch her move from one corner of the room to another, playing football with the small tennis ball! Gaze into her lovely eyes and you won’t want to look elsewhere. There’s nothing more adorable than to play with her by dangling a paper in front of her. The way she jumps high in the air to catch it can make your heart swoon. It wouldn’t be wrong if we say she’s one of the most photogenic cats in India. Instagram handle :  plowythecat (loved by 25000+ followers) So, did you fall in love with her 🙂 … You can follow this adorable cat Plowy (one of the most popular cats in India) on Instagram for her regular updates. Plowy’s Instagram handle : @plowythecat Plowy the cat is fond of a high quality food rich in proteins. She likes her food with a balanced amount of fat concentrations. Plowy the cat is very picky sometimes if it is about her food. Plowy being a Persian cat (one of the most popular breeds) is always high on her energy. At the same time, she loves to relax and rest. Plowy, one of the most popular cats in India is a very well behaved and a friendly cat. Plowy the cat loves purring. Her meow is very rare to hear but simultaneously her purring is quite often. Plowy being a popular Persian cat do a lot of purring. If groomed properly, taking care of combing your cat’s hair daily can reduce in shedding. Plowy being one of the most popular cats in India is groomed and combed daily which results in less shedding. Bathing your cat on a regular period is also an important factor. Photography credits : @vivekverma0909
URI gives a Surgical Strike to Conventional Marketing Strategies:	The Vicky Kaushal and Yami Gautam starrer that entered the theatres in early 2019 has been acclaimed by all the sections of people. All of this success is nothing but a fruit of the stunning storyline, talented actors, and the ingenious marketing strategies that kept Uri in the race till today. With the brilliant marketing campaigns held by the team, the movie’s promotion has excelled on attracting the audience of all fronts. Lead by the Trigger Happy Entertainment Network (THEN), RSVP’S Uri – The Surgical Strike has garnered the right attention from all kinds of people and has shown the movie industry a new era of marketing. If you haven’t watched the movie yet, then watch URI now while we brief you through the quirky yet brilliant marketing ideas that came along with it. The Vicky Kaushal and Yami Gautam starrer Uri: The Surgical Strike, that released in early 2019, has been praised by all the sections of people. All of this success is nothing but a fruit of the stunning storyline, talented actors, and the ingenious marketing strategies that kept Uri: The Surgical Strike in the race till today. With the brilliant marketing campaigns held by the team, the movie’s promotion has excelled on attracting the audience of all fronts. Lead by the Trigger Happy Entertainment Network (THEN), RSVP’S Uri: The Surgical Strike has garnered the right attention from all kinds of people and has shown the movie industry a new era of marketing. If you haven’t watched the movie yet, then you should watch Uri: The Surgical Strike now . But before that, let us brief you through the quirky yet brilliant marketing ideas that came along with it. The Beginning of the Surgical Strike with the #UriDeceptiveStrikes and the Strike Videos The first marketing campaign that gained anticipation among the audience about the movie is the “Strike”  videos. Generated and executed successfully by the Trigger Edge, these videos are five promos named as Night Vision, Revenge, Stealth Mode and others that were part of the film’s narrative. This was the beginning of the attention-grabbing process of the movie’s promotions. #UriDeceptiveStrikes Briefly after this, they came up with #UriDeceptiveStrikes that came up as a surprise to most of the people watching them. They conducted a press conference with Yami Gautam where she was asked a bunch of questions by the team. When the question about the surgical strike popped up, all the soldiers along with Vicky Kaushal resurfaced from behind, showing the theme of the entire movie. It turned out they were standing in the background the entire time and went unnoticed until the end, talking about how they want to attack their enemies in silence in their movie Uri: The Surgical Strike . Step Two of the Strike With The Google Assistant: “talk to the surgical strike” Vicky Kaushal from a still in Uri The marketing team of Uri went to another level and collaborated with Google Assistant through Dentsu Webchutney. They made a clip of Vicky and Yami interrogating with a suspected terrorist while asking their audience to do the same through the Google Assistant. The audience just had to say ‘talk to the surgical strike’ , and they would get the opportunity to interrogate the terrorist themselves. This marketing campaign was a massive success and was lauded for its smart use of tech. People have been talking to Google Assistant about this and sharing videos of the same on social media networking sites like Instagram and Facebook and spreading the word about the movie. #HowsTheJosh Using the famous hashtag #HowsTheJosh, all the actors and crew of Uri especially the lead actors have garnered the attention of the viewers by encouraging them to chant their dialogue “How’s the Josh? High Sir!” and upload videos about the same . This strategy has helped them reach every single person in households of the viewers, pulling them all to the screens to see about how high the josh is! The Ultimate Anti-Piracy Surgical Strike The Anti-Piracy Video Even after releasing the movie, the makers of Uri have been keen on avoiding piracy to help their business from collapsing. When they noticed the torrents uploaded on the website, they took them down and instead replaced them with a 3.8 GB video that they made by themselves. Falling in the trap, a lot of people have downloaded and opened the video to find the lead actors Yami Gautam and Vicky Kaushal asking them not to watch pirated movies and encouraging them to watch the movie at the theatre. They also depicted how they carried out a ‘surgical strike’ on the audience who wished to watch the movie through piracy. This has impacted a lot of viewers who saw it as a brilliant move. Keeping aside the striking marketing campaigns, Uri: The Surgical Strike made its place in the hearts of the viewers through the wonderful taking of the movie alongside actors who gave their best. It really has set the josh high and now even if you ask a kid, “How’s the Josh?” he’s going to reply, “High Sir!” The first marketing campaign that gained anticipation among the audience about the movie is the “Strike”  videos. Generated and executed successfully by the Trigger Edge, these videos are five promos named as Night Vision, Revenge, Stealth Mode and others that were out of film content. This was the beginning of the audience attention on the process of the movie. Briefly after this, they came up with #UriDeceptiveStrikes that came up as a surprise to most of the people watching them. They conducted a press conference with Yami Gautam where she was asked a bunch of questions by the team. When the question about the surgical strike popped up, all the soldiers along with Vicky Kaushal resurfaced from behind, showing the theme of the entire movie. It turned out they were standing in the background the entire time and went unnoticed until the end, talking about how they want to attack their enemies in silence in their movie Uri . The marketing team of Uri went to another level and collaborated with the Google Assistant through Dentsu Webchutney. They made a clip of Vicky and Yami interrogating with a suspected terrorist while asking their audience to do the same through the Google Assistant. The audience just had to say ‘talk to the surgical strike’ , and they would get the opportunity to interrogate with the terrorist themselves. This marketing campaign went to leaps and bounds that reached the audience on a larger front. People have been talking to Google Assistant about this and sharing videos of the same on social media networking sites like Instagram and Facebook and spreading the word about the movie. Using the famous hashtag #HowsTheJosh, all the actors and crew of Uri especially the lead actors have garnered the attention of the viewers by encouraging them to chant their dialogue “How’s the Josh? High Sir!” and upload videos about the same. This strategy has helped reach every single person in households of the viewers, pulling them all to the screens to see about how high the josh is! Even after releasing the movie, the makers of Uri have been keen on avoiding piracy to help their business from collapsing. When they noticed the torrents uploaded on the website, they took them down and instead replaced them with a 3.8 GB video that they made by themselves. Falling in the trap, a lot of people have downloaded and opened the video to find the lead actors Yami Gautam and Vicky Kaushal asking them not to watch pirated movies and encouraging them to watch the movie at the theatre. They also depicted how they carried out a ‘ surgical strike ‘ on the audience who wished to watch the movie through piracy. This has impacted a lot of viewers who thought of it as a brilliant move and went on to watch the movie in the theatre. Uri – The Surgical Strike released on 11th January 2019 and went on to enter the 100 crore club very soon. Keeping aside the striking marketing campaigns, Uri made its place in the hearts of the viewers through the wonderful taking of the movie alongside actors who gave their best. It really has set the josh high and now even if you ask a kid, “How’s the Josh?” he’s going to reply, “High Sir!”
Visiting Palampur? Check Out This One Of The Best Hotels To Stay In Palampur:	Palampur, a beautiful hill station in Himachal Pradesh is the tea capital of Northwest India. The beauty of the place enhances 2x when there is endless streams flowing from in the region. Who doesn’t like clicking Instagram worthy pictures besides a river? Looking for a perfect weekend getaway to relax in the lap of nature? Well, you will be left spellbound by Palampur’s lush green tea plantations and panoramic views of the snow-capped mountain range. One of the major attractions of this exotic location is its adventure sports – paragliding! Get an adrenaline rush with Paragliding at Bir Billing Touch the sky by flying in the air and the aerial view of Himachal Pradesh surrounded by snow-capped mountains. Temple visits Palampur is an outstanding location to seek blessings at various temples.  Seek blessings at the famous Baijnath Temple, one of the oldest temples of Lord Shiva. Trek to the Birni Devi Temple to enjoy the scenic view of the valley from the top. A pleasant stay during vacation can double the fun. Bagora Heights Hotel, approximately 20 minutes from Palampur Bus Stand is one of the best hotels to stay in Palampur which offers great hospitality and a splendid view of the mountains which will make you re-visit Palampur. The view from your room’s balcony will rejoice you with its beauty as the sun hides between the mountains and this astonishing view will remind you of your childhoods painting of sunset amidst mountains. Bagora Heights also offers you hot and cold air conditioning in the rooms which makes this place comfortable to stay in all seasons. Who wouldn’t want to get the picturesque view from the hotel in a hill station of North India? A picture perfect is the main reason why the hill stations of the Himalayan region are in our bucket list today. Now, that you have to come here for the splendid view, the view from your hotel should be picturesque and Bagora heights meets all your expectations without fail. Bagora Heights Hotel is surrounded by snow-capped mountains throughout the year. Bagora Heights Hotel offers you a well-maintained garden within the hotel to relax in its lush green beauty. Away from the pollution, and citie’s hustle-bustle, enjoy nature in its full glory with fresh air which you will totally miss once you are back to your city! This picture perfect location makes a beautiful place for your pre-wedding shoot. The view of the surrounding makes this a romantic place for couples. Excited for Paragliding? Here is the sight of paragliding visible from Bagora Heights Hotel and prepare yourself for this adventure sport. Fly through the air to get an astounding view of the snow-capped Dhauladhar range. So, get ready to touch the sky and fly like a bird. Bir Billing is approximately 1 hour 20 minutes from Bagora Heights Hotel. 20 mins from Bagora Heights Hotel , this picnic spot is perfect for spending quality time with family and friends. You can sit near the water stream and relax yourself. Bagora Heights offers home-like amenities to its guests well complemented by highly efficient staff. It is one of the best place in Palampur to enjoy the home like stay. Bagora Heights Hotel is one of the best hotels in Palampur that offers accommodation at reasonable rates. The rooms are well equipped with all the modern amenities like Wi-Fi connectivity, HD Television, and Intercom Connectivity. Bagora Heights Hotel offers some of the best services in a town like 24-Hour help Desk, tight security round the clock, Airport Shuttle and restaurant that offers lip-smacking food options. These facilities offered by the hotel ensures comfort at all levels. By Air The nearest airport is about 35 kms i.e. the Dharamshala Airport. Take a taxi to reach Palampur in an hour. By Train Palampur hill station is well connected with all the trains passing through Chandigarh, Shimla, Manali and many other tourist destinations. By Road It is about 490 kms away from Delhi and there are many buses and taxis available which connects Palampur with major cities like Mandi, Pathankot, Shimla in Himachal Pradesh. The prime location of Bagora Heights will make you appreciate the beauty of Palampur in Himachal Pradesh. Watch the serenity of nature, enjoy the splendid view of the beautiful Himalayas and chirping sounds of the birds. Who wouldn’t want to get complete peace of mind with nature at its best serving us to appreciate its beauty? You can book your stay with Bagora Heights On Their Website: http://www.bagoraheights.com Bagora Heights contact number +91-8447839703 e-mail: bagoraheights@gmail.com
Buy Flats And Apartment in Dubai with Azizi Developments:	Most of us share a common dream. The dream that makes us feel like we belong somewhere in the world, a dream that gives safe heaven to stay for the rest of our life. The dream of buying a house. When buying a flat in Dubai, the location you choose plays a significant role in determining the value of the investment that you put in buying the apartment. Owning a house in Dubai these days is an excellent investment from an ROI point of view and of course, it gives a good feeling to own a flat in Dubai. Not only this, but the additional facility you get in the area is the easy to travel metro line that is being added in this locality owing to the Expo 2020. The Expo 2020 attracts traders from all over the world, eyeing for properties in Dubai to increase their investment. So it would be best to get your hands on these offers before they get to it. You can also reach to the famous Dubai landmarks easily from this place and get the best-in-class amenities that you would be looking forward to. In addition to this, you also get the best payment plan that is flexible to the core, offering an ROI higher than 10%, and also you can obtain your house by just paying 10% of the down payment fees. This wonderful development located amidst the Sheik Zayed Road and the Mohammed Bin Zayed Road has flats for sale in Dubai for every one of you. They have 1 bhk flats for sale in Dubai for those who are looking for a compact house and 2 bhk flats for sale in Dubai for those eyeing the spacier ones. You name it, and they have it. Here is how luxurious the projects under Al Furjan will look like: Azizi Samia: Closest to the EXPO 2020’s location, the Samia Azizi offers Studios starting from AED 489,881 for all those who are eyeing the EXPO 2020. Azizi Star: The Studios in Azizi Star start from AED 501,107; offering your the best of services that you can think of. Azizi Farishta: The Azizi Farishta’s Studios begin from AED 489,138 and they are right after the Star, with a stellar location advantage. Azizi Plaza: Located right beside Farishta, the Azizi Plaza offers Studios starting from AED 486,119 alongside all the location advantages that Farishta has got. Shaista Azizi: Last and the most luxurious one, the Shaista Azizi offers a single bedroom starting from AED 828,008 owing to the uniqueness it holds, that makes it stand apart from the crowd. Imagine being able to move into the house after paying only 10% of the amount. The rest you can pay 75% on handover and the other 15% after the handover. All this along with 3 years of free service charge. What else do you need? Go ahead and book your studios before it’s too late and you lose your opportunity on an excellent investment. Contact at +91 8826636393 by call or WhatsApp for your flat booking inquiries at Al Furjan, Azizi Development
Best Hotel With Swimming Pool In Shimla:	Planning your next vacation on the hills? Well, then Shimla is one of the best places to visit in northern India. The cold wind, tall snow-covered mountains, and greenery all around are so dreamlike that you’d want to stay a little longer. To have a comfortable stay throughout your journey is very crucial, and in Shimla, Hotel Hot Spring is a right choice for a luxurious stay in Shimla. Hotel Hot Spring, is the best hotel with swimming pool in Shimla provides a homelike feeling to the guests and has facilities that you will not find elsewhere. They are specialized in Healing, Wellness SPA, Ayurveda Yoga, Retreat Detox Programs, Relaxation Programs, Slimming programs, Massage.  And if you love swimming, it has a swimming pool as well, making it the best hotel with swimming pool in Shimla! You must have been to various hotels during your vacations, but what makes Hotel Hot Spring special? Well, the kind of facilities it offers is commendable. The unique facilities and services provided by the hotel are: Don’t you think this is exciting? Then, book your accommodation in Shimla at the earliest and enjoy their hospitality. You will taken aback with the hospitality they provide. Hotel Hot Spring is known for its involvement in both outdoor and indoor activities. You can also visit some romantic locations around Shimla. The view and surrounding of the Hotel will definitely give you some beautiful Instagram worthy pictures and add them to your social media. Your friends and family will surely message you are asking about the place, and you’d definitely want to recommend Hotel Hot Spring to them. Click on the link below and experience the serenity like never before at the best hotel with Swimming pool in Shimla!
All You Need to Know About Pro-Kabaddi League 2019:	Dream 11 has continuously been into tuning your sport strategy skills and this time dream11 is going to do that with Pro Kabaddi League 2019. Pro Kabaddi League came into existence in the year 2014 and this 7th season has begun since July where twelve teams will compete on the mats to win the battle. The matches are going across the metro cities of India. Contenders of Pro Kabaddi League 2019 Following is a list of 12 teams who are enthusiastically participating in PKL 2019: Following is a list of 12 teams who are enthusiastically participating in PKL 2019: Patna Pirates: Masters of PKL, Patna Pirates have set standards for other teams in point-scoring. They have been champions of three seasons and this is the team which is working hard to win the trophy. Selecting right players for your fantasy team is what makes you win the name and here is a list of top five players: 1.       Pradeep Ranwal: Captian of Patna Pirates, who has already bagged the title of most valuable player can be a significant asset for your team. 2.       Vishal Bharadwaj: A young defender from Telugu Titians is known for his fantastic game sense. His robust defence and attack on raiders have always grabbed the eyes of other teams and the audience. 3.       Fazel Atrachali: Awarded as the best defender, Fazel Atrachali will make it impossible for the raiders to overcome this defence. Labelled as a dominant player, he is one of the most successful players of Pro Kabbadi League. 4.       Nitesh Kumar: Star defender , Nitish Kumar has scored a century of tackle points in the last season. Raiders cannot overcome his ankle attack, and he can change the game with his great sense of timing. 5.       Parvesh Bhainswal: He is a defender, left cover player is dominant, quick and dart well. Aged about 20, this player has come back with more strength and power to perform better. Fans are eagerly waiting for their favourite teams to play every day and we cannot wait to see who’s going to brag the trophy this season. So tune in to PKL and keep the excitement alive! Featured image source: hotstar
Plan a Perfect Getaway with Your Better Half In Himachal Pradesh:	Himachal Pradesh isone of the best states in India to pick up for holidaying. With mountain peakscovered in snow, deodar thick forests, apple orchards and snowfalls cities likeMashobra, Shimla has become one of the most preferred destinations of the tourists.If you are planning a trip with your spouse to sparkle the romance, then youmust select one of the best hotels in Mashobra Shimla. Planning a holiday can be exciting and selecting the right hotel for your stay can be confusing! Here are some handy tips which will simplify your steps for choosing the best hotel: A room with a view is a must – Holidaying in Shimla and other hill stations cannot be complete without a panoramic view of the Himalayan outside your window or balcony of the room Look for the activities they offer – you need some time away from the city noise and outdoor events. Check if they havea dining option – you wouldn’t like travelling back from the hotel in search offood after a tiring day. Check for romanticactivities offered – if you are travelling with your significant half to spiceyour love life then do check if they provide passionate services. With these things in place, your holiday can become one of the most memorable experiences with the best hotel in Mashobra Shimla you choose to stay with. You can spend an entire day at The Nilaya Resort admiring the natural beauty of Himalayan Peaks drenched in cloud and snow. The Nilaya offers a nature walk of 20 to 120 minutes in the nearby areas of Mashobra, which is going to be a lifetime experience as you pass through thick deodar forest. Like it happens in movies, The Nilaya has taken a step to make it happen in the real-life of couples. They offer star gazing activity after 11 pm in the night, which is going to be the most romantic time for both of you.   You will enjoy your time with your partner at The Nilaya as they have rooftop restaurants, patios where you can enjoy some music, food and the Himachal beauty. Himachali thalis are known for its fantastic taste and variety, and you must try them. The Nilaya Resort also offers various cuisine. Indoor games are fun, and The Nilaya has arranged a room for indoor games like foosball, pool table, carrom and many other board games. Games can really bring fun and laughter along with bringing out love for each other. Mashobra is known for many adventurous activities, and one fun activity for you as a couple would be biking! The Nilaya is regarded as the best hotel in Mashobra Shimla as they arrange these activities for you on request so that you have all the fun and do not go back home with incomplete exploration to Mashobra. Mashobra is locatedaround 11kms from Shimla, and you can reach via a taxi or bus. Nearest Airport:Shimla Nearest Railway Station: Shimla and Chandigarh. The Nilaya is best with arrangements for couples – be it in the woods or on roof top. The Nilaya has surprises in store for proposals, pre-wedding shoots, wedding receptions and also anniversary celebrations .
Why You Hate It So Much When You Don’t Get A Text Back?:	It is a matter to ponder upon how easy it has become to make someone realize they are ignoring you. All one needs to do is to ignore your text message; a well crafted, well thought out and expectant text which took you about 3 re-reads of their message and 5 whole editing sessions of your own, before you pressed that ‘send’ button.  Now is the perfect time to insert this phrase ‘Technology Sucks!’. It’s not that you have never been the culprit yourself; it’s only that this time it is you who is at the receiving end of this seemingly nugatory but actually too mortifying action. The avant-garde of all what they can do to instantly make you feel embarrassed and vulnerable, leaves you all exposed to the person who you so expected to get a reply from but all that they sent you was a head full of thoughts and an exceedingly long wait. Still, what is that one thing that makes it so annoying to any recipient (ironic, since all you want is to ‘receive’ that reply!)? Perhaps, it’s the void that is left there, that makes it so vexatious! And why not, after all, even while typing the text, you conceived what would be their probable reply, and even smiled to yourself feeling silly. But not more than how silly or rather stupid you feel now awaiting their text which seems to be on a permanent hold. It is this void or space that is the nuisance at its zenith; for its the time when you get all kinds of self-doubts when you mercilessly shred every singly word of your text again and again in hopes to catch the miscreant that must have caused this person to tick off and stop responding to you! This is the time when the devil comfortably settles down in his little workshop and makes you think all kinds of nasty things they must be thinking about you and making you feel more and more empty and unsure of yourself. However, while you read this I know you would be thinking of all those times you have been through this foolishness even when knowing its nothing more than just that. But even so, you would still freak out and self contemplate every single time someone delays or forgets to reply you back. Featured Image Source
It’s Either White Or Black In A Relationship. Not Grey.:	There’s this cute guy in your class with whom you grab a bite now and then. He asks you out often to catch a movie with him and you think or rather wish you are the only one he calls to for that. But of course you aren’t sure and even more than that can’t fathom asking him so. Similarly, he could be seeing this lovely girl next door who may call her to fix broken things or hang out after the gym but he has no way to know if that’s because they have something between them or if he’s just an another guy friend to her. Or worse…. he and maybe even you could be ‘on the hook’. If this is going on for a while now and you still can’t define this ‘thing’ between you two and aren’t even sure if it’s exclusively with you or the guy/the girl that you are kinda seeing now is actually seeing someone else too on the side (or behind your back), one thing is certain, you are my friend in the ‘grey’ area. You know, that gloomy shade that’s somewhere between the black and the white? You are certainly in that. Oh no. Don’t dare take it as something good. ‘Grey’ can be and probably is sexy and desirable only in the erotic novel, not in the real life. You are no Anastasia Steele and that grey area I’m talking about is nowhere close to Christian Grey either. In fact it’s something that you must be wary of from the start. Courtship period is something everyone desires and enjoys too. The uncertainty there is nice in its own unique way. That’s what makes you blush and excited at the same time. It’s actually healthy for a relationship to begin. But that’s the twist. It is good when you have at least this much of certainty that this half baked relationship (if it’s even that), that’s spurring between you is going somewhere. You have a feeling then that he/she may only be shy and not yet ready to commit yet but yes you know that there is definitely a green signal somewhere down the road that will be visible once you drive down the lane a bit further. But if that person is available at his/her own will alone, calls you to make plans only at the last moments and stays off the grid for long and without a warning beforehand, then be assured you are not reaching any green light. Believe it or not there’s not even a road ahead to reach anywhere. It’s the dead end or something far worse, it’s that darn Blair Witch Project that will make you go round and round but return you to the same spot with no progress whatsoever. For some, this could be a dream come true. With no strings attached and apparently no psycho girlfriend/boyfriend to put a noose around your neck, they are a free bird to wander and yet have a home to come back to. But unlike these, most of you who need and want something real, someone to actually call your man or your girl, to rely on, feel cared for and have some stability in life; it can prove to be a living nightmare. Being in the ‘grey’ area eats you up; at least emotionally it does. Most crave the more certain and relaxing black or white zones; a defined area which allows you to label them as ‘yours’; if black, then your friend (or the top name on your hit list) and if white, congratulations you got yourself a bae! So, getting stuck in the dull, gloomy, emotionally breaching and frustrating synonym for hell is no choice. Instead of sleeping on a wet sponge of a pillow and blaming and questioning yourself fruitlessly in the shower, gather some courage and shoot the question on them instead. At least they aren’t mute like your shower curtain; they’ll definitely have something to say. Good for you or bad that’s secondary. But anyway it’s always the best to define your relationship and mingle happily or even to stay single some more and enjoy the free and me time till you find the right one. Featured Image Source
Should A Girl Expect Her Date To Be A Gentleman:	Gentleman. What or who is he? Google describes a gentleman as someone who is a chivalrous, courteous or an honourable man. Hmm… interesting. And what’s interesting is that it is something that every girl wants, isn’t it? Perhaps ‘Are you kidding me?! Of course yes!’ or perhaps  ‘Mmm…. I don’t know’. While most of the girls (and truthfully) will go with the first answer, some like me would go for the second. The reason? Well, the second Google definition may help shed some light on it. It says, ‘gentleman’ is a polite or a formal way of referring to a man. For all those who are still batting their eyelids, with a huge question mark hanging above their heads, it simply means we assume or bestow this title on someone. That someone who is courteous or rather who fits the age old picture of the fathomed ideal man. A man who would be considerate enough to lift a heavy bag for a girl or who would willing volunteer to squish a spider that scared you Miss Muffet away. While these all seem like dreamy and gorgeous ways to make you feel like a delicate damsel, let’s not forget they are also the ancient norms of behaviour for men, jotted down by the same born octogenarians who also set certain rules of conduct for the ‘ladies’. While you are so fiercely fighting tooth and nail for your own rights of equality why do you think it is okay to let the men be left shackled in their old school? The women are shouting out slogans everyday to empower them, let them wear what they like, be out till whatever time they feel like and be given equal positions and wages at their jobs. Then why do you still expect the guys to pay the bill every single time you go on a date? Why would you prefer he pull the chair for you? And why would you remain seated till he walks all the way over to your side to open the car’s door? Some of these gentlemanly ways are nice and do make you feel respected and courteous like offering a seat to a pregnant lady in the crowded metro or greeting your mom with a namaste . And some others like talking in a polite manner are just good etiquettes. These can and should be a part of anyone’s character, be it a girl or a guy. But other than these, matters like him wearing baggy shorts, fashioning long hair or getting tattooed shouldn’t be considered as indecent or anti gentleman actions. The guys too need freedom just like the women do. Undue expectations from a guy in the name of gentlemanly antics is not only injustice but also far fetched as far as dating is concerned. After all don’t you like it when a guy is playful, witty and pulls your leg? Don’t you want him to give you the space to go anywhere without him putting a tab on you in the name of protection? And won’t you like to give them a treat when you get promoted? The expectations or rather the rules the society has enforced on the guys has led you to think it is the only criteria to identify the nice guys from the rest of the rotten tomatoes. For all you know he could only be donning the said ‘gentleman’ façade only to get in your pants. So, be the change. Look beyond the societal standards and learn to look deep into a guy’s core to pick out the one who is actually nice minus the unnecessary frills. And lest you know, chivalry isn’t dead, though unfair presuppositions should be. Featured Image Source : 50 Firstdates movie
19 Brilliant Date Ideas For The Artsy Girlfriend:	When your girl’s an artsy one you have to work it up hard to meet the level of creativity that she has. Planning a creative, artsy and fun date is one of the many such things. To impress and to show her what she means to you and how much you care and respect her interests, we have some brilliant date ideas for you to take her on for a memorable time together. Yash Raj Films image source image source Yash Raj Films image source/ Featured Image Source / Balaji Motion Pictures
8 Signs Of A Truly Trendy Girl And How To Cope With Dating Her:	Who doesn’t love a trendy girl? The girl rules every heart with her perfect look that’s the craze of the day. A trendy girl is not necessarily obsessed about fashion and latest trends but sure does love keeping herself chic and looking beautiful all the time. And why not, that’s her right, isn’t it? So, if you are hooked onto her, this is what you need to know about her and how to cope dating her. 1. She wants to look all; sometimes cute, others trendy and still others plain beautiful… so unless you can figure that out from her look of the day and deliver appropriate responses/praises, you don’t have it in you to qualify as her boyfriend. Eros International   2. This is the reason why you need to garner patience and brave the mini-fashion shows she would entertain you with after each session of shopping , which mind you would be quite frequent. image source / Featured Image Source / Dharma Productions   3. Zara and Pantaloons vouchers will always be welcome be it it for her birthday, anniversary or the numerous you-love-her days. image source   4. You should always be ready to freeze to almost death on winter night dates for she will never hide her cute dress she just bought for some lame idea of saving herself from cold winds, until of course she feels the cold and spots you! image source / Yash Raj Films   5. She is going to spend all her food money too on boots , so be ready to sympathise and occasionally lend her money for a new peplum dress or even a designer poncho. image source   6. As long as it’s trendy and in fashion, she’s going to try it all so don’t freak out if you see her one day in something you can’t make head or tail of or her hair dyed in mermaid hues. Yash Raj Films   7. Don’t be alarmed if she takes an hour in the loo every time she excuses herself from your ongoing date. She’s just doing touch up of every make-up article she has on her and taking selfies after each application. So, chill and eat your soup. image source   8. And she will say she doesn’t have anything to wear a lot. And so, even though you know it isn’t true, just be nice an nod your head but don’t ever try to pull out something from her wardrobe or advice her to wear the dress she wore in some party the other night. image source
Before You Expect A Happy Relationship Be Happy Yourself:	Nobody can emphasize enough how important it is to keep smiling. I’m not telling you to follow Charlie Chaplin and keep making people laugh and cry when it rains so nobody can find out you’re sad. What I’m saying is that being sad is fine. Being upset is also fine. And so is being angry. These are as much part of life as is a smile, a laugh or a giggle. But don’t be a person who has secretly vowed to the Sacred Society of The Frown Brothers. Or Sisters, doesn’t matter. If you are annoyed or upset over something, no person can be better than your beau to pester with your tear tales. But the process must not be as common as the frequency of you taking your selfies in the loo. Okay, so you got it now. When you have a low self esteem or are unhappy with your own life, it clearly reflects in your relationship as well. If it becomes more of a constant routine, it starts affecting both of your lives and the relationship as well making it dull and painful. What you bring then to your dinner table is not the dazzling smile that lights up the atmosphere but something that turns it into a gloom fest. Do not misunderstand though. Your partner is meant to be there with you in all your happy and sad times with special reference to the sick ones when you have had a tad too much. But then they are there because they love you, which if we take out the clichéd Bollywood version of love at first sight, clearly translates into seeing you happy and smiling always. Now, by the same logic doesn’t that apply to you as well? If you want to see them happy and by a totally not far- fetched extension, your relationship, you need to start loving yourself first. How on earth can you ever imagine otherwise to love and take care of an another human being? And forget being thoughtful or romantic then! Being happy is not that a Herculean task either. Whatever that they say about meditating, taking a walk in fresh air, doing yoga or sharing your meal with your loved one is bogus, except it’s not. Do these and try to be content with your life. And when you do have to face untoward situations, please contact your beau. They’ll just be a call away to be there for you. Now, that’s another reason to smile, isn’t it? Featured Image Source
9 Truths Of Dating A Chatterbox:	When you are dating a chatterbox some things come by as a given. The utterly chirpy beau may be too noisy and irritating at times talking on and on and on but at the same time he can be cute and extremely loving. Read on to find out the real truths only that person who is dating a chatterbox can relate to. image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Visions Ltd.      
19 Things About A Carefree Girl That Make You Thank Your Stars That You Are Dating Her:	It is a common thing for a person to find himself drawn to his stark opposite. So, if you are an uptight and careful person you are most likely to be attracted by a truly carefree and free spirited one. A carefree girl is not careless, it is just that she has learnt the skill of taking life lightly as it has always meant to be. It is both refreshing and amazing to date a girl like that. If you too are dating such a girl, you can’t help but thank your stars for you being with her. image source / AA Films
15 Things That Prove Single Dads Make The Best Dates:	Are you looking for love but leaving single dads out? Not a good idea. For all you know, they have the potential of being the best dates possible. These guys are undoubtedly the most loving, caring and selfless persons you can ever date. Why you ask? That’s because they have their amazing toddlers cum grooming team to take care of that. Read on to find more. image source
14 Commandments Of Dating A Go-Getter You Should Never Break:	A go-getter is someone who knows what he wants and how to get it. He is ambitious, workaholic and doesn’t and can’t stop at anything to achieve his goal. A go-getter has his aim sorted out and his passion is fiery. If you are dating or want to date someone like that, you should better get acquainted and accustomed to some of his ways which may seem cold and selfish from a distant look but are in fact nothing more than a reflection of someone who is passionate about his dreams. Here are 14 commandments that you must clearly understand and not break at any cost if you want to date this go-getter. image source / Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures He is making the best of his time to achieve his dreams, which is his foremost goal and then to be with you in the left time because he wants to be with you. So, questioning his liking for you on the basis of the amount of time he spends with you is not the right way to look at the relationship.   When there are two things that need his attention, his work and his relationship. He’ll pick the former one first always. That’s not because he does’t care but only because his work is his priority.   He isn’t the commitment type of a guy so trying to force that out of him is not going to work. Solution? Let him breathe, get comfortable and do it in his own sweet time.   He’s the type of guy who doesn’t have time for games. If he does commit to you it mean he really enjoys your company as much as he enjoys his work and given his love for his work, that’s a big thing. So, instead of doubting him on the basis of his priority or the amount of time he spends over work, is only duping yourself.   There will be a lot of business talk, project ideas and work humour when your are with him. It may sound like gibberish to you but he’s actually sharing his most loved passion with you and that’s all because he feels you are an important part of his life.   It will be a common scenario for him to suddenly transfer into a completely different zone when he hits on a solution for a work problem while in a conversation with you. What’s important to know here is that, it’s not because he’s not interested in what you are saying but because work is more than just a part of his life, so it is always on his mind.   He can celebrate his success for a day or two but don’t expect him to linger onto that forever. The next instant he’ll be at his workstation to give himself a reason to celebrate an another victory with you. You may think he is exhausted but in reality, this is just how he keeps going.   His work needs his undivided attention. Stopping to talk to you only breaks his train of thought which is bad for his work. So, wait till he finishes because he blocks away every noise and other disturbing elements just to concentrate well on his work.   When dating a go-getter, there is a lot of future plans in the conversation. He is so interested in the future because it helps him to keep his mind clear and him focussed on his goal. So, if he isn’t dwelling on the past memorable moments you shared or talking about the present, it doesn’t necessarily mean you aren’t in his future plans.   He doesn’t need something to get rid off his loneliness or boredom and he isn’t there because it’s convenient for him. If that had been the case, he would have been working rather than being with you. Right? If he chooses to hang out with you than bury his head in his project, it’s actually because he likes to be with you above and beyond anything else.   Go-getters are intellectual people. He would appreciate it more if the date be productive and fun at the same time than be the routine movie and dinner date. For him, an ideal date is more about taking different classes together, travelling somewhere, attending business conferences and fairs and reading books or magazines side by side and perhaps having an interesting discussion or even a debate.   The fact that he hangs out with you, shares his deepest passions and dreams with you is because he wants, rather needs his partner’s support. So, instead of shutting him out for being too workaholic or selfish, try to be understanding and support him in his endeavours.   There is nothing more boring to him than a girl who doesn’t have a life and aspirations of her own. Live your life, enjoy it and  work up your passion because that’s what he truly respects and seeks in his beau. If you can be ambitious yourself and appreciate him too for for that, there is no denying he will be so much devoted to you.   He may already be successful or may have everything in him to be so. So, if you always dreamt of being with someone with power and the courage to earn that, a go-getter is one for you.
9 Signs Of A Truly Equal Relationship:	A happy relationship calls for equality between the couple. It is not something to keep on giving or keep on receiving but something where there is mutual agreement, understating and sharing. When there are equal efforts from both the sides, only then can a relation stand strong and stay loving throughout. Dharma Productions   Yash Raj Films   Reliance Pictures   image source   image source / Kaleidoscope Entertainment- Madras Talkies- Yash Raj Films   image source / Eros International   Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   Reliance Pictures
12 Things To Keep In Mind When Dating A Girl Who’s A Party Hopper:	She is a queer and unique person who definitely has some very different ways of life. When the others tuck themselves into their beds, she revs up her car’s engine to join her league in a night of incessant dance and booze. So, if your girlfriend is this girl, congratulations, you are already in a world of a party hopper’s crazy, fun and nightless days. Like every relationship, a relationship with a party animal too is full of turns and twists, and often unusual ones too. You can learn to get accustomed to your girl’s colourful and loud lifestyle the hard way from experience or you can read the following list and help yourself to fit in and make your relationship with her, a success. image source / Eros International If you are not the party type person and yet she is dating you, she must really like you for your laid back charm. But that doesn’t mean you have to overdo it. You must still try to be outgoing for her.   Just because you return home right at 8pm, while she chooses to stay up late partying with her friends, doesn’t imply you are better.   Of course it doesn’t need to be only you trying to fit in her crazy night schedules; she too must make compromises and amendments in her lifestyle for your sake but trying to change her for your own selfishness is not good either.   A party hopper has her calender overstuffed so forgetting your date or getting late for it sometimes is on the menu. Save yourself the disappointment and headache by checking in with her at least 30 minutes before a date.   Okay so your serious and sophisticated charm is what’s gotten her hooked on to you but still you should try to loosen up and realize how lucky you are to have such a fun and lively girl by your side.   It’s stupid, prejudiced and only a total waste of time. Just because she has a bunch of friends dancing with her, is comfortable around opposite sex and shares a laugh or two with them doesn’t make her guilty of cheating on you. So, give that green face a rest and learn to be more trusting.   She is open to have you party hard with her. But there would be times she may just want to be surrounded with her friends and enjoy the night. Respect her feelings. If you love your space, love to be left alone to sleep, watch tv, read, go hiking or whatever, she’s got that right too.   Unless she’s a psychic who can read your thoughts, you need to let her know if something’s bothering you, whether it be her calling you in the wee hours of morning and waking you up or leaving her phone anywhere missing your calls all the time.   If she pukes on a stranger or sings terrible song in front of the crowd and still enjoys it, be happy for her. It’s rare to find someone who can laugh at oneself. Don’t feel embarrassed, instead take a cue from her and join the fun.   She could be really bad at being punctual but she does has some great skills that are admirable. Say, breaking ice with strangers like they never were any, organizing top notch parties or her mastery over making your hangover vanish in a jiffy.   A night in a club with her, some mixed tape of great techno music or just a keg of smooth liquor to enjoy with you… And she’ll be happy.   She is a party hopper so all you need is to take her to some great pub with fantastic music and food. But even apart from that you can always give it a thoughtful and personalized touch by taking her on long drive with peppy music to accompany you, discover crowds and new clubs or go to music festivals together. Also, don’t forget to take her on traditional dates sometimes as well. She’ll appreciate it.
If You Are Goofy, Here Are 12 Reasons Why She’ll Fall For You:	Whenever you ask a girl what qualities does she want in a guy, somehow ‘a good sense of humour’ is one thing that is never amiss. No girl can deny that a guy who can make her giggle like a silly school girl has something about him that’s absolutely electrifying and magnetic. So, if you are well habitual of making your friends snort with laughter, thank your goofy genes because while you are busy pulling an another Chandler, she maybe feeling an unknown attraction towards you right now.  And here is why. image source There’s never a dull moment with you around. You can cheer up anyone and make almost any gathering a lively party.   People need to struggle to keep pace with you while you leave no opportunity to crack a spontaneous joke. And who doesn’t love a witty joker?   Anyone can pull a fart joke but to make her laugh hard till her stomach starts hurting and her eyes watery is an art. Only a well knowledgeable person with a a treasure of funny voices and faces can manage to do that.   Debate took on an ugly turn or a friend got dumped? She knows they can leave it on the jester of the group to drop the temperature of the room. You have it in you to make the most appropriate wisecrack to lighten the dense atmosphere.   She knows that if they leave you in a room full of complete strangers and lock the door, it will only be a matter of minutes before they can hear the voices of laughter from inside. You are an expert at small talk and making friends.   You have the ability to keenly observe the tiniest of details in your environment and find the absurdness in them. This is what makes you a great comedian and imprints you on her mind.   When you can be goofy and laugh at yourself, she automatically finds herself getting comfortable. When with you, she can thus, laugh and not be embarrassed about anything.   Your social skill is what’s to thank for. You make every party a hit with your dry sarcasm, crazy impressions and well timed jokes. This is the reason why her friends tell her what a riot you are besides a great catch.   You would rather share punchlines than punches with anyone. You are known to keep your temper in check and take things easy without giving in to drama.   It takes a secure guy to poke someone or make fun of himself. It is but obvious that a guy who’s comfortable in his shoes will be attractive to her.   You could shoot a joke or two on yourself but it’s evident that humour is a way to mask the complex chest of emotions that lie deep inside of you. And when you are enough at ease to give a sneak peak of it to her, it makes her deeply long for you.   You know the perfect one-liner to make her smile even from the curtains of tears. Your cute smirk and your thoughtfulness is what makes her heart melt. And then my friend, how can she keep herself, from falling for you, that is, if she hasn’t already.
How To Pick Up Girl Easy And Quick, This Disabled Guy Will Boost Your Confidence:	Internet is flooded with new videos of guys doing gold digger pranks. They go and ask a girl out to hang out with them. Initially the girl says no to the guy, but when he pulls up in his Lamborghini, she suddenly gets attracted to him and wants to go out with him. In such a materialistic world , what hope does a disabled person have in meeting the woman of his dreams? This YouTuber named Kshitij from Iron Man Lifestyle believes that all you need to do to meet women is confidence. Not looks, not money and not even the ability to walk. And to prove this, he went in a wheelchair to see if disabled people can meet women or not. The results were shocking. Check it out for yourself in the video below. Liked the story? Do share your reviews with us to help us keep getting good viralstories for you.
This Hindu-Muslim Couple Wedding Celebration Has Stolen The Internet’s Heart:	“ We were dating for a long time and I never knew that this in going to happen “..says Junaid Shaikh. Inter religion marriage is not easy considering the complexity of our culture and rituals and so unfortunate that even today Hindu-Muslim marriage is considered a Taboo in our country. It takes a lot of courage to love someone out of your religion and culture and be with that person for the rest of your life. What moves us the most is Junaid’s words – “ We are just having a celebration, a celebration of 2 cultures and 2 families spending the rest of their lives together” Video source:  Shutterdown – Lakshya Chawla This video has already got more 42k+ views on facebook. Please share Garima & Junaid story with your friends. Lets create more #Garima&Junaid
Ever Imagined How Would It Look Like When 45000 People Sing Vande Mataram Together?..Goosebumps:	Cricket is like a religion for fans in India. This video of World cup final 2014 where the whole Wankhade Stadium was singing Vande Matram with deep feelings of joy and patriotism. What a wonderful feeling it gives to witness such unity in diversity in India. Goosebumps guaranteed. Featured image and video source: Youtube via  Saikiran Balijepalli If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
After 2007, India Won World Cricket T 20 Championship in 2012 As Well! This Man Deserves A High Five:	Unsung heroes ! … this STINGS HARD! When we fail to give due acknowledgement to people who put in their blood and sweat for their passion and their desire to get glory for the nation. What is disability? Is it disability of mind or body? Where there is a will…..we find a way! Hats off to Shekhar Naik , who steered the team to victory of the inaugural World T20 Championship ; – what is so extraordinary??…..let me complete the sentence – who steered the team to victory of the inaugural World T20 Championship for the BLIND IN 2012. There is no disability…..it is a bad attitude which is the biggest disability ! If , despite all odds, the team emerged victorious, then it is time for us to introspect…..are we passionate about something which can impact our society/country in a positive manner…individually/do we have the influencing capacity to garner people and work for the benefit of our country? ; in whatever manner. Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  Pocket Films – Short Films Channel If you like this story, don’t forget to share this with your friends.
Watch Why We Call MS Dhoni Best Finisher In World cricket! ..He Won India Matches Out Of Nowhere… WHOA!:	MSD is India’s most successful captain of all time and has won hearts of millions with his ability to take risk and courage to finish games with even One Man Standing ( Batting with lower order player) Alastair Cook , England’s captain, described  MS Dhoni  as one of the hardest players in the world to bowl to at the death “Dhoni is probably the best player in the world in those situations, in these conditions,” Cook said. “He does it time and time again. He’s incredibly hard to bowl at.” Video credit: Youtube   Featured image credit If you appreciate this brave heart talent of Indian cricket, share this video with y our friends.
Mumbai Girls Asked Simple Questions About Football! Get Ready To Laugh Out Loud:	Football fever is on its peak at social media platforms like facebook and twitter and even if you are not watching a match you are told everything about it on social media by your friends.  We all know that  in this crowd of football crazy people there are even those who behave that they are also one of them who follow football! … though they don’t know the F of football!. Few girls from Mumbai were asked some simple questions about FIFA world cup 2014 and football in general! Q # 1 Which is your favorite team in world cup and  why ? Q# 2  First thing that comes in your mind  when you hear the word football?  Q# 3 What is the  full form of FIFA ? Q# 4 What is the  off side rule ? Q# 5 Who will win the match between  Holland and Netherlands ?  (both are same country) Q# 6 Which country does   Messi play for ? Get ready for a load laugh….hahhahahahhaha Video and featured image source:  Youtube  via  TVFRecycleBin If you enjoyed this story, don’t forget sharing this with your friends.
12 Interesting Facts About Indian Cricket Which Will Leave You Stumped!:	– Edgbaston 2011 – Ishant Sharma drops Alastair Cook – Cook scores 294 – Sydney 2012 – Ishant Sharma drops Michael Clarke – Clarke scores 329* – Wellington 2014 – Ishant Sharma drops Brendon McCullum – He scores 302 image source image source image source In the Prudential World Cup of 1975, in the match between India and England, England set the target of 335 runs in 60 overs. Sunil Gavaskar batted throughout the innings and scored only 36 runs  of 174 balls. India managed to score only 132 runs in 60 overs with 7 wickets in hand. image source image source image source image source image source image source image source image source image source , story inspired by this post on quora Did we miss any? If you like this story, pass it on to your friends.
This Is What Girlfriend And Wife Go Through During IPL…All 3 Are Hilarious But #3..That’s Messed Up!:	This hilarious spoof explains perfectly the agony IPL has brought to many households specially to our better halves . This spoof by  Julaab Gang  has put together the story of such 2  housewives and 1 Girlfriend experiencing the side effects of IPL in the oblivious world of their husbands being glued to television sets during the matches.  It’s got fun moments along with lyrics set to the old song Chup Chup Baithe Ho rendered in a nasal voice. Watch this spoof to find out if you have experienced the same or maybe this turns out to be a eye opener! Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  Julaab Gang If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
15 Hilarious Photoshop Images Of Roger Federer On His Request To Indian Fan On Twitter:	In the past India has contributed a lot in making Gangnam style the most popular video on youtube. We even witnessed Maria Sharapova getting publicity (negative) when Indian social media went mad on her after her comment on Sachin. Roger Federer seems to also have got his place under the sun…his popularity has soared going by the tweets he is getting when he asked a harmless question! A very warm welcome to Incredible India … Roger. India, here I come! Looking forward to playing two matches in Delhi on December 7th & 8th. I’m beyond excited! — Roger Federer (@rogerfederer) September 22, 2014 I need some help from my supporters in India. I’m only in Delhi for a few days, so can’t visit all amazing places that I’d like… — Roger Federer (@rogerfederer) September 23, 2014 Maybe you guys could help #PhotoshopRF ? Show me where I should visit and I’ll retweet the best pics! — Roger Federer (@rogerfederer) September 23, 2014       @rogerfederer You have to enjoy #Navratri in India. 🙂 #PhotoshopRF @deepikapadukone pic.twitter.com/SgqDArU8qy — Niral Desai (@niraldesigner) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer @rogerfederer you can go to the beautiful hills of Tiruvannamalai #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/tvYaVuiQKO — Danielle Mauron (@dm_mauron) September 23, 2014 Look, Haha.♡ RT @rogerfederer kanha national park? #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/RTjNpVwXiz — Juli ± (@Bossanova_Asz) September 23, 2014 HEY RF! do come to chitradurga, KA, India @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF . its a wonderfull place! 😉 #chitradurga pic.twitter.com/9nToeACUDk — Adarsh Davanageri (@adarsHere) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF You could maneuver a coracle in the Hogenekal Falls pic.twitter.com/nBdehF694p — Darshu Tikle Tukaye (@darshutikle) September 24, 2014 Finally Roger Federer will see India and India will see @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/ZiTFVAlSVO — Detelina Genova (@DetelinaVarna) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer You should try out selling bananas as well when you come to India #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/m2lCJjtQTN — Lijo Isac (@lijoisac) September 25, 2014 Federer… like you’ve NEVER seen before: http://t.co/5quAG5etMp #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/KPp4i3b2Ns — Sheena McKenzie (@sheena_mckenzie) September 25, 2014 #PhotoshopRF #rogerfederer @rogerfederer Expierencing Indian culture <3 pic.twitter.com/NwKQGVwGUB — Imperfect_wolf (@Imperfect_wolf) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer This is how Roger Federer enjoys NAVRATRI @ Gujarat. #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/PVeluokhFl — Anil Gupta (@anilgupta003) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer nice car Roger. ..fancy one. How do you see yourself in one like this? Besos .. #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/gR8lugFuju — silvana galdi (@silvyG) September 23, 2014 You need to watch Gunda! @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF #Bollywood pic.twitter.com/IxadbO409p — Sharath (@Sharath14MUFC) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer Get “Fed Up” #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/RhOeY0MHmB — Vijay Menon (@menongitis) September 24, 2014 #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer tries to travel incognito in India… and fails. pic.twitter.com/Y0I5bCe4pU — Jan Van Assche (@janvanasscheB) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer in south indian style !!!! welcome to india Fedex !!! we are waiting 😉 pic.twitter.com/6IZzKLcz9Y — itsmerajhere (@mrajhere) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer refresh yourself amidst the beautiful backwaters of Kerala #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/jItHBba0OR — Arjun Surendran (@arjun_surendran) September 24, 2014 Roger Federer s’amuse avec ses fans indiens #PhotoshopRF http://t.co/FFe43rd2GU pic.twitter.com/cPYatCYLVw — Yves Bourgoin (@YvesBourgoin) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/SMV4ZCSnii — ├┤ⓟⓞⓜ├┤ (@pilouofmontreal) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer in marina beach tamilnadu #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/Q8HKNSLceV — Aravindhsibi (@aravindhsibi) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/7QGYoHSZq4 — Aravindhsibi (@aravindhsibi) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer come to Rajasthan ! Get ready to rock the moustache & turban 🙂 #PhotoshopRF #myfirstTweet #justdoit pic.twitter.com/ygzGzwVPUm — ANJALI SAH (@MsAnjaliSah) September 24, 2014 @themumbaikars Wishes @rogerfederer a Happy Navratri #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/VIfJ4M8qNx — TheMumbaikar (@themumbaikars) September 24, 2014 “ @tweetfromjitu : @rogerfederer hanging out in mumbai local 😛 😀 #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/Htt8qvlrV7 “Ultimate bro — Nikhil Kotian (@Nix_Rising_Star) September 24, 2014 I hope Delhi’s panipuri/golgappas are not too spicy for roger federer… #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/XUUzvFJoIh — Barjinder Singh (@barjindersingh) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer @iptl Getting a taste of the Delhi Street Chaat #PhotoshopRF #Delhi #Chaat pic.twitter.com/EKS0TOZ2R6 — Aastha Mantri (@OCDmantri) September 24, 2014 Omg whoever did this for #PhotoshopRF yesterday,this is epic 😉 pic.twitter.com/LeXRvvfeDl — Yami (@Yamistic) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer You Should Visit #Matrimandir At #Pondicherry Once!!! #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/TqiGj7I9Fl — Gowtham (@GowthamSg2013) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer In Bollywood Singham Style #PhotoshopRF #singhamreturns #Bollywood pic.twitter.com/BOFQvkiUdq — Sarang (@sarangsp) September 24, 2014 It is too late? my contribution with #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer sirvió para desestresarme y reír 🙂 pic.twitter.com/Ft4nIWAR2B — kpi (@kpicol) September 25, 2014 #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer pic.twitter.com/HyzayyOaSi — John Rowe (@johncarync) September 25, 2014 #Federer visits #Mysore . He seems lost. #PhotoshopRF #india pic.twitter.com/LPGr036hc4 — Vinayak swamy (@VinayakSwamy) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF Federer in action at the Kerala Boat Race!! pic.twitter.com/S1ctGhrkXZ — abhishek leslie (@abhishek_leslie) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer Don’t forget to visit #Rajasthan #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/KVFTbbJDEK — Gopesh Bhatra (@1GBTWEET) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer Don’t forget to visit #chokiDhani #Rajasthan #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/9o9PUq6zFf — hardeshsingh (@hardesh23) September 25, 2014 here is tough competition for you @rogerfedrer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/pZhZYL9wMR — Sagar Heerani (@SagarHeerani) September 25, 2014 You’re a very courageous person! #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer pic.twitter.com/YnNaH1Onuv — ö.o (@pemberencir) September 25, 2014 #PhotoshopRF Your Match in Delhi @rogerfederer pic.twitter.com/9KgAqX2ZPd — Micko (@Mikz99) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer playing in India is finally inching closer to reality! #PhotoshopRF #LotusTemple pic.twitter.com/XCrzfTGyE3 — christo shajan (@christoshajan) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer And then there is H.P. lovely places like Kalpa, Sangla, Thirtan Valley, Manali, Shimla #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/sGoeCe3pqu — Beatrice (@Happy_1) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer Sir, maybe we could spot some on field bonding ? Face-off perhaps! @sachin_rt #Legends #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/o4tfjN7xzG — ARUN (@arun_architect) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer go to the Red Fort #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/o13eOBbkxl — Lucía (@brillantino) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF Get your beard trimmed by an Indian Celebrity! You may need to grow a beard first Rog pic.twitter.com/ifO3jcEZpo — Ya Boy Akshat (@TheRajanStudios) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer Swaminarayan Akshardham in New Delhi #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/LSDKfyDBqY — Sharad Patel (@Sharad2020) September 23, 2014 #PhotoshopRF #rogerfederer Lungi Dance pic.twitter.com/69MOfMwgUV — Sebash Carmel (@sebashcarmel) September 25, 2014 LOL. That look on his face! RT @krishashok : #PhotoshopRF Roger Leela pic.twitter.com/NPllqP8XAg — theSubDude (@thesubdude) September 25, 2014 “ @BBCNewsMagazine : The images of Roger Federer in India, created by his fans http://t.co/5FFFWwJra2 #PhotoShopRF pic.twitter.com/7vEUgF6vq9 ” — Shanks (@vermashanks) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer and Mirka in Kerala to resolve the – “Who’s turn to do nappies” – debate once and for all! #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/1IRqQ8XjoY — Subin Jacob (@sozigzag) September 25, 2014 . @rogerfederer When you take a break, don’t forget to take home some sarees 😉 #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/wgBsKLGd8J — HomeShop18 (@HomeShop18) September 25, 2014 images source: twitter.com [mashshare]
This Ground Breaking Cricket Video Will Leave You Giddy With Laughter:	Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via The Satya Show
11 Best Winning Moments In Indian Cricket:	Cricket in our country is nothing short of a religion, with Sachin Tendulkar as the God himself. This epitomizes the madness of cricket in India. Here we live again some of the greatest winning moments that every Indian has witnessed and have made them proud. Nobody gave India a chance against the fearsome West Indies pace attack but a rookie Sunil Gavaskar led the Indian charge and ultimately to a famous series win. image source   India came in as the underdog with West Indies looking to complete the hattrick of World Cups, but like in earlier one, the West Indies juggernaut was halted by determined and dogged Indians led by mercurial Kapil Dev. image source   Many considered India’s victory in the 1983 World Cup as a fluke, but victory in final against the arch rival Pakistan cemented India as the force to reckon with. image source   It was the second World Cup in India and Bangalore witnessed the pulsating quarter final between India and Pakistan which India went on to win with young Ajay Jadeja demolishing Waqar Younis still fresh in every Indian’s mind. image source   It was Tendulkar against the Australian team. The master blaster single handedly led India to one of its most memorable victories. image source   Australia won the opening test match in Mumbai and was on its way in Kolkata as well. But what we saw after India was forced to follow on was an absolute master class from VVS Laxman and Rahul Dravid. Their heroics not only bailed India out of the trouble and made likes of McGrath, Warne and Gillespie look ordinary but along with Harbhajan Singh made sure India won the test and level the series 1-1, which India ultimately won. image source   Chasing 325 runs to win, India was struggling at 146/5 with all the big guns back in the pavilion and not much could be expected from new comers like Yuvraj Singh and Mohammed Kaif. But what transpired after that is considered on the greatest one day comebacks of the modern times. Yuvraj and Kaif (not out till the end) along with the tail enders’ took India to a famous victory. image source   Some consider this innings by Rahul Dravid which gave him the nickname “The Wall”. He single handedly took on the Australian attack and scored a wonderful double hundred in the first innings and a gritty 70 odd not out in the second innings that took India to victory and also not to forget the spell Ajit Agarkar bowled to skittle Australia out for less than 200 in second innings. image source   Mahendra Singh Dhoni led a very young and inexperienced Indian team to its maiden T20 World Cup that helped lift the gloom over the Indian cricket which had surrounded after a dismal 2007 50 over World Cup. image source   India registered arguably one of its most famous overseas test victories when they defeated Australia in Perth (considered to be the fastest pitch in the world) and gave the Aussies a test of their own medicine. image source   Sachin Tendulkar after all those years of sacrifice and sheer determination led India to their second ICC 50 over World Cup, thus giving billions of Indians a reason to smile and to be proud of. image source
15 Sure Shot Signs Of An Indian Sports Fanatic:	We all happen to know at least one such person who is a total sports whiz! They eat, play, watch and pray sports. It could be football, cricket or just about any game…. Uh oh… that brings us to our first sign of a sports fanatic…. image source / Ronnie Screwala   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Red Chilies Entertainment   image source / Sony Pictures- Meteor Pictures   image source / Dharma Productions- Eros International   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source / Red Bus Film Distribution- Fox Searchlight Pictures   image source   image source / Shemaroo- UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source  
ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 Complete Matches Schedule. Gird Your Loins.:	India has always been the odd pool of crazy die hard fans of Cricket. It won’t be wrong to say cricket is a religion in its own here. And so when it comes to world cup series, what else can you expect but a month long gearing up and absolute madness! The ICC Cricket World Cup, 2015, to be jointly hosted by Australia and New Zealand is scheduled to commence from 14th of February 2015 and up till 29th of March, 2015. So, here we bring to you the precise date, day, teams and every damn information that you need to prepare for your madness overloaded days starting next month!! image source  : ctvnews.ca
Chris Gayle Slams Selectors For Pollard And Bravo But No One Stood Up For Yuvraj:	West Indies cricket board and Clive Lloyd-led selection panel announced list of 15 members squad for Cricket world cup 2015 which did not include two West Indian all rounders Kieron Pollard and Dwayne Bravo.  After playing a match winning knock of 90 runs in the second t-20 match against South Africa Chris Gayale hit out at selectors for emission of two most experienced all rounders from the West Indians side and labeled this emission as “ ridiculous “. Gayle said . ” That’s really sad for us. Its really a big blow for us to actually loose two key players and two key all rounders as well who are also good in the out field.  I do not know what is the history behind it but its RIDICULOUS selection from my point of view. I do not know where out cricket is heading with this sort of situation but its really sad.  It really heart, but I am glad that we won this series for Pollard and Bravo. For me it looks like victimization for those two guys.. Its sad!! Common guys, its  RIDICULOUS..i mean RIDICULOUS..it really hurts RIDICULOUS…honestly. I spoke to Bravo, and he told me that the team which we have build for the World Cup is actually rebuilt for the next World cup which I can’t understand what Bravo is telling me as this team is not selected to win the World Cup but basically rebuild it for the next World Cup.. which is RIDICULOUS and I can not just understand what Bravo told me.” source: cricinfo.com featured image source I’m just thankful. Bravo & Pollard – Long Live The King!! Can’t and won’t keep a good man down! http://t.co/K4FHCSBlSc — Chris Gayle (@henrygayle) January 11, 2015 When Indian board selectors left out Yuvraj Singh in the final 15 world cup squad even after scored three back to back centuries in the Ranji trophy matches. No one from the Indian team stood up and spoke about what they feel after the same. They even did not react on inclusion of Stuart Binny in the final 15 for the world cup.
Sangakkara Trolled Ahmad Shahzad By Pretending A Run Out:	Sri Lanka’s legendary cricketer Sankakara trolled Pakistani Ahmad Shahzad in a cheeky way by pretending that ball has reached him and trying to run Shahzad out without ball in his hand, the funny part about the whole incident was that it made Ahmad Shahzad dive in full length which will make you lol. 🙂 Video source:  HD Streamer  /Sony Tv live
How to choose the best online betting site?:	As online gambling has only ever increased its popularityamong punters, more and more online betting sites have cropped up that offeryou incredible value for very little effort. It is said that the search for theperfect online betting site is like having a little adventure , and for many, adventurescan be daunting. Thus, the best online betting sites in India , is sure tohelp you narrow your search as much as possible. There are several key themes that determine what makes anonline betting website good. The more tick boxes each site ticks the better. Wehave covered what we think are the most vital concerns that one may have while choosingan online betting website. Gambling, including its online iteration, has to deal withlegal issues. There are a lot of regulations that concern gambling . Games areoften divided into games of skill and games of chance, and the latter arebanned in several nations, as they fit more into the idea of betting than theformer. Often, online casinos try to violate established regulations, puttingthe customer at risk. In a few ways, online gambling might be safer than itsoffline counterpart, as it eliminates misinformed bookies, but even then, itnever hurts to be safe. While it is not always possible to know every possiblelaw in the book regarding gambling, some quick research about what is allowedand what isn’t goes a long way in keeping you safe. In theory, if a gambling website is good, you should neverhave to resort to customer service at all. However, things are rarely, if atall ideal, and a good customer service goes a long way in ensuring a goodexercise in betting online. What you should be looking out for, while gamblingonline include: There are several varieties of customer care services that are offered. Thesecan range from simple emails to calls to a team of customer support. Some sitesoffer live chat-based customer services, which means that these sites areobviously better in the way they approach customers and there also existsguaranteed response to your question. The problem with emails is that they takea long time to get replies from, while calls have no guaranteed response.Moreover, most betting queries are minor issues that can be resolved by asolitary quick question and do not need a call or an SMS. Thus, websitesoffering live chats are often preferred. Online casinos often have reward systems in place that seekto incentivise players to continue on their site, instead of rival websites.These seek to improve your chance of winning, increase your pay-outs or sometimes even do both. The methods in place includesign ups and referral bonuses for first time gamblers to a website, as well asscore multipliers for veteran punters. Free bets may also be offered where youcan play a risk-free hand and also keep the pay-outs. These bets although, aremostly lost. The most exciting of these offers though, is the increased odds ofwinning. They tend to modify the probabilities the game is based on, resultingin a higher odd tailored to you, so that you have a higher propensity to win agame. Sometimes offers can be clubbed together, making winning even better. Sites which offer variable payment options, covering mostkinds of credit cards, mobile wallets, UPI etc. are always preferred. Immediatedeposits are more often present on sites and need not concern you. Withdrawals are a different headache. Most sites will notlet you withdraw funds once deposited, requiring the entire money invested inthe site to be gambled, often a frustrating experience. For sites that are okaywith withdrawals, quite a few of them take an unending amount of time todeposit the money back to your bank account, which is always a cause ofanxiousness. Thus, your choice should be restricted to sites that give you backyour money within one to three working days of making the request for awithdrawal. Probably the most helpful guide in your choice of the perfect gambling website, is the opinion previous gamblers have about a particular website. Reviews can exist both online and offline. You can ask your peers and colleagues who gamble, about a particular site, or take their recommendations for the best sites, based on the games you want to play. Internet review websites exist, where punters comment on their personal experience with regards to gambling, and it always helps to only restrict yourself to websites that have most, if not all, favorable reviews. Featured image source: screenshot from here 
This Simply Awesome Pingpong ball Chain Reaction Is Nothing Like Anything You Saw Before:	Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Pepsi Max
Shoaib Akhtar’s Scathing Attack On Misbah: ‘I’ve never seen such a coward captain’:	After Pakistan’s 2nd defeat in World Cup 2015 against West Indies, Shohaib Akhtar who is currently watching all matches closely in details during his contract with Start Sports as a Hindi commentator blasted Pakistani team including the coach Waqar. Shoaib Akhtar snaps out !! The level of frustration … do watch !! Video source:  Sushmit Nath  / Geo news channel
Its Getting Better And Better. This Will Make You Dance In Mauka Mauka For Sure:	If you are an not from mars, you must have seen at least one of the “Mauka” ad campaign by Star Cricket which has made success beyond the expectation of the channel. Its getting better day by day. If Indian keeps on winning we will definitely witness more of such ads coming up. Whoever is behind this ad deserves an award for sure. Mauka Mauka..Mauka Mauka 🙂 video and featured image source:  Star Sports 
Is this India’s Best Bowling Attack in Last 2 Decades?:	It is notsurprising to infer the importance of sports in one’s life—right fromgerminating stages, rural India has pushed its children right into the kabaddiground, or maybe in a kite-flying competition, whilst urban India took tohorse-riding, or polo—the ones meant for the esoteric masses, basically. However,there is one game of sports that is a common ground for both aforementionedsections of the country—cricket. The importance cricket plays in the life of anIndian is dividend of the fact that cricket is not just hailed as a game, buthas taken the role of something as astound as the culture of the country—as isevident from the unity one can observe during cricket matches, or in moments that etchitself in history books . Through innumerable victories and losses—Indians have always felt united in times of cricket matches, especially national ones. Similarly, what isn’t surprising is the credibility of the current generation bowling attack—whilst or armchair analysts at 10Cric.com might argue that the bowling attack two decades ago was rather intimidating, there is substantial evidence that the current Indian bowling attack is not just promising, but oozing with potential. While thebowling front led by Kapil Dev might have had a fair amount of success, thereis no denying that the current Indian bowling line-up has proven to beexponentially more effective. Here are a few key elements that have proven tobe profitable for the Indian cricket team, and the individuals responsible forthe success of modern-day bowling in the country. If one isbeing brutally honest, there is no denying that Jasprit Bumrah is possibly thebest fast bowler the country has had in decades. It is a common misconceptionto assume that fast bowlers lack intellectual prowess, and are just about brawnsans brain, but Bumrah proves otherwise; while he has a reputation ofshattering the stumps to oblivion , he is also known to exercise a great deal of intellectduring matches, especially during death overs. Being anexpert in limited-overs format, Bumrah has shown time and time again thatvariable pace and consistent line and length is the key to success—sticking tobasics goes a long way—and this is even more apparent in the IPL where he isfamous (or infamous, depending on which team you support) for conceding aminimum number of runs due to incessant yorkers. Either way, Bumrah can becredited as the single-most important reason why the current bowling attack ispossibly the best the world has seen in decades. It may beslightly unfair to tag Ishant Sharma as a “veteran” per se, considering howconsistent he has been over the span of the entire decade, but there is nodoubt in the fact that Sharma has been a boon to the Indian bowling side. Whileone might have witnessed his recent fantabulous performance in theIndia-Bangladesh test series, it is just a small example of how useful he hasbeen to the Indian side over the entire course of his career, and can berightfully held as one of the pioneers of modern-day fast-paced bowling—thereis no doubt that Sharma is one of the most important reasons why the currentgeneration Indian bowling is so dominant, and why the current bowling ispossibly the most successful in their endeavours. While thepost of Chanakya in politics might becontroversial, there is no doubt that in the Indian cricketing scenario,Yuzvendra Chahal takes the cake. With his sleight of hand and deceptive action,it becomes difficult to read what bowl Chahal will be bowling next—making him asintimidating and effective as his fast-paced counterparts, if not more. He is also known to have a cooltemperament , and him staying calm and collectedhas also resulted in squeezing matches out of losing-lane, no matter howminuscule the margin. Chahal is equally effective in the fieldingdepartment—making him one of the most important assets of modern-day Indianfielding. While the previous generation of bowlers witnessed the spectacularspells of Anil Kumble, there is no denying that Chahal, in his own ways, hasbeen spectacular with both bat and particularly with the ball, making themagician one of the reasons why Indian bowling attack of today is possibly thebest the country has ever witnessed. There might be individual contributions to claim the effectiveness of Indian bowling of today. However, another reason that makes Indian bowlers of today better than any other generation is their efficiency in the field too. A doosra might lead to taking a teesra wicket, but the fundamentals of cricket still remain the same— catches certainly win matches . Featured image source 
Searching For A Rented House Online?….Haha…Oops Sorry…Let Us List The Issues!:	Searching for a rented flat in any city of India is as tough as fitting your feet in a one size small shoe! By God!! It pinches….and harasses!  especially in Metro cities. You think you are a smart alec by applying online ; but alas! those deals are also through the ‘Brokers’. They will ask you your budget and very cleverly you will quote less than what you can afford …but these agents; even more cleverly will take your budget sky high! Your budget – you will get a ‘ashram’ like abode! But you go by their quote and you will find a ‘BEARABLE ‘ please. We have listed down our observations of types of problems we all face while searching for a house on rent. image source: 1 , 2 image source You never get what you read online. If you also experienced something like this, share it with your friends.
18 Hysterically Funny Meme Of Mumbai Metro Rain Water Leakage Which Went Viral:	These meme’s came so quick on internet that we can call India officially a meme country . Dhimant Vyas, an animation film designer by profession created an album called ‘Monsoon just arrived in Mumbai!’ on his Facebook page which trolled across the country.   Creating meme demands creativity with sense of humor by which Dhimant has made everyone smile.  Get ready for a harmless laugh.                If this story made you smile, pass on the joy to your friends on social media by sharing this story.
If Ever Mickey Were To Come To India It Would All Be Exactly Like This:	image source   image source Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Disney India
16 Things Only The One Who Doesn’t Know How To Dance Will Understand:	For some of you people the term ‘having two left feet ‘ totally suits. It is like going to a war every time you have to shake that booty. You can’t do without it because it may be your bro’s baaraat and you can’t do it either because, let’s face it…. You do not know how to dance and this is by no means an exaggeration. And you know it way too well. image source / Sony Pictures- Meteor Pictures   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Filmkraft Productions (I) Pvt. Ltd.   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films   image source   image source / Yash RAj Films   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Eros International   image source / Hari Om Production- Three’s Company- UTV Motion Pictures    image source / Eros International   image source   image source  
Funny Things Indians Would Have Done If Halloween Was An Indian Festival:	Halloween, celebrated every year on October 31st, is a festival of the western countries where they celebrate everything magical, monstrous and of the dead. It may sound repulsive but it actually is a fun-filled and exciting festival where people get to dress up in different costumes, feigning different creatures, celebrities, things and what not! There is absolutely no limitation. The children enjoy the most though; dressing up in fancy costumes and going from one house to another, calling out ‘Trick or Treat’, when the house owners would choose to treat the little monsters with candies and other goodies! Such fun! Isn’t it? Wish we had this in our country too. Wouldn’t it be great then? But how would it be if there indeed was Halloween celebrated in India? image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source image source  / Featured image source: Vega / Video source:  Link Jamesy
Watch The Even Crazier Indian Version Of The Ridiculously Hilarious Gangnam Style:	Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via kaalajack Day
What All Men Expect Travelling Alone In Flight Vs Reality:	People hardly prefer to talk while travelling via flight which makes the journey boring. We met few youngsters and asked them few questions about what they always imagine and expect while boarding a flight alone..and guess what! we got some answers which is probable story of majority of men travelling alone. Its not at all bad to expect a decent company while travelling but unfortunately it does not happen 99/100 times in reality. image source image source: bollypop.in image source image source image source: bollypop.in [mashshare]
9 Pure Genius Ways To Deal With The Annoying Telemarketers:	I don’t mean to be mean and bitchy. I know the poor things are just doing their jobs. But let’s face it, these time- bey time calls really piss you off and you just want to shout in the receiver and threaten them that if they call again it will be a bloodbath! But of course you can’t and won’t do that. So, here are some really terrific ways you can deal with these pesky telemarketers and be sure they will think a thousand times before dialling those 10 digits again! Ask them where are they calling from and pretend you can’t hear them. Shout at the top of your lungs ‘who is it?’, ‘sorry I can’t hear you’. ‘What?’…. And put down the receiver. image source / Eros International   When they call you again ask like a thousand times, ‘ok, so you are calling from where?’. ‘Alright, ‘V’ as in Van?’, ‘Wait a minute., whom did you say you are?’, ‘OK so let me get this straight, you are calling from ….’ and so on. image source / Yash Raj Films   As soon as they introduce themselves, burst out, ‘ Ab tujhe apni ma/ baap ki yaad aayi’?!! Ab kabhi mujhe apni shakal mat dikhana. Tu aj se mere liye mar gaya. ‘!! And put down the reciever. image source/ Red Chillies Production   Or tell them ‘ Ramesh Babu tumne mujhe kahin ka nahin chhoda. Main ja rhi hu is duniya se door. Alvida .’ And if it’s Rashmi baby, say ‘ Anuradha tumne mere sath dhokha kar ke acha nahin kiya. Main ja rha hu .’ image source / SLB Films   Make them feel they dialled a wrong…a very wrong number. ‘ Hello Bhai? Sab maal taiyar hai. Apun apko usich jagah mil jaega theek 12 baje ‘. And put down the phone. image source / Dharma Productions   Simply take your phone and put it in front of your TV running some indecipherable song in a south Indian language at top volume. He also needs to enjoy after all. image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Answer as if you are from an another planet. Make disturbing noises and speak in a seriously unidentified language. Main Youngistan se aaya hoon !! image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Put them on hold. Have a parantha subji roll, watch new movie trailers on YouTube or read a book. But don’t come back. image source   Make this noise. Beeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeepppppppppppppppppppppppppppppp…………………………………………………………………… Well that’s it. Now sleep. image source   Featured Image source / Shree Ashtavinayaka Cine Vision Ltd.
What Nightmares We Have Vs Their True Meaning:	Every night we go to sleep we are haunted by those dreadful dreams that make us sit upright drenched in sweat!! But what you see in your nightmares, is that really what it actually means or something far less scary and too much LOL worthy? image source image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   image source   image source   image source image source Featured Image Source
14 Most Annoying Things About Your Best Friend Which Only He Can Be Excused For:	Everybody has that one friend who is extremely annoying, irritating and too self-welcoming. But then again, that is also the only friend who is excused for it all and more. Because he has been, is there and and you know, he will be there for you always; because he is your best friend. Though so excused, he can be very annoying…. image source / UTV Motion Pictures Which in their defence, was too important to wait till the morning.   image source / Reliance Entertainment (worldwide) You know you can never do a wrong thing around them (unless of course a they are a part of it too! 😉 )   image source / Dharma Productions This is the reason why you experted in mentally blocking someone.   image source / Eros International But you keep with it because you know if and when you find the perfect one for you nad happen to screw it up, they will be the first one to slap you hard across your face!   image source / Eros International And you love to pig out with them anyway, so it’s always cool!   image source Also if, if the ton of the samosas they order is just for themselves!   image source Arrgghhhh…. wish they were not your best buddies!   image source You know that even if their eyes are on their phone screns, their ears, minds and hearts are all intently listening!   image source / Eros International You expected it.   image source Bid your xbox farewell, for which you had been saving for months.   image source / Eros International Only to make your parents get after your life to know what he meant!!   image source / Balaji Motion Pictures You know you can never win with them here!   image source Nothing can be sacred with them around!   image source / Dharma Productions OK if they got away doing this one… they are definitely best buddies to you!! 😉 🙂   Featured Image Source / Dharma Productions
14 Things That Prove You Are Madly, Incomprehensibly And Inseparably Addicted To Technology:	Technology has taken over the planet!! Help! But you are definitely been abducted and done unspeakable experiments on… because you have become what we can say an alien prototype of a typical technology addict! We don’t even recognize your face if you do not have that smartphone in front of it! Yeah, that’s right; technology has become your identity! So if you have the following signs…. You need help my friend! image source   image source   And with a AI security system, cctv cameras in the hallway and remote controlled (or better bluetooth enabled) home appliances. image source   image source   image source   OK maybe, just maybe 1-2 in the real world. image source   image source   image source   image source   You are an expert at chatting all day on Whatsapp, browsing internet and watching some into-the-future-heavy-technology Hollywood movie is a routine. image source   image source   Why to type when you can make things done by just speaking. image source image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
13 Things Every Girl Who Has A Guy Best Friend Is Tired Of Hearing In India:	We all have friends, both girls and boys. Girls generally have one of their girlfriends as their BFFs because they are more connected to them and other times just because they don’t want to make their lives a hell by having a guy friend as the best buddy due to sometimes the  choti soch and at others due to the stereotypical upbringing and even influence of stupid Bollywood movies!! But those who dare to have a best friend that’s a guy, really has a tough time. You know why? Because starting from the first point and unfortunately the one idea that is unanimously bored in the heads of our people and sealed with Amantium!! And we really don’t know who to blame for it… Us ourselves or Mohnish Bahl??!!! Is it your stereotyped attitude or your love for Bollywood talking? image source / Rajshree Productions   What are friends for? Haven’t you heard?!! image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   Yeah of course I like him… That’s why he’s my friend’!!! image source / Yash Raj Films   WTF!! Why are you always with your f***ing iPhone? Wo tera bf hai kya ? image source   OK sarva gyaani maatey ! Bravo! image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   Jab tak hai jaan. Jab tak hai jaan. Jab tak hai jaan.  image source / Dharma Productions   Haan hain na . And he’s best of all of them. Okhayee mom?!! image source / Yash Raj Films   Whatt?!! Seriously. Whatttt?!! image source / UTV Motion Pictures    WTF! I have my own life too you know?!! image source   OK. Thanks for reminding me again dear. I will set it in my reminder to discuss the matter with him. (And laugh at it. Yet again.) image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   Ya haaa… and much much more. And that’s why you aren’t but he is my best buddy Miss. Channel Vogue. image source / Eros International   Are you stupid?!! I have my mom and many girl friends too to talk girl stuff. Besides, why should it be such an issue anyway?!! image source / Red Chillies Entertainment   Oh Goddddd!!!!! For the 75,38,921th time…. We Are Just Friends!!!! image source / Yash Raj Films   Featured Image Source / Yash Raj Films
22 Sign Boards In India That Will Make You Go WTF!!:	Here is to the fun that is never ending, thanks to these numerous signboards raiding our roadsides. May you guys keep putting up such disastrous signs all the time. LOL                                                 All the images are sourced from here . 
9 Things Couples Need To Stop Doing In Public Right Now:	It’s one thing to be affectionate and totally other to make the people gross out with your over the top PDA. Couples do look good and make us go awwww…. but when it becomes ‘too much’ it really makes us sick, isn’t it? And here is what couples need to know, what is this ‘too much’ really that they may be doing, and which Needs. To. Stop. Now. image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Eros International   image source / PVR Pictures- Hari Om Entertainment   image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Eros International   image source   Featured Image Source / Reliance Pictures
15 Signs You Are An Indian Bachelor Working As A Software Engineer (for 18+):	You are an IT engineer and that too a bachelor right? Yeah, we know it. A life of a software engineer in India is both taxing and exciting. The sense of freedom they get when they move away from homes is something else. But it also brings up too many problems and hassles and a typical IT engineer lifestyle! Well check out the tell tale signs of a typical software engineer in India yourself. Yup… No need to go through the map. That pretty much summed up your options. image source   image source   And P.S. None of you have an idea who’s going to keep it when you switch. Not that you care. image source / PLA Entertainment   image source   image source   Only to have them made yet another mop! image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   You couldn’t have dared bring her home, let alone have her stay with you in your room. image source   Who can miss a live porn next door, even though its just sound no visual. “ Ahhh. .” Oh yes, there it goes. image source
16 Small Things That Instantly Send You In A Blinding Rage:	Some things really drive you to the edge. And they need not be huge boulder sized incidents. Some seemingly harmless nothings can do the trick just right. These stupid things make you so much angry you would never call them small! image source   image source   image source   image source Yeah there I am. Flying 8th from the left, second row. Like.   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
13 Dogs Who Are Badly Annoyed By The Cats:	Dogs are adorable gentle creatures we all know it. And cat… well they are the ones who take the undue advantage of the fact. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
10 Reasons Why You Absolutely Hate Monday’s:	Oh God!! It’s That darn Monday again!! What’s good about it? Mondays officially suck. It’s proven. These are those worst days of our lives that we just can’t seem to get rid of. And to make matters worse they are there to torture us every single week!!!   image source /    image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Vishesh Films   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source / Reliance Pictures/  Featured Image Source / Reliance Pictures
13 Awkward Situations You Can Never Get Away With:	Some situations are just tailor made to make you most uncomfortable creature on earth. There is no escape. You can only try and try until you get more awkward. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source
This One Video Every Frustrated Indian Should Watch!:	The Satya Show  has come up with yet another rib tickling spoof of on Congress, BJP, Arvind Kejriwal slap, Himesh Reshamia’s new film The Expose and  Tiger Sherof’s film Heropanti. Watch this hilarious spoof. Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  The Satya Show Share it with your friends mentioning element story which you liked the most.
This Aam Aadmi Remix Featuring Arnab Will Not Shake Your Leg But Head! We Bet You Will Watch It Twice:	Arnab gets a kickass remix by Raka Ashok and TVF . First musical collaboration featuring the words from a man who refuses to keep quiet. If you see this video for about a 10 times still you will not be able to control yourself from watching it again and again …its addictive! Classic satires entertained us without being below the belt at the same time. This election has been one of the most entertaining election even in India and here comes one more creative stuff which will shake your head and bring smile to your face. We are proud that such talent exists in India. Without any delay, watch it here! Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  TheViralFeverVideos If this remix made you smile, don’t forget to spread the joy with your friends
8 Things That Will Happen When IPL Ends:	With IPL craze grazing the whole nation wide, there have been many changes that have occurred in these two months. People hardly care for movies, hardly watch anything but IPL matches on TV and there’s hardly anything that goes around as word of mouth than the same matches again. So, when such a thick blanket of fanaticism is holding us in it’s tight grip, it is a matter to think about what would it be like when the IPL 2017 finally comes to an end. So, here’s a sneak peak into the now, very near future. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   AA Films
10 Things That Man Really Needs To Invent For The Lazy Person In You And ASAP (Read NOW):	For the love of lazing around. Man has reached moon… and those who have watched Interstellar will agree…beyond. But there is still much to be done here. Your lazy brothers and sisters implore you.. Come save us from the hassles of ‘work’! image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source  / featured image source
Modi, Rahul & Kejriwal Walked Into A Restaurant and It Turned Into Biggest Election Tamasha. Hilarious Spoof:	This time we witnessed lot of creativity in marketing of political parties during Elections in India due to growth of social media and creative agencies. This time  Mainduck (a famous youtube channel) has come up with a hilarious spoof with actors who closely resembles the real life characters. Don’t know if they can order armies but they definitely can’t order food.  Watch watch what happens when the political slug fest enters a restaurant. Without any delay watch it here, Election  tamasha  in a restaurant . Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  mainduck If you like this story, don’t forget to share it with your friends.
Expectations Of A Guy From A Girl Before Marriage Vs. The Reality After It:	There are certainly side effects of marriage. It’s a strange institution which makes us dream all kinds of rosy things but when we are actually living that life, then we get to know, what we expected from it, may not be something that we are actually getting. And your wife is not an exception in that scenario. image source image source   image source image source / SLB Films   image source / Reliance Entertainment- Viacom 18 Motion Pictures- Hari Om Productions image source   image source / T-Series- Rawail Grandsons- Sohail Khan Productions   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source /Sony Pictures- Meteor Pictures   image source   Featured Image Source / Balaji Motion Pictures
Modi, Rahul, Arvind Kejriwal Went To Buy An IPL Team, Can’t Believe What Happened After That:	Lets run a riot with our imagination…….! Imagine…….not the John Lenon song 😉 … Imagine…the political party leaders, dressed in simple attire and wearing an even simpler expression on their face…going out to buy an IPL team. I shudder to think what would happen in the auction room… a la parliament scene 😉 …. and if by stroke of some luck (cant call it good or bad as am confused!) they manage to buy teams for their party……it would be A ONCE IN A LIFETIME EVENT. I  started with Imagine….but I myself cant imagine what would the team attire be,  how would the cheer leaders be ,how…why,…when….!!!I mean ……….I really don’t know what I mean! …. So watch  The Satya Show  which has rolled out a hilarious video presenting the Indian Political League! Go ahead and enjoy a harmless laugh…..! After all , enjoyment comes not only at laughing at others but on our own selves too….so in the spirit of humor…..get humored 🙂 Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  The Satya Show If this story made you smile, don’t forget spreading the joy with you friends.
She Taught This Auto Rickshaw Driver A Lesson Which Every Girl Should Watch:	Despite of continuous effort by common people, government, celebrities to spread awareness and stop crime against woman, there are few breeds of people who has no scope for change and continue do crimes secretly by living in the same society and never get caught. This is a story of  Rujuta Diwekar  who is author by profession. She was molested by an auto rickshaw driver in Mumbai but she fought back with courage and bravery and taught a lesson to the criminal on spot. This happened about 3 days ago. So yes, I am a woman and if you molest me, I will run after you, hold you by the collar and create a ruckus. Through all this drama, there was a woman slightly older than me who helped me both physically and emotionally to deal with this guy. Huge thanks to you mam, I dont know your name, but I remain indebted for all the help. About the man, don’t know his name too but his breed is growing.. Rujuta is a great inspiration to all woman in India and across the globe. Spread this article as much as possible to get this rickshaw driver caught or at least inspire females to act strong in such situation and get criminals caught. [mashshare]
Pepsi Got A Scare Worthy Reply In Return From Coca Cola On Halloween While Trying To Scare Them:	The war of the brands is not anything new. It has been there since maybe the Dark Ages. Pepsi and Coke being rivals for decades now, have always been clashing and cleverly coming up newer ingenious ideas to show each other dirt. image source image source  / credits: PepsiCo  and coca cola, The Coca-Cola Company
Video Of Sarita Devi Returning The Bronze Medal To Silver Medalist In Protest With Pride:	Sarita Devi refused to accept the bronze medal in protest of unfair decision in semi-final against a Korean player at Asian Games 2014 in Korea. Sarita’s performance was dominating throughout the semi final match and she even left the Koren boxer with a blooded nose. Sarita was seen crying with a broken heart during the ceremony. The Indian boxing contingent lodged a protest after paying a USD 500 fee however the appeal was rejected later. [Click on the video to play] // <![CDATA[(function(d, s, id) { var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0]; if (d.getElementById(id)) return; js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id; js.src = "//connect.facebook.net/en_US/all.js#xfbml=1"; fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs); }(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));// ]]&gt;
Amul Vs. Neha Tomar: Who Is It At Fault? Or Is There Any?:	image source: dudhsagardairy.coop When as a common customer, we experience a folly from our favorite brand what do we generally do? As a responsible customer, it is both our right as well as duty to bring the authorities to notice the problem faced by us and request them for an appropriate action. This is what a just a commoner of a customer, like you and me, Neha Tomar did. When she experienced some alarming issue with her usual brand of Amul Gold Milk, she lodged a complaint with the Amul people. image source The not so cold war, took an ugly turn when the Amul authorities posted an explanation of the allegations posed on them by Ms. Neha Tomar  on their official Amul page on Facebook. Now, the hurt and disappointed customer is narrating her side of the story, claiming Amul’s allegations to be baseless. Video Source: Amul- This is unfair! What I projected as a concern, being a true consumer of Amul, came to be projected as WAR. On the night of 9 October 2014, my husband bought 3 ltr (6 packets of 500 ml each) of Amul gold milk from a vendor outside our society. It was duly refrigerated, only to be opened by my mother-in-law the next morning. She noticed a sour smell in the first packet, and then eventually in the second one too. She took the rest of the four unopened packet to the vendor, who refused to take it back. Like any other middle class consumer, we thought of making paneer out of it instead of throwing it away. When the milk was put to boil, the look of it changed to a stretchy gooey substance, despite the fact that nothing else was added to it. It was nothing but scary to see that mass, which could have been consumed by my family, including an infant. Being a responsible consumer, I called up Amul customer care where the executive noted down my contact details and told me that some Amul executive will visit me in 4-5 working days. I was taken aback because it was a serious problem and needed immediate attention. The executive mistook me to be overreacting, and disconnected the call without giving any complaint number, even after my asking them for the same. I tried calling again, but lines were busy and I could not get through. It was then that me and my family thought of taking the help of Facebook, which is the most active networking site these days and also has pages of all big brands. I posted details and pictures on Amul’s page, and my own Facebook page on 10 October at 11.55 a.m and again at 11.56 a.m. Amul officials got into action, contacted me and met me on 11 October at 6.30 p.m. However, my post is no longer visible on their page and no new post can be posted too. I humbly attended to and met Amul officials and explained to them my predicament and disappointment. They replaced the milk, and gave me promises that appropriate technical guys will look into the matter and will resolve this. I narrated this whole meeting incident on my Facebook page on 13 October at 10.53 a.m, impressed that the Amul officials were helpful and promised to take cognizance of the matter. Later that evening, 6 Amul officials came to me and explained to me what that stretchy substance could be. However, they accepted that customer care executive was not correct in saying that the complaint will be addressed by Amul officials in 4-5 working days. They informed me that the customer grievances are taken care of by third party and that the Amul head office will look into it. They showed me videos also, which I believed and said that being a layman, I do not know what came from my milk and it is good that they took the effort of explaining the whole reason. I thanked them, happy with the effort they took in addressing the consumer complaint. The very next day, 14 October 2014 at 10.38 a.m., I shared a post again on my Facebook page showing victory and also that how the officials came and met me and explained. And I also praised Amul for its complaints solution and efforts. Like a good consumer I was happy and satisfied in the end. But that same day, Amul posted a post on its page at 3.16 p.m., which read more like a threatening message. Not only were the facts misrepresented, but also the wrong and tampered screenshots of my post were posted. I posted my grievance on 10 October, whereas Amul showed that I posted it on 9 October. This can be seen here . Amul also edited their own post on their page three times with different edited versions. Below mentioned highlighted portions are the edited versions. First post of Amul on their page was posted on 14th October at 3.16 p.m. This is regarding the Facebook post that Ms Neha Tomar has shared on her wall. The details of the matter are as follows: The consumer called our customer care on 10th morning at 9.22 am and shared her experience of using Amul Gold Milk on the very same day. She also emailed the complaint to our official email ID on 10th afternoon. As informed by her, the “use by” date of the Amul Milk was 9th of October. This means the consumer had used expired milk in the first place. It may be also noted that the consumer has been misusing her office to publicize this story on Amul. We hope that she has informed her office regarding the same as we shall hold her office too responsible for her actions. Edited version of first post again posted at 7.10.p.m The consumer called our customer care on 10th morning at 9.22 am and shared her experience of using Amul Gold Milk on the very same day. She also emailed the complaint to our official email ID on 10th afternoon. As informed by her, the “use by” date of the Amul Milk was 9th ofOctober. The milk got expired in her fridge, later used by the consumer. We do not understand that why the consumer used her official position to make such complaint without knowing the fact. See the link for detailed edited posts. Link the link and see the edited section at the post. It is clear how Amul realized that they have threatened me in their first post, thanks to many comments on the thread, and they edited the post. There is no clarification needed for their mala fide intentions. Secondly, I did not give any time promise to Amul officials to upload my feedback. This is a lie and a clear attempt to play with someone’s faith in them and their service, and only to twist facts in their favour. Thirdly, Amul tried to threaten me by involving my office name into highlight which is again totally wrong at their part. I posted everything on my personal level and not on behalf of my organization. Nowhere have I written that I am representing my organization for raising this issue. Nor I have posted my position anywhere. It was clearly mentioned by me that it is my personal experience, and my office has absolutely nothing to do with it. Amul tried to defame the name of my office also, to which they have no right. Fourthly, Amul accused me of having mala fide intentions. Perhaps the first thing I should have done was to sue Amul and claim handsome monetary compensation. That would have defined ‘mala fide’ for Amul officials. But that I did not do. I am not a publicity seeker. Perhaps behaving cooperatively or humbly with Amul officials made them believe that I was an easy consumer to mislead or defame. If indeed I wanted to gain publicity, I would have very initially gone to the electronic and print media. What I did was as an everyday aggrieved consumer, who has seen this brand being used from the very childhood. I had faith in the brand and that’s why I approached the people concerned. I was never having personal grudges against Amul, and there was no reason for it. I was angry on the product, Amul gold milk, which was not up to the required qualitative standard. I brought the issue in the light because nobody takes consumer complaints seriously in India. I took the help of these platforms so that the senior officials and authorities could access the issue and take steps for it being repeated. I stand proud at the step I took and have no guilt at having done so, and the way I did it. The entire country has faith in Amul, and so did I. But the way Amul threatened me was unimaginable. By maligning a consumers image, Amul has only dug its own grave, has ruined the name that has taken so many painful, hardworking years to build. I was an angry consumer and so I took recourse of those platforms, so that my concern could be heard. Adulteration in products is nothing new in India, and milk is a basic daily need of ours. I was scared and terrified after seeing what we were consuming every day. Being a mother, I was terrified with the consequences that could have happened if that milk would have been given to my seven month old daughter, or any other family member. All I expected was a quick and polite response. I am no scientist to know what happens to milk in particular conditions, and a straight forward explanation was all that was needed. No threats. No tampering posts. And no blame games. There is no war between me and Amul. Like an ordinary consumer, I wanted Amul to solve the matter, and also being a big brand they have some accountability towards customer grievances. But the way they solved and manipulated the whole issue was totally unexpected and hurting. I happily posted everything good about Amul on Facebook after their response in appropriate time. Being humble is the quality of the wise; threatening a vice of the arrogant/ ignorant. Just this one mistake from a few officials has not just soiled the brand name, but also lost many good consumers. I would have been very happy if Amul would have ended this on an amicable note. A proof of which is over one lakh people who shared the post on Facebook and shared their comments and observations. A brand is made by its consumers; it is never the other way around. I could have taken legal measures to respond to the public threat by Amul, but I did not, because I do no hate Amul. But Amul Gold milk has lost its customers, one is me. As a regular Customer of Amul products, I only tried to bring to the notice of the Customer Care and management an issue which needed immediate attention. It was construed by Amul Management that I was working on behest of other Corporate, and I had malafide intentions. I never expected this kind of response from Amul, a brand I have grown up consuming in various forms. It is sad day for consumer rights! [mashshare]
The Relentless Snapdeal Soap Affair..This Will Tell Us How Materialistic We Have Become:	images source Yeah folks, that’s right! A Mr. Lakshminarayan Krishnamurthy was one such lucky brute who got to sway high with such a thoughtful and personalized treat when he ordered a mobile phone from one of India’s biggest online shopping portal, snapdeal.com . Oh no. Snap! You can’t take away the credit! It was all the effort put into by a thoughtful courier man or a seller, not you! Evidently, Mr. Lakshminarayan ordered a Samsung phone for his wife, trying to make use of Snapdeal’s Diwali Bumper Sale; but as it turned out some jolly good fellow in the festive spirit of Diwali switched the phone with a Vim bar to give him a Diwali Dhamaka!! My! What a brilliant idea to surprise somebody and at the same time connect at such a personal level! image source Anyway, unable to understand the pure soul, the naive customer got a little upset over the the Samsung box containing a used up dish washing soap-bar instead of a fresh one! Sigh… Some people can just never be pleased. C’mon man! That’s the beauty of the prank…it was a humble attempt to connect to the customer with the daily lives of the retailer. Nevertheless, Snapdeal came up to be a spoilsport and refunded the whole amount apparently “good-heartedly”. Not only that, even Hindustan Unilever Company gifted him with the Samsung Core Duo mobile phone along with Vim Liquid soaps! Can you believe that?
Arnab Goswami Trolled LIVE By Subramanian Swamy. Liar, Stupid, Dumbo, Mentally Retard:	A lot of people even assumed after watching this clip that that S Swamy was drunk but the fact is that Arnab,in the very beginning of the argument alleged Swamy of writing a letter to Rajpakshe asking him to hang the fishermen. This baseless allegation was in itself, outrageous. Arnab could not prove it at any point during the debate, even when Swamy kept on inciting him for doing the same. This turned out to be the most hilarious thing happened to Arnab LIVE on his own show. Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Gondor Mordor
Secret Ingredient To A Breaking News (Only for 18+):	What is the recipe to a breaking news? Breaking “NEWS” you said? Isn’t that supposed to be news and not something ‘cooked up’? Hahaha… You would think so, wouldn’t you? The way news channels show us the so called Breaking News which they miraculously manage to obtain every single day, is something beyond imagination for a simple and humble human being. It is a matter of great thought and perseverance to cook up a news that not only appeals to the appetite of every audience but also pleases and scintillates their taste buds!! Mmmm….lip smacking! Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via TVF (Disclaimer: This video is uploaded for a harmless humor and we do mean to hurt anyone’s emotions, because you are awesome!)
30 Years Since The Bhopal Gas Tragedy Yet The Pain Echoes In The Air. 9 Painful Images Inside:	It was the night of 2nd December 1984 when there was a leak at Union Carbide Corp pesticide factory, in Bhopal, India that exposed as many as 500.000 people to the poisonous methyl isocyanate gas. They suffered unthinkable permanent and temporary injuries; with the death lulling about 25,000 of those innocent and unsuspecting people into a deep slumber from which they could never again rise. And the large scale soil and water pollution is still affecting the people of Bhopal. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Video Source: YouTube via euronews
Watch This Hilarious Parody On The Comical Episode Of Arnab Being Trolled On His Own Show By Swamy:	You watched how Arnab Goswami was trolled by Subramaniyam Swamy on his own show. It was by far the worst what could have happened to Arnab live on National television. But indeed it made a great watch and a super risible at that, for us! However, the cynical episode doesn’t just end there. Watch this amazing video in which Arnab and Swamy clash has been trolled even further but with a musical and a yet funnier touch! Video and Featured Image: YouTube via  TheSurfingViolinist’s India Adventures
Narendra Modi Temple In U.P:	image source We have earlier heard of people worshiping Ranjikant, Amitabh and Sachin earlier and now its the P.M of India. This temple was created at Kaushambhi district in U.P. This lord shiva temple where Narendra Modi is worshiped is now named as Namo Temple. The priest in temple also seems to be dressed in BJB colors and also kept a Modi style beard.
6 Easy Steps To Open Account On Paytm Bank:	Indian digital payment and e-wallet giant Paytm has launched its full fledged bank in India. The bank is  operational for customers from 23rd May 2017.   This move by Paytm will make all the private and national banks run for their money as new customer acquisition will not be easy for any bank from here on. Paytm wallets is widely accepted by Indian audience and Paytm bank is expected to create huge traction in India market. It will be interesting to see what strategies private and national banks adopt from here on to compete with Paytm bank. Here is everything you need to know about Paytm bank 1. You can deposit upto INR 1 lakh in Paytm bank 2. You can open both savings and current account 3. You can avail banking services like Debit Cards, Online Banking and Mobile Banking 4. Paytm banks are not allowed to lend to customers, however it can tie up with other financial institution to offer this service 5. It will have physical branches and you can visit the branch operational from Monday to Saturday 10 a.m. – 4 p.m. (closed on 2nd and 4th Saturday 6. Paytm bank head office will be based out of B-121, Sector 5, Noida – 201301 6. You can just scan the QR code to know more about the Paytm branch services, seems most of the services will be self served and very easy to use. 1. Go to your account on Paytm app and tap on open account 2. It will show you a screen which will say “Welcome to Paytm bank”. Click on “Proceed” 3. On the next page set your Paytm passcode 4. After setting you pass code the next screen will allow you to set a nominee on your Paytm bank account 5. Fill details of your nominee 6. You are done! Its that simple Here is the gimps of the Paytm ATM. Looks like the ATM machine will have a fingerprint sensor to withdraw money from the ATM. Story source: PayTm founder Vijay Shekhar Sharma fb post , featured image source
Bollywood Is Contagious. Don’t Believe Us? Ask Obama.:	image source Video Source: YouTube via Ayushi Bhargava
After Indian Internet Audience Support Finally The Good News:	In big conferences we talk about growth of internet penetration in India and how big brands can be benefited by the same. However the power of internet is much larger if used in the right way. This is proved once again. As per latest update on the story, Ashwani Uppal’s 15 year old daughter who went missing on 15th April 2017 from Delhi has been finally found . The internet audience came together to spread the word and help finding this daughter of our nation. The facebook post requesting help finding his daughter got  259,457 shares   and his public help request video got 69 lakh + views  which restores faith in humanity. Here are few pictures of his daughter and the video appeal. Thanks internet audience Gif source , image source
If Movies Could Serve The Government These Are The Departments They Would Head:	What if Bollywood movies could replace the government sector departments and preside themselves? Which movies would get the honour to serve the janta ?!! Mother India image source   Life of Pi image source / 20th Century Fox   Aaja Nach Le image source / Yash Raj Films   Gangs Of Wasseypur image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Guru Madras Talkies   Karthik Calling Karthik image source / Reliance Big Pictures   Lakshya image source / Excel Entertainment   Taare Zameen Par image source / Aamir Khan Productions   Coolie image source / Aasia Films Pvt. Ltd.- M.K.D. Films Combine   Koyla image source / Filmkraft Productions Pvt. Ltd.    Jal image source / DAR Motion Pictures   Rocket Singh. Salesman of The Year Yash Raj Films   Daawat-e-Ishq Yash Raj Films   Jungle image source   Rajneeti UTV Motion Pictures   We Are A Family image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Page 3 image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Dharma Productions   Pardes image source / Mukta Arts   Jolly LLB image source / Fox Star Studios   Swades image source / UTV Motion Pictures   3 Idiots Reliance Entertainment   Gulaab Gang image source / Sahara Movie Studios   Zindagi Naa Milegi Dobara image source / Eros International   Highway image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Bhag Milkha Bhag image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures/  Featured Image Source / UTV Motion Pictures
If Bollywood Had Its Own TV Channels This Is What Its Channels Would Be:	We can’t live without our daily dose of idiot box and so is the case with Bollywood… We are crazy for these both. But what will happen if the two combined? From hockey to cricket…we have a range of sports channels to choose from… Chak De India, Bhag Milkha Bhag, Dhan Dhana Dhan Goal, Mary Kom, Lagaan image source / Yash Raj Films   Who can live without family melodrama….. Take you pick Hum Aapke Hain Koun, Hum Sath Sath Hain, Kabhi Khushi Kabhi Gham image source / Rajshri Productions   With Bollywood in question there can never be lack of options for good music… Sur, Rock On, Rockstar, Ashiqui 2 image source / Eros International   Stay ahead and informed with… No One Killed Jessica, Page 3 image source / UTV Spotboy   Be a master chef and win everyone’s heart with… Bawarchi, Cheeni Kum, Duplicate, Daawat-e-ishq image source / MAD Entertainment Ltd.   Bring the world home with… Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara, Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Glam up and dazzle everyone with… Fashion, Khoobsurat, Aisha image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Bhandarkar Entertainment   Experience the future and learn from your past… Krrish, Robot, The Legend of Bhagat Singh, 1947 Earth, Hey Ram, Jodhaa Akbar, Mughal-e-Azam image source   Because youth is the future…. Yuva, Raanjhanaa, Youngistan, Mujhse Fraaandship Karoge, Pyaar Ka Punchnama image source / Eros International   Entertainment… Entertainment… Entertainment… Kahaani, Dus Kahaaniyaan, Darna Zaroori Hai, Bombay Talkies image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures- Pen India Pvt.Ltd   Connect to the almighty… Ramayan, Santoshi Ma, O My God, God Tussi Great Ho, Baghban image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Because dil toh baccha hai ji … Chillar Party, Bhoothnath, Taare Zameen Par, Raju Chacha, Ta Ra Rum Pum Ajay Devgn Films   Apni boli, apna des … Delhi 6, Hyderabad Blues, Mission Kashmir, 2 States, Madras Cafe image source / Showman Pictures- UTV Motion Pictures- Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra Pictures- ShowMan Pictures
14 Bollywood Characters And Their Iconic  Facebook Status:	Facebook has become an indispensable part of our lives now. Wherever you are, whatever you are doing and however you are feeling, you want to update your status so accordingly all the time. So, let’s see what would be these iconic Bollywood characters’ statuses be. image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   image source   image source /Viacom 18 Motion Pictures     image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   1 image source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films   image source   Featured Image Source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films
7 Must Have Characters Of Any Bollywood Movie:	We just can’t get enough of Bollywood movies but what we like even more than that is to laugh at their nonsensical and stereotypical characters that they don’t seem to get enough of putting there either! So, here are some typical Bollywood typecast that I am sure you would agree with. Don’t ever expect this guy to go back to his own house. He is here to stay with his buddy’s family, eat their food and run errands for them and assist his friend free of cost in all his madness soaked endeavours. image source / Tips Music Films- UTV Motion Pictures   She sticks to her guru mata , nods in agreement at everything, says dumb things and always dresses sloppily to make her hot (and high headed) friend even hotter. image source / Yash Raj Films   Dressed completely as a typical bhartiya naari , she is all for her husband and children. She would only do housework and mind you with full dedication and forget and forgive every wrong doing of his beloved family. image source   With work profile restricted completely to dancing in every song then disappearing immediately, she has nothing to contribute to the movie other than her unsolicited adaayein . But yes, she is always the reason for the villain getting killed. So, sincere thanks for getting kidnapped every time. image source / UTV Motion Pictures   If he’s a dad he’s gotta be strict, often so much that he would set his pet men on the hero for romancing his daughter or at least scratch him out of his will if he’s his own son. image source / Yash Raj Films   He is the demon born as a human. There can be nothing good in him at all. Name any crime and he would have done it all. And almost always meet his fate fighting one on one with the hero because y’all know dying with a bullet is just so junior level gunda style. image source / Eros International   Hero has another meaning in Bollywood… It means he can kill a hundred goons with a single punch and can put up a fight with a 7 ft., double in size villain and mix him up in dirt even after braving three bullets, getting his arms torn and legs broken. image source / Eros International
20 Interesting Bloopers Of Bollywood Movies:	While watching movies we come across loads of silly and illogical bloopers that inadvertently make us exclaim WTF! Bollywood movies are stuffed with such horrendous mistakes that lead us to think either they think they are extremely smart and will get away with anything or assume the audience to be stupid enough to not notice their boo boos. We saw poor SRK getting killed b y that wretched ahem game character and then buried in Christian ritual… But voila! As miraculously as the game character came to life, same way did SRK’s buried body turned to ashes for Kareena to do the last rites as per Hindu procedure.   Ranbir Kapoor takes away the nuisance of a book too while handling her luggage, from Deepika… But they don’t just say Knowledge is Power for nothing.. The omnipotent book is back in the lass’s hands the next instant.   In the movie Rohit Mehra is shown to be away in Singapore for a good 2 years period and still one fine day his mother calls him to break the news of Preity Zinta being pregnant!! OMG! Maybe that’s Jadoo!!   OMG! They remembered to use the new name and logo of ABP News (than its older Star News) on the TV channel… But forgot to change it for good on the mic. Shi*!   They sing this song Nanha Munna Rahi Hoon… Which is cute and inspiring as hell but the thing is the song was a part of a 1962 movie ‘Son of India’ while the movie sequence was set in the 1950s. Hmm… Maybe patriotism just spoke to him.   Apparently Tapasvi Maharaj was right about how you shouldn’t trust Sarfaraz. He said he works at Pakistan embassy in Bruges but as it turns out there’s isn’t one… Though Brussels does.   Moreover who could tell Kalyan Express can become Durronto too just for Sanjay baba?   SRK has a lot of trouble with ashes it seems. He is seen happily putting the urn containing his Grandpa’s asthiyaan (ashes) in his bag before leaving for Goa. But in somehow his Granny hands him the same urn on the railway platform while he’e about to leave.   It seems like they director had a vision and he broadcast the Gujrat riots of 2002 on a channel Headlines Today which was yet to take birth a yea from then in 2003. We need such visionaries, don’t we?   The opening scene sees three friends arriving at a dhaba tripling on a motor bike… But as the scene gives way to a song, they are seen leaving in a jeep! Mmm…. transforming bike! Can we have one too?   Suhas is already at the venue, getting ready and humming something gibberish while trimming his nose hair.. (Eww)… But something crazy happened and he found himself kicked out of the venue and hysterically making entrance from the main gate! What an idiot…. Not him.. The direc… Nevermind.   They say you can’t see ghosts in cameras. Well this could be the only reason why the musicians who were playing on Raghu’s right when he went to meet Harman.. Disappeared without a trace when its CCTV camera footage was seen. *Goosebumps*   Disappearing mystery just gets weirder. When Raghu flings wine, there the nasty stuff ruining the whole wall and the painting on it… But the next instant it’s spotlessly clean! (Psst… mom is asking which cleaner did they use. Anyone?)   Set in 1982 the movie is shown to have a game of cricket consisting of an over with 6 balls but back in that time there were only 5 allowed. Howwzzaattt?!   The right front door of the SUV is completely damaged but the next instant its all hammered and polished and as brand as new! Well done boys… Your garage’s address please?   Heard the term ‘remote sensing’? Now, witness remote dressing.   Its good the timid girl was travelling on her own and exploring but we recommend to check before sitting in a train; for all we know the train she was boarding that was supposed to go from Paris (France) to Amsterdam (Netherlands)… …was a sprinter that only runs in Netherlands and definitely doesn’t cross borders!   We saw omnipotent… It’s time to witness the omnipresence now. See these guys strumming the guitar and doing jugalbandi as Shraddha kapoor croons… Now behold as they are backstage too chatting and all… Respect!   You know the Tomatina Festival that tempted you as hell to play it yourself, that’s celebrated in August.. And that scary half as*ed bull chase? Well that’s celebrated in July… So ideally it should have been sported before the fun natural facial festival of La Tomatina.   When Prem sets off to meet Sandhya it’s in this baby… But perhaps it took them years to reach her place or God knows what… It turned into this oldie… Hmm… Omni Van bhi Complan peeti hai … grew up so fast. All images sourced from here . 
14 Bollywood Clichés Without Which No College Life Can Actually Be Complete:	Bollywood never gets old… And one of the proofs is it’s college based movies. OK… not really. But seriously, it has so many movies with colleges as backdrop that they have actually become cult films for the students. And although there are so many stupid clichés in them like the whole college dancing with you matching perfectly with your steps etc. etc. etc. that are not only silly but also too unrealistic; there are still others which are actually true of any given college. Let’s find out what are these. You just have to have a at least one crush on one of the faculty of whose class you never miss and who is the only one who believes you are a good and sincere student! image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   It’s a must to secretly drink in the class… Maybe at the back bench or even at the back side of your college. And then being not so sly about it! image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   You have at least one friend who is a pro with strings and is always in demand to play the latest number on his/her guitar!! Maybe this is why they made it in the first place…to impress your classmates. image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   What are classes made for if not bunking? Dharma Productions- UTV Motion Pictures   Bunking and wasting all day in the canteen to look out for your sweetheart is on your daily agenda. image source / T-Series   When there is making of life long friends being in the process, of course you’ll have quite a many night outs…. ‘Too many’ as your parents may complaint. image source / Dharma Productions- UTV Motion Pictures   But obvious… After so much fun all night long with your buddies, you of course need rest and where better than to rest your sleepy head on the class desk. image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   College and a trip to Goa with your friends is like mornings and breakfast…. Ok, the latter can be skipped sometimes, but Goan trip? Naah ahh… image source / Excel Entertainment   When you have such a crazy gang, every moment of life is worth capturing forever… image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   Apart from being the best time ever to get officially approved bunks, it’s also the best time to have fun organizing, performing or just enjoying the shows! image source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films   Yup… more than fests, it’s the parties that you enjoy almost everyday… And half of the times you don’t even know, who’s it anyway! image source / Y-Films   Crushes and love in college are as old as the concept of college itself! You will always find pairs soaking the sun in the campus ground no matter which period is on… And even you, in hopes to pair up! 😉 image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Gosh! These are true as well…. Take any college.. Guys will always be guys.. image source / Vivek Kumar Mitthu   Exam time is one time when you sneak into your pal’s hostel room and spend the whole night ‘group-studying’! Reliance Entertainment
13 Motivational Bollywood Dialogues That You Never Thought Could Be Used In These Situations:	Bollywood is by no means deficient in great and memorable dialogues. And among them you will surely find those gems that can actually prove to be brilliant motivators even in our common lives. But when we think about these dialogues meaning serious business of provoking thoughts… The people with devil’s workshop for mind will surely love to use them in these hilarious ways…. The more you sweat in peace … the less you bleed in war (Border) image source / J.P. Films   Darya bhi main darakht bhi main, jehlam bhi main chanab bhi main, deir hoon haram bhi hoon, shiyah bhi hoon sunni bhi hon, mein hoon pandit, main tha main hoon aur main hi rahoonga. (Haider) image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Kabhi kisi ko itna bhi mat darao, ki darr hi khatma ho jaaye. (Mary Kom) image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Success ke peeche mat bhaago; kabil bano, kabil … kamyabi toh saali jhak maarke peeche aaegi (3 Idiots) image source / Reliance Entertainment    Door jana hi hai toh paap se door jao … paapi se door kyun jaate ho (Bheja Fry) image source / HandMade Films   I don’t believe in destiny … I believe in me (Luck By Chance) image source / Excel Entertainment- Big Pictures   Sometimes even the wrong train takes us to the right station. (Lunchbox) image source / Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures –  Sony Pictures Classics   Risk toh Spiderman ko bhi lena padta hai … main toh phir bhi salesman hoon (Rocket Singh) image source / Yash Raj Films   Raaste ki parwah karoonga toh … manzil bura maan jayegi (Once Upon A Time In Mumbai) image source / Balaji Motion Pictures   Ab bhi jiska khoon na khaula, khoon nahin voh paani hai … joh desh ke kaam na aaye woh bekaar jawani ha. (Rang De Basanti) image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   Insaan ko dibbe mein sirf tab hona chahiye … jab woh mar chuka ho (Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara) image source / Eros International   Dimaag aur dil jab ek saath kaam karte hai na … toh farak nahi padta hai ki dimaag kaunsa hai aur dil kaunsa hai (Iqbal) image source / Mukta Searchlight Films   Life mein kitna bhi try karo, kuch na kuch toh chootega hi. Toh jahan hain wahin ka maza lete hain na. (Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewaani) image source /UTV Motion Pictures-   Featured Image Source / Reliance Entertainment 
14 Birthday Gifts That Would Be Perfect For These Celebrities This Year:	Recently Deepika Padukone and A R Rahman celebrated their birthdays. While he spent his evening chatting live with his fans on FB, Dippy got the lovely gift of getting to celebrate the day with her beau in New York. It led us to think, what would other of our Bollywood celebs may want this year as gifts for their birthdays? So we researched a bit and came with some brilliant ideas for them. image source image source Oh yeah.. Maybe that will work.   image source Agar dum hai toh saamne aa !   image source image source Oh you are so thoughtful!!   image source Well of course… What does one need in a person anyway?   We really wish they had gifted her this much before….   image source image source Hmm… So, thumhe laghta hey .. Ki yay kham kharega ?!!   image source OH thank you!! Thank you so much!!   image source Mmmm…. Stop talking and let me eat.   image source OK OK.. This time pakka acting lessons lunga .   image source image source OMG!! How did you know I wanted that?!!   image source image source Nooo… Get me something from the movie ‘Aliens’.   image source   image source Yayyyy!!! No more paparazzi letting our cat out the bag!!   image source Hahaha..!! As if that would help!!!! 😉   image source Yes. Meri ‘Karan-Arjun’ aayegi …..   Featured Image Source
11 Things You Learnt From Dil Dhadakne Do:	One of the most awaited movies of 2015, Dil Dhadakne Do is here. You must probably even watched it by now, for the the excitement and curiosity it created with the wonderful cruise poster and the funny trailers, was enough to arouse the urgency in you to watch it first day itself. So, how did you like it. While you mmmm.. on that for a while trying to figure out how exactly to answer that difficult question, we tell you what we learnt from it! Here you go. image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International
17 Celebrity Reactions On The Grave Issue Of “The Porn Ban”:	The banning of porn in India has shook everyone. It is one difficult time for the whole of nation and when every common man is grieving at the loss of their favourite thing to do of all, even the celebrities aren’t left untouched. Ironically, though we don’t have the means anymore, but definitely it will get harder with each passing moment. But at least you aren’t alone. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source       image source   image source   image source   image source   Reliance Entertainment   image source   image source     image source   image source   image source   image source / Featured Image Source
Baaghi: A Story That Talks About Rebels in Love:	Haven’t we all always been fascinated about love stories?  Bollywood has been delivering cliché love stories to our audience for decades, and we would all still flock at the theatres to watch them like we didn’t know the ending. I think it is time we all agree upon the fact that Bollywood love stories are the staple of our country. No matter how many different kinds of concepts keep coming our way, a comforting love story is what makes into our everyday guilty pleasures to feel better about life. Another story on the same lines, but not cliché is what  Baaghi  is all about. They start the story with two rebels who always fight with each other or with others to get their things done. The lead actors Ronnie (Tiger Shroff) and Sia (Shraddha Kapoor) hit off their love story amidst beautiful backdrops of undisturbed forests. Ronnie, who is a martial arts academy student, comes across Sia. Being the rebels they are, the couple tends to stay put to their ego and refrains from feelings for each other. At the same institute, Ronnie finds a guru who tells him ‘ Baaghi  bano, par kisi maqsad ke liye.’ This dialogue is pretty much the crux of the movie, giving us all the reasons why we should watch Baaghi on ZEE5 now. A still from the movie! After Ronnie and Sia fall in love over a brief time, then enters the villain Raghav (Sudheer Babu) who also falls head over heels for Sia. He feels that Sia is the right match to his attitude, and hence decides that she is the perfect match for him. Following this, he gets to know about Ronnie and Sia and decides to kidnap her. He takes her to Bangkok where Ronnie and Raghav come face-to-face to fight for their ladylove. The film carries a certain kind of charm with a little humour here and there added by the fights put up by Tiger Shroff. Shroff does complete justice to his character, with an immense improvement from his previous film, whereas Kapoor keeps up her charm and acting despite being restricted to a damsel in distress. The action sequences are choreographed in a rather stunning way, making it almost difficult for you to turn your eyes away. This 2 hours 20-minute long movie gives you enough entertainment on a laid-back evening. Shraddha Kapoor, being her pretty-self, delivers some punches and packs here and there, showing the rebel in her character. Whereas the talented Tiger Shroff is sure to carry you away with his emotions and flared muscles that are very candy to the eye. The best part about Baaghi is that the fights are based on the traditional way of dealing with the hands rather than guns and weapons, which makes the cut for this movie. The movie received some good reviews from some of the leading critics like  Anupama Chopra,  Rajeev Masand and similar ones, pouring all praises for Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor. With the birthdays of the lead actors Tiger Shroff (2nd March) and Shraddha Kapoor (3rd March) approaching soon, there is yet another reason to revisit their performances and give them a thumbs up by watching Baaghi! 
List Of Quirky Bollywood Movies About Con Men:	You know the saying right, that TRUST is a dangerous game. On a desperate attempt to watch something good this weekend, I stumbled upon this movie called The Wolf of Wall Street’. Though I’m literally watching this for the 50th time, I can’t help but get awestruck by DiCaprio’s portrayal of Jordan Belfort every time and this got me more passionate about con artist movies. And it is this inclination that got me looking for some of the best Bollywood movies about con men. So in this list, we are listing down movies that are based on con artists. Also, I will not be condoning any movie based on a bank heist or robbery, so as great as it is, Dhoom series did not make into this list. The Fakir of Venice Presented in the 2009 Indian Film Festival, it took The Fakir of Venice 10 years to find its way into Bollywood. This 2019 movie is about a young man Aadhi (played by Farhan Akhtar) who only cares about money and would do anything to get it, even if it means going underground, literally. Though the movie is over 10 years old, the crux of the movie is still fresh and entertaining, making it an enjoyable watch even in 2019. Also, The Fakir of Venice movie is supposed to be the debut movie for Farhan Akhtar. Ladies Vs Ricky Bahl In this movie, Ranveer Singh makes girls fall prey for his tricks with his charming attitude. While some found this movie extremely misogynistic, I think there is nothing fair when it comes to cheating someone for money. For what it’s worth, Ranveer leaves his past behind and starts a new life by the end of the movie, so I think that makes up for what he has done in the past. Raja Natwarlal This 2014 Bollywood movie features Emraan Hashmi as Raja who cons people for his livelihood. On an attempt to make a big catch, Hashmi ends up stealing the money of Billionaire Varda Yadav (played by Kay Kay Menon) who just can’t stand the thought of getting robbed by two cons and orders his goons to kill them. The thrilling chase that follows forms the rest of the film. Music added an extra element of emotion to the film, all thanks to Yuvan Shankar Raja who did his Bollywood debut through this movie. Special 26 No one batted an eyelid when they Akshay Kumar played the role of a con man who does fake CBI raids to steal money from the rich. The movie was so good, in fact, that it was later remade in Tamil as Thaanaa Serndha Koottam. The movie tasted a massive success at the box office, proving good movies are always welcomed by the audience. While we all like seeing Akshay Kumar in righteous roles, this is one movie you just can’t afford to miss out. We are pretty con-fident that these are some of the best movies of Bollywood in this list, puns intended. Con-sidering how much we love these movies, I think you are going to have to have a fun time watching it. 
Kaafir, A Tale Winning Millions Heart:	Kaafir, the ZEE5 Original web series has been the talk of the town since launch. Starring Dia Mirza and Mohit Raina in the lead, the web series shows the journey of Kainaaz Akhtar, resident of POK who crosses over to India and is held as a prisoner. It portrays the beautiful relationship the mother Kainaaz and her daughter Seher share and their fight to return back legally to Pakistan. All the eight episodes keep you hooked and leave you with some questions to answer about the struggles and bonds. Inspired by a true story, Kaafir is a tale worth telling the masses. The simplicity and innocence of the child are in complete sync with the struggles and tortures her mother faces. The journalist cum lawyer, Vedant played by Mohit Raina has his own share of efforts to overcome. Having lost his brother to militant, he saved from imprisonment a few months backfill him with never-ending guilt. This is what forces him to take up Kainaaz’s case, and the bond shared by Kainaaz and Vedant speaks volumes in itself. (Click  here  to see Mohit Raina’s interview with The Indian Express about his role in Kaafir, why he chose the project and more.) Kaafir tells the tale of two warring nations, its politics and society and gender oppression. Kainaaz, played by Dia Mirza, showcases the emotions of a victim perfectly. The commendable acting by her evokes sympathy and compassion for her character by the audiences. Her mental trauma and constant efforts to free her will force you to question about the struggles people face who accidentally cross borders. What’s the best part of this endearing tale? Kaafir draws the similarities between two different nations and its people in terms of culture, lifestyle, food and most importantly, emotions. What is shared between the two countries is the love between a mother and her child and the struggles we all face every day. Indians and Pakistan share many things in common: Kafir has been clearly defined in Quran – they are not non-muslims but are thought so by the Muslims or Moin. People have a challenging life at the borders – and we need to be sympathetic towards them for the same. According to Quran- Kafir is the one who conceals the fact, is ungrateful and kafirejects Quran. Be it an Indian or a Pakistani, both are peace lovers and that is why you must be empathetic, kind and helpful towards the ones struggling at the borders. If you are looking for some exciting web series to watch this week, watch this intriguing tale Kaafir and we are sure you will just love it.
