This Video Will Give You The True Insight Of SRK’s Popularity Worldwide:	Shahrukh Khan…naam toh suna hoga. Of course. Who wouldn’t have? He is popular not just in India but the world over. And it is for a reason…With his superb acting in possibly all genres, whatever the film industry could ever have offered, he is and has been a superstar with incomparable versatility. No matter what your taste is, or what is your age, SRK is a favorite of all. Established as a never before seen charmer and a benchmark in romantic movies, some of his films like Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge, Kuch Kuch Hota Hai and Kal Ho Na Ho are loved and adored by masses in places as close as Ghatkopar and as far as Germany! Don’t believe us? Check this excellent video by some of his German fans which enact the famous title track of Kal Ho Na Ho, and find out for yourself. Video and featured image source:  Sha [mashshare]
You Won’t Be Able To Stop Yourself LOL After Watching This Video On Bollywood Songs For Everyday Reactions:	Hind movies and their good, not so good songs, all become a part of our everyday lives. We inadvertently remember a scene from a movie or a song when we are in situations similar to them. This amazing video by Sahil Shah reminds us of the same. You won’t be able to stop laughing after watching this video. Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Sahil Shah
20 Reasons Why We All Simply Love Shahrukh Khan:	We have known Shahrukh Khan for over a two decades now. We have grown with this star. We have seen this fantastic actor live every kind of role and any character with such ease and charm. He once said in an interview, “ I am the last of the stars “; and it seems, he was right about it. There is no-one today in Bollywood who seems capable to replace this superstar who has ruled the hearts of many; women, children, men and oldies alike! In the light of his newly released movie, ‘ Happy New Year ‘, let us recall the brilliance of his acting in varied roles over the years. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source  / featured image credits: Yash Raj Films
20 Photos That Prove Bollywood Is As Magical As The Magical Land Of Disney:	Bollywood has always enchanted us with its glamour, grandeur and super heroic and angelic stories. It has been the land of dreams for so many of us. And Disney has been our friend, companion who taught us to believe in magic and that what you dream and imagine truly can be true. Now, when these two combine you can truly imagine how that story is going to be!! Our beautiful heroines; the fairy princesses, locked away in the towers so high that touched the sky, and with a moat around them. And our heroes; the brave knights in shining armours, our charming princes that never failed to slay the dragon and win the princesses’ heart’s in return! So, here bringing the two magical lands together are the pictures, which will truly mesmerise us. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source     image source   image source  
20 Funny Dialogues Of 60s-80s Bollywood Movies That Will Make You Teary With Laughter:	Some Bollywood dialogues are the identity of of our bygone  Bollywood era. The classic lines though heavy and dramatic just suited  the melodrama in the movie itself, are truly senseless and if you think about it ecstatically hilarious! Good, that we are done with these clichéd dialogues, but yes, we can’t ever forget these epics either! C’mon yar! Don’t get dharmik all of a sudden!! Please! image source   Nahiiiiiiii….!! I-pill failed?!!! image source   OK dad but please let me have your credit card first. image source   What about the windows dude? And the chimney? Ho Ho Ho… image source   But mom..! I toh call him shona, baby, pumpkin, darling, muffin……..never his name. image source   Bas jitna aapki beti ek mahine mein udati hai…Ek hafte me meri gaadi utna tel khaati hai. image source   Great so let’s get started with Ghoda Badam Chai. image source   Yeah dude, what’s up with these Holi ki pichkaariyan?!! image source
22 Funny Dialogues From Andaz Apna Apna That Still Make You Laugh Every Time You Hear Them:	More than two decades have gone by and still the name of this movie itself roughs up our funny bone. The perfect mix of epic acting of Aamir and Salman, the precise comic timings and the immensely, mind blowingly funny dialogues are just enough to give you those aching cheeks and stomach with laughter! image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image s ource   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
Oscar Winning Sound Track JAI HO Recomposed Without Using A Single Instrument..Simply Unbelievable!:	Ever imagined a  soundtrack which won  Grammy and Oscar Awards can be recomposed in a cappella ( without instrumental accompaniment ) version? Yes, you are hearing it right! The song “Jai Ho”  from Slumdog Millionaire  has been re-composed by  Alaa Wardi  and his good friend Peter Hollenssounds. Alaa Wardi is an 26 years old Saudi Arabia-based Iranian musician. His music features a cappella singing, usually with human rhythmic accompaniment, including beatboxing. He became internationally known for his Hindi cover versions of Bollywood hits  Pehla Nasha and Jiya Re. With the patriotic fever running high  in the country lets all chant together “Jai Ho” You can also follow Alaa Wardi on Facebook Video and featured image source: Youtube via  Alaa Wardi If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
7 Ways Our Bollywood Actresses Prove They Are Actually Heroines When It Comes To Saving Their Movies’ A**:	Bollywood makes some amazing movies no doubt. But it also true, many rather most of its movies are actually bogus and are nothing but worth being in trash box! No story. Neither relevance. And yet they create wonders on the internet and many a times even on the box office… And often the credit goes to the ravishing and bold actresses. If only it hadn’t been for these….. They have nothing to bring to the table except for their thumkas  that create dhoom !! Even the lines of the songs they lip-sync in their movies is more than the actual lines they get to speak in the film!! But still they become the talk of the town with their grooves…even more attracting than the story itself!! Story? What story?!! image source / Yash Raj Films   The movie has no substance. The screenplay is dull. And the dialogues? One syllable…. Phusssssss …… But still the movie becomes the hot topic of discussion and even for one time watch.. How?!! Why?!! Because of the glitteratti !! If that’s even a word. From Christian Dior to Ferragamo.. It should be all about high end fashion if not an impactive storyline. Oh!! Ai Shi. image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   The decades old mantra still goes strong. Drop more clothes than all your dialogues put together and Voilà!! You’ve got yourself some steamy soup for everyone to get drawn to the theatres… At least now they won’t ‘murder’ you for making that movie. image source / Vishesh Films- T Series   Put that vacuum cleaner at home to good use and suck out the life from your body… Cuz unless you don’t start looking like a dehydrated prune, you are noway going to pull off that tashan ! Well, this is what we all need in a two and a half hour long movie isn’t it? image source / Yash Raj Films   Or perhaps gain some ‘extra’ tonnes to ‘fit’ or perhaps somehow squeeze yourself into that role. Mix a little s** talk, garnish with some boldness and boy!! You have a dirty picture ready!! image source / ALT Entertainment- Balaji Motion Pictures P.S. Kidding apart the movie was really something to watch.   No story?!!! How do we make a film then?!! Don’t fret miss…better kiss. And not once, or twice.. That’s passé. Make it 17.  And before you know it, your movie chale ya na chale , it will be on everybody’s lips and you…. the next hot thing!! Bang on! image source / Vishesh Films image source   The successors of the burning looove and kisses is the latest bathtub and shower scenes… What if it doesn’t go with the movie type. You want to sell your film or not?!! Then, better pound and beat and make the grains as fine as possible that it may fill all the gaps and holes in the movie. Then wash the nonsense down the shower drain. image source / Balaji Motion Picture /  Featured Image Source / Yash Raj Films
If Bollywood Had Its Own TV Channels This Is What Its Channels Would Be:	We can’t live without our daily dose of idiot box and so is the case with Bollywood… We are crazy for these both. But what will happen if the two combined? From hockey to cricket…we have a range of sports channels to choose from… Chak De India, Bhag Milkha Bhag, Dhan Dhana Dhan Goal, Mary Kom, Lagaan image source / Yash Raj Films   Who can live without family melodrama….. Take you pick Hum Aapke Hain Koun, Hum Sath Sath Hain, Kabhi Khushi Kabhi Gham image source / Rajshri Productions   With Bollywood in question there can never be lack of options for good music… Sur, Rock On, Rockstar, Ashiqui 2 image source / Eros International   Stay ahead and informed with… No One Killed Jessica, Page 3 image source / UTV Spotboy   Be a master chef and win everyone’s heart with… Bawarchi, Cheeni Kum, Duplicate, Daawat-e-ishq image source / MAD Entertainment Ltd.   Bring the world home with… Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara, Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Glam up and dazzle everyone with… Fashion, Khoobsurat, Aisha image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Bhandarkar Entertainment   Experience the future and learn from your past… Krrish, Robot, The Legend of Bhagat Singh, 1947 Earth, Hey Ram, Jodhaa Akbar, Mughal-e-Azam image source   Because youth is the future…. Yuva, Raanjhanaa, Youngistan, Mujhse Fraaandship Karoge, Pyaar Ka Punchnama image source / Eros International   Entertainment… Entertainment… Entertainment… Kahaani, Dus Kahaaniyaan, Darna Zaroori Hai, Bombay Talkies image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures- Pen India Pvt.Ltd   Connect to the almighty… Ramayan, Santoshi Ma, O My God, God Tussi Great Ho, Baghban image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Because dil toh baccha hai ji … Chillar Party, Bhoothnath, Taare Zameen Par, Raju Chacha, Ta Ra Rum Pum Ajay Devgn Films   Apni boli, apna des … Delhi 6, Hyderabad Blues, Mission Kashmir, 2 States, Madras Cafe image source / Showman Pictures- UTV Motion Pictures- Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra Pictures- ShowMan Pictures
If Movies Could Serve The Government These Are The Departments They Would Head:	What if Bollywood movies could replace the government sector departments and preside themselves? Which movies would get the honour to serve the janta ?!! Mother India image source   Life of Pi image source / 20th Century Fox   Aaja Nach Le image source / Yash Raj Films   Gangs Of Wasseypur image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Guru Madras Talkies   Karthik Calling Karthik image source / Reliance Big Pictures   Lakshya image source / Excel Entertainment   Taare Zameen Par image source / Aamir Khan Productions   Coolie image source / Aasia Films Pvt. Ltd.- M.K.D. Films Combine   Koyla image source / Filmkraft Productions Pvt. Ltd.    Jal image source / DAR Motion Pictures   Rocket Singh. Salesman of The Year Yash Raj Films   Daawat-e-Ishq Yash Raj Films   Jungle image source   Rajneeti UTV Motion Pictures   We Are A Family image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Page 3 image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Dharma Productions   Pardes image source / Mukta Arts   Jolly LLB image source / Fox Star Studios   Swades image source / UTV Motion Pictures   3 Idiots Reliance Entertainment   Gulaab Gang image source / Sahara Movie Studios   Zindagi Naa Milegi Dobara image source / Eros International   Highway image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Bhag Milkha Bhag image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures/  Featured Image Source / UTV Motion Pictures
11 Healthy Lifestyle Expectations Of A Woman From When She Will Turn 30 That Seldom Become Reality:	When I grow up …. This is a strange phrase. It makes you dream and aspire of all the good things you ever wish for yourself and actually let you see them happening, even though just in your imagination. But the sad part is we only imagine. Hardly ever does it happen, that we meet our expectations for our future self! Being 30 is a scary. And you become aware of it the day you bid good bye to your sweet 25 (Not sixteen. That will be ridiculous). So, we make promises, have expectations but when we actually turn into our 30s….we seldom see that turning into reality. image source / UTV Motion Pictures image source / Eros International   image source     image source   image source / Eros International image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Yash Raj Films image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source image source   image source / iDream Production image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source   image source     image source   image source     image source   image source  /  Featured Image Source / Eros International
16 Things You Would Relate To About Christmas If You Studied In A Convent School:	Christmas is a joyous occasion. With the wonderful weather outside and festivity everywhere it is perhaps the most wonderful time of the year. And if you happened to study in a Convent school, it becomes an altogether more important and indispensable part of your life and memories. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source     image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
14 Bollywood Characters And Their Iconic  Facebook Status:	Facebook has become an indispensable part of our lives now. Wherever you are, whatever you are doing and however you are feeling, you want to update your status so accordingly all the time. So, let’s see what would be these iconic Bollywood characters’ statuses be. image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   image source   image source /Viacom 18 Motion Pictures     image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   1 image source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films   image source   Featured Image Source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films
Watch Why We Call MS Dhoni Best Finisher In World cricket! ..He Won India Matches Out Of Nowhere… WHOA!:	MSD is India’s most successful captain of all time and has won hearts of millions with his ability to take risk and courage to finish games with even One Man Standing ( Batting with lower order player) Alastair Cook , England’s captain, described  MS Dhoni  as one of the hardest players in the world to bowl to at the death “Dhoni is probably the best player in the world in those situations, in these conditions,” Cook said. “He does it time and time again. He’s incredibly hard to bowl at.” Video credit: Youtube   Featured image credit If you appreciate this brave heart talent of Indian cricket, share this video with y our friends.
Mumbai On Cleavages: A Must Watch Hilarious Video By Being Indian:	We have heard a lot of the word ‘cleavage’ in the news lately. Indiatimes and it’s spin on Deepika Padukone’s cleavage has been the talk of the town (read country). What was your take on the news? Is it OK to use a celebrity’s public figure to talk about any of it’s personal attributes too? Do you think one should respect the personal life of the celebs and not leave them alone? Or do you think, somethings as common and natural as cleavage should not be hyped so much and taken in a good spirit? Let’s find out in this laugh-a-riot video, what Mumbai has to say about all this? Video Source: Mumbai on Cleavages by Being Indian
Enough of complaining about everything we own,Hell Yes! It’s a BIG DEAL:	Our journey must have been mind blowing if we travel for the first time in airplane but if we fly in foreign airlines and then compare the same with an Indian one might leave us in disappointment. This does not mean that we should not improve our hospitality or services but instead of complaining we should be encouraging them to grow, after all our country and like we read about foreign airlines people from other nations also ready about our airlines. Video and featured image source: Youtube   Featured image source We all should promote positive hospitality of our country, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
13 Traditional And Famous Dishes Of Himachal You Must Definitely Try Once:	Himachal Pradesh apart from being blessed with breathtaking natural beauty, is also a tasteful blend of exquisite pahari cuisine that gives any traveller more than just one reason to fall in love with this beautiful mountains dotted state. Himachali or pahari  cuisine has a unique aroma and flavour to it due to the usage of a lot of yoghurt and cardamom and cooking on slow flame. One can clearly see that the Himachali dishes have a lot of influence of Punjabi and Tibetan style of food. The availability of vegetables is a challenge in the hilly and cold terrain of Himachal Pradesh hence, most of the traditional dishes are either non-vegetarian, make use of different types of lentils in them or both. The use of varied spices like chillies, cardamom, cinnamon, turmeric and coriander powder is common and make the food rich and spicy; very much to the delight of the tourists that flock to this part of the country almost all year long. The pahari folk also use a lot of dairy products, especially buttermilk, curd and ghee to make their food even more delectable. There are a lot of restaurants all over Himachal Pradesh which serve authentic pahari food for you to enjoy and imprint on your minds. So, if you are planning to go to the land of the majestic Himalayas for your next vacations, you should definitely give a try to these amazing dishes from Himachal Pradesh. No festivities of Himachal are considered complete without Dham. It is a dish prepared by the Brahmins of the regions of Chamba by cooking red kidney beans ( rajma ), green lentils (moong daal ) and rice in curd. It is served teamed with mash daal , boor ki kari and sweet and sour sauce made from tamarind and jaggery ( gur ). It is traditionally served on plates made out of leaves. image source   Mittha as the name suggests is a local dessert of Himachal Pradesh. It is prepared with sweetened rice mixed with a generous helping of raisins and other dry fruits. image source   Sidu is a local bread made from wheat flour. The flour is kneaded and set aside for some hours for the yeast to settle and the dough to rise. This dough is put on direct flame of bonfire to be par-cooked and then later steamed to complete the cooking. This distinct bread is usually enjoyed with ghee or butter alone or can be savoured with mutton or daal as well. image source   Babru is like a Himachali variation of the popular kachoris. It is made by stuffing soaked and ground black gram daal paste to kneaded dough patties. These patties are then rolled and deep fried and served with tamarind chutney. image source   Madra is a form of yoghurt and chickpea flour based gravy popular in pahar cuisine. Chana Madra is one such dish made with kabuli chane or white chickeas cooked in the gravy seasoned with  assorted spices, ginger, garlic and onions. image source   The name itself brings a tangy taste in our mouths. Khatta is indeed a very sumptuous dish made with pumpkin cooked in a spicy and tangy madra gravy and dried raw mango powder or amchoor along with other spices .  Other popular vegetable preparations of the region are Sepu Vadi and Gucchi Mattar. image source   Another of Himachali delicacy, Chha Gosht is a dish that is made with marinated lamb meat cooked in a gravy of gram flour, yoghurt and spices such as cardamom, red chilli powder, coriander powder, bay leaf, asafoetida and ginger-garlic paste. image source   Mash daal or kali daal is made with split black lentils or ma ki daal. It is soaked overnight, pressure cooked and then simmered in a heavy bottomed pan along with thinly sliced onions, ginger, garlic and spices shallow fried in hot mustard oil to give the comforting mash daal. image source   A popular breakfast dish of Sirmour district, Patande can rightly be called as Indian pancakes. Ladle full of smooth batter made from wheat flour, milk and sugar are poured on a ghee laden hot griddle and a thin pancakes like those resembling dosa(s) are cooked to make sweet and yummy Patande. image source   This fish delicacy made with marinated trout shallow fried in mustard oil with spices is a much loved dish of the Kullu region. Cooked in minimal spices, the dish brings out the natural flavours of the delicious trout. image source   Akotri is a typical delicacy of the Northern Hills. It is a type of cake made with buckwheat mixed with wheat that is usually prepared on occasions of festivities. image source   A type of pulao, Tudkiya Bhath is made with rice cooked with lentils, potatoes, onions, ginger, garlic and yoghurt and spiced with bay leaf, cardamom, cinnamon, red chilli powder etc. This spicy rice dish is usually served with mash daal. image source   A unique dish made from the lotus stems, it is truly a scrumptious. The stems are thinly sliced, washed and boiled then stir fried with onion, ginger-garlic paste, gram flour, cayenne pepper and other spices that renders the dish a distinct taste and texture. image source
Order the Best Waffles in Gurgaon at Crepe-fe:	Order the best waffles in Gurgaon at your doorstep. Yes you heard us right! Do you belong to the group of people who enjoy waffles more than dosas? We get you! Aren’t waffles the yummiest food on Earth? With their crunchy texture topped with the right kind of chocolate or a syrup can just make your day! Waffles are a blessing to us Indians from the French, that are just the right kind of soul food. These crunchy dishes are the best food to go and eat in any cafe. Good mood or bad mood, waffles are sure to make you feel better than ever! The best part about this dish is the crunchy texture that gives you a good feeling as you chomp on it. However, if you order them home, they are sure to be a mess. When you order waffles for home delivery, they tend to become softer and lose the crunch, making it a waste of time to even eat them. But we all want to order them home and have them while snuggling in our blanket on a cold night, don’t we? To solve this problem of yours, Crepe-fe is here! Crepe-fe offers you to order the best waffles in Gurgaon that will remain crunchy even at your doorstep. Crepe-fe, started by Shourrya Sachdeva who graduated from Les Roches International School of Hotel Management Switzerland which is one of the top Hospitality University in the world. It is not unknown to us waffle lovers that when waffles are ordered online, it is a disaster. The experts at Crepe-fe recognised this too, and made sure they do something about it. Since the segment of waffle delivery is a challenge that no one wants to take up, they wanted to take a chance at it. It took them 25 days and around 65 different kinds of batters to arrive onto the right one. They experimented through various kinds of batters and saw which one lasted the most crisp until 45-60 minutes. they finally landed on the Brussels Waffle. The Brussels Waffle crafted at Crepe-fe is a palate wonder. They can remain crisp for around 45-60 minutes and can retain the flavour of the waffle. The toppings and sauces are carefully separated from the waffle and packed differently. When arrived, you can freshly add your toppings on the crispy waffles and enjoy your treat. Crepe-fe is undoubtedly your go-to place if you love the French cuisine! They have everything that you have been craving for. Crepes, waffles, shakes, bagels, pancakes, gelatos, chocolate bars, chocolate chunks, hand made chocolates and the best croissants in the town, too! Their crepes are the sweetest dishes you can get your hands on. That being said, the chocolate chunks are not less either. If you want to have flavourful chocolates filled with nuts that you just wanna store for 7-10 days; these chocolate chunks might be everything you are looking for. The gourmet bagels, gelatos, and the shakes need a special mention for their jaw-dropping flavours. All-in-all, Crepe-fe will make you drool just by the smell and look of the desserts. Take a bite of them, and you’re almost in heaven. They are sure to satiate all your sweet teeth with the wide variety of dishes that you can get your hands on. They are available on both Android and iOS app stores, and can get you your desired desserts to your doorstep. They will offer you the freshest experience you might have imagined when it comes to these French dishes. Crepe-fe has the most transparent and hygienic kitchen in recent times, making sure to keep your waffles healthy. In addition to that, they are selling India’s crunchiest waffles at your doorstep. Make sure you try them. You wouldn’t regret! Their crepes are the sweetest dishes you can get your hands on. That being said, the chocolate chunks are not less either. If you want to have flavourful chocolates filled with nuts that you just wanna store for 7-10 days; these chocolate chunks might be everything you are looking for. The gourmet bagels, gelatos, and the shakes need a special mention for their jaw-dropping flavor. You can Order here !
10 Fun Things to Do During Your Goa Holiday:	When you think of partying, what destination pops up in your mind? Goa! Yes, the land of fun, adventure and parties, Goa. Also the ultimate destination for good times. A rage among youngsters and families alike, Goa has cropped up as a great travel destination in India, frequented almost all year round by tourists, both Indians and foreign nationals. This has made Goa holiday packages the best selling packages than any of its counterparts, leading to many exciting offers on the solo and group trips to Goa, from time to time.   image source image source Goa is an exceptionally beautiful state of India with stunning beaches, sweeping beautiful shores and simply amazing architecture dating back to the colonial times, making anyone’s Goa tour package a ‘value for money’ deal. While the place is almost always brimming with tourists from all over the world, keeping its beaches warm and happening, and its nightlife soaring high, Goa also has its fair share of tranquil and secluded beaches, quaint monuments and sleepy but scenic villages and towns that speak of unparalleled charm and beauty.   image source Though known primarily for its wine, dine and parties, this coastal paradise of India has much more to offer than just that. If you have already been to Goa half a dozen times with your friends or family and think there’s nothing more than Baga beach or Basilica of Bom Jesus, think again! We know you still haven’t had enough of the place because of the scrumptious array of sea food, tax-free liquor and endless parties ! But this time visit Goa for these 10 exhilarating things to do !! image source / Excel Entertainment One of the most wonderful experience to gain in Goa is sighting Dolphins. Since many people are not aware of this exciting activity viable in the state, it often goes ignored. However, when on your next Goa holiday package, it will be a good idea to try this superb offbeat activity that is facilitated at multiple regions in Goa. Varca is one popular destination in Goa to try it. The cruises often commence from Panjim Jetty, the fort of Aguada or Sinquerim. If you get lucky and are allowed to do so, you can enjoy the unmatched experience of playing with these intelligent and lovely fish, by taking a dip in the waters; though see to it that proper safety arrangements are in place.   image source   Before we proceed to tell you about how exciting this activity is, a fair warning: Crab catching is not an easy task! If you hate to get your hands muddy or are afraid of getting a sting, do not try it. Catching these crustaceans is not a child’s play and requires both patience and a little tolerance for nips too. Homemade nets known as ‘Kobblem’ are used to trap and catch crabs in the backwaters of Goa or at a few seaside regions. If you think you are up for it then you can avail the benefit of one of such tours organized in Goa. If you have an adventurous streak then tag along a local this escapade.   image source   A walk in the aromatic and enchanting spice plantations of Goa provide the perfect getaway from the swarming regions of the place. The fragrance of the fresh spice cultivation in Tropical Spice Farm, Savoi garden, Bondla Wildlife Sanctuary or Sahakari Spice Farm is enough to scintillate all your senses and refresh your soul. In addition to enjoying this natural allure, you can also play with the majestic residents of the region, elephants! Give the mighty tuskers a bath or sit on their backs while they splash you with trunk fulls of water! Make the most of your Goa tour package this time and try this offbeat activity for sure when in Goa.   image source   As legend has it, a demon used to reign over the place and all of its dwelling creatures. Once when a local cheated the demon out of his fish, he cursed the area for eternity. Even to this day, the eerie silence can be felt when you visit this place. The uneasy vibes that you feel are unmissable. The gorges flowing over with a violently turbulent river is ill famed for taking the lives of a number of swimmers here due to slippery rocks and depth. So, if you get your kicks from spooky adventures, then you definitely visit this canyon on your Goa holiday package .   image source   Talking about excitement, luck and celebrations, Goa’s casinos cannot be far behind. In fact, while gambling is illegal in rest of the country, it is very much legal here, leading to a rush of zeal for it on the counters of Goa casinos. So, it only makes sense to try your hand at gambling , when in Goa. Of course, caution is inevitable, needing you to draw a line, but don’t put a break on the fun that it delivers! So, go ahead try something zingy and new at one of the many onshore or offshore casinos in Goa. Some of the most popular ones include Casino Pride, Casino Paradise, Deltin Royale, Deltin Jaqk and many more.   image source   Though known for its hip environment and abuzz beaches, Goa has other side to it that’s enigmatic and rich with history, even beyond the famed Portugese architecture. There are many surreal caves in the area that are absolutely gorgeous and heavily laced with the legacy of past. Some natural and other man-made, these caves provide excellent sites to satiate your inner thinker, explorer or nature enthusiast. With an idealistic set up for a tranquil rendezvous with self or even with your friends, Arvalem Caves, Rivona Caves, and Lamgau Caves are certainly not ones to be missed out on.   image source   Tracing your way back from the verdant spice plantations in Goa, you can stop by the Butterfly Conservatory in Ponda and relish the nature’s marvel. You will be welcomed here by perhaps the most hypnotizing vista of all ; the mesmerizing and vibrant butterflies fluttering their magnificent colorful wings in a contagiously joyful manner. Standing amidst these joyous, vibrant and beautiful creatures, you cant stop from staring at them in utter wonderment as they cheerfully collect nectar from the juicy and colorful fruits in the vicinity. This indeed feels blissful. It is certainly one of the most satisfying things to do on your Goa tour package making it one of the top choices of activities here.   image source For anyone with a knack for adventures, kayaking in Goa backwaters is a must. Not just does the tempestuous water pose a thrilling challenge to your adventurous persona, but the ravishing sights of the beautiful North Goa passing along with you, is simply impossible to resist. Perfect to pack suitcases full of memories with your friends, this crazy water sport in Goa is a must to indulge in on your next Goa holiday package .   image source   Miles away from the din of the buzzing city and frenzied tourists, Goa has much to offer to the soul in search for some peace and authenticity of the Goan roots. With myriad secluded islands of the region, nature paints a delightful picture of Goan landscape that’s hard to describe in words. The pristine natural beauty and invigorating serenity of the islands is exceptional. The quaint villages welcome you heartily. With their old and trodden but impressive Portuguese Baroque style houses and picturesque topography, lush surroundings and peaceful environs, these hamlets are a delight for the thirsty traveller.   image source   Ever thought why you find so many hippies in Goa? Well that’s because Goa has this strong vibe of freedom, respite and zest about it that is so inviting to the free spirits that hippies signify. So, why not unleash your own inherent free spirit and live a day or two on your Goa holiday package like the carefree yet ardent hippie? Braid your hair in colorful threads, get inked (temporarily or permanent, as your free mind desires!), wear long flowy tie and dyed nomadic clothes which can be easily found at one of the many street shopping arcades near the beaches. And if you dare to go bolder, you may as well try getting dreadlocks. The idea is to blend in the fun and friendly crowd of Goa and enjoy its ethos to the core.   image source Anytime of the year is the best time to visit Goa. The beauty and the magic of the place beckons you to its shores all year round. Though the tourist season is October to January, you can have the greatest of time on the wonderful beaches in monsoons too! Lying in a hammock put up in a shack, you can view the magic of raindrops mingle with the sea , making you want the time to stop! So what are you waiting for? Feel like planning a trip to Goa now? Check out “ 23 Best Places To Visit In South Goa ”  What was the most memorable activity on your Goa holiday ? Let us know in the comments below.
Famous Beaches in Goa You Will Never Want to Leave:	Goa doesn’t need an introduction, neither does anyone need coaxing or even a reason to visit this exhilarating place. The vibe and energy of Goa is magnetic enough to pull anyone and everyone looking to break free, come dancing to the town. The world famous beaches in Goa are the perfect spots to let off steam and enjoy your vacations in a way that will become a memory to etch in your mind forever. However, if you been putting off your vacation to this sand, wind and surf paradise, these amazing pictures of famous South & North Goa beaches will help you make up your mind soon. So, what are you waiting for? Come join the endless loop of fun at these top 12 famous beaches of Goa. North Goa is the most frequented part of Goa for its brilliant beaches and incessant parties. There are some pretty famous beaches in Goa which everyone seems to have heard of and there’s a  big reason why. They are breathtakingly beautiful, not to mention the amazing adventure sports and beach shacks where you can enjoy until it’s dawn. So, here are the famous North Goan Beaches that you cannot simply contain by looking at from far off. Most exciting and popular beach among tourists and locals alike, come to this famous Goan beach for some delicious seafood, foot tapping music at beach shacks and salt bath. image source The sole address of scrubbed sand dunes in all of Goa, enjoy the popular ‘Dive Goa’ activity right here at this famous Goa beach. image source If you want to taste the authentic Goan cuisine, enjoy hearty drinks, indulge in a lot of shopping and enjoy water scooter ride, you know where to go. image source Looking forward to head rush with water sports? Sinquerim Beach is the place to be to try all kinds of water activities including snorkelling or parasailing. Aguada lighthouse is another major attraction. image source Get out your cameras people, the star of the lot is here. With red cliffs, Chapora fort and stunning greenery, Vagator is the most famous beach in Goa for good photography…. and for its rave culture (!!!). image source And the award for the most mystical beach goes to… With gentle breeze swaying tall palm trees, the Arabian Sea flanking a side, unusual rock formations, it is, of course, a highly famous beach of Goa, but for its flea market and rave parties too! image source Less popular but still fairly visited, South Goa has many famous beaches to its name that are apt for a beachside vacation. This part of the town is well known for its pristine and relatively tranquil beaches making them ideal for a relaxing beach travel destination. These are perfect if you like a little adventure and thrill on your holidays as these beaches offer ample of opportunities for indulging headfirst into various water sports. So, let’s check out some of the most famous beaches of South Goa. Lined with numerous coconut trees, this golden sandy beach is the ideal place to recharge your batteries. Enjoy delicious seafood and happening Indian and foreigner crowd apart from myriad water sports. image source Patronized mostly by the foreigners and fishermen, Palolem is one-star child that is still successful at saving itself from the harsh paparazzi, giving you plenty of opportunities for a calming and refreshing beach holiday. image source With Agonda church as one of the main attractions here, this pristine beach is famous beach in South Goa region, yet sees less crowd, making it ideal to enjoy peaceful activities like Yoga, meditation, dolphin watching and hiking too. image source Which one of these are you planning to visit next? Let us know in the comments below. 
7 Travel Sites And Apps You Must Know:	A travel junkie does not need a reason to travel and to make their travel, life more exciting there are travel websites and apps which help travelers discover best destinations to travel and also take care of the logistics involved in travelling. Below is the list of recommended travel websites and apps a travel enthusiast should browse while making travel decision in India. Travel decision starts with travel discovery. MakeMyTrip offers you discovery of weekend gateways, travel offers, holiday packages and many more. You can download MakeMyTrip travel app here ( Android , iOS , Windows ) image source: makemytrip.com If you are looking at discount and good rates on your travel bookings via.com is the site to keep as bookmark or download the app here. ( Android , iOS ) image source: via.com IRCTC helps you book train tickets online across India. IRCTC is also available on Android app.  You can download the app here . image source: IRCTC Redbus is simple and easy way of booking a bus online. It provides you live inventory availability of bus networks across the country and helps you to make booking online. It also allows you to select your choice of seat. You can download redbus app here ( Android , iOS , Windows ) image source: redbus UBER and Ola helps you to book taxi on the go which you are traveling in India. It is recommended to check the availability of Uber and Ola in the travel destination before you count on them. However in metro cities they are majorly available for booking. You can download UBER and OLA app. image source: ola OYO Rooms offers you affordable hotel booking across the county. Oyo is delightful and great place to stay, it offers standard room, wifi and complimentary breakfast. (subject to availability) You can download OYO app here. ( Android , iOS , Windows ) image source: OYOrooms.com If you want to discover hotels nearby in India, Zomato is the app to carry with you. It offers your restaurant address, contact number, menu and online order (online order only on few selected locations). You can download the app here ( Android , iOS ) image source: Zomato, featured image souce
13 Amazing Places to Visit in Kolkata Before They Become Too Popular:	You’ll Be Glad You Experienced These Unusual Places to Visit in Kolkata When Still Fairly Hidden The city of joy, Kolkata is famous for many things than just Victoria Memorial or Puchkas. But it should be given its due credit that the overstuffed tourist hubs and other popular joints in this former Indian capital is enough to put you off for good. Solution? Some ‘off the beaten track’ spots around the city that will not just refresh your mood but also add to your non-existent list of secret Places to Visit in Kolkata that only you and the gang can be privy to. Take a look at our list, thank us later. It is good just to stroll around watching the people or of course, to get some fragrant and fresh flowers too. image source   Kolkata isn’t just about art, culture and (yawn) history, y’know. image source   The roadside eateries in Chinatown, are going to be your next favourite breakfast joint in the city. image source   Run by the small Armenian community, it is amongst the oldest surviving churches of Kolkata, which was destroyed by fire, only to be reopened in 1724. image source   An ideal place not just for the serious ornithologists or nature photographers, it is a spectacular place to visit in Kolkata even for the average you and me who just love nature and rare moments of peace. image source   Unusual but definitely one Place to Visit in Kolkata that will bring you the closest to the soul of the city. image source   In operation since 1918 (OMG!), this small little juice hub in the city is what you need to get the authentic taste of the laidback life of Kolkata. image source   You’ll forget ‘eerie’ when you spot the lovely Indo-Saracenic and Gothic architecture of the tombs here, dating way back to 1767!  image source   A unique spot not just on our list of places to visit in Kolkata, but also the world’s largest market of its kind, selling second hand books, it is definitely the place to be if you love books more than people. image source   Talking of offbeat, you can’t get farther from this one. image source   With around a hundred odd boats, with over 200 sellers in them, this is definitely a sight to behold if not to get some retail therapy. image source   Perks of visiting this quaint place- negligible crowd, cheap boat rides, and ample of unperturbed me-time. image source   Built by the East India Company in th 18th Century, the forgotten walls of the church also shelter other attractions like Job Charnock’s Mausoleum, Second Rohilla War Memorial and Black Hole of Calcutta Memorial. image source
Hotel Spiti Sarai & Resort Top Hotel In Spiti Valley At The Height Of 12,500 feet:	Spiti Valley, a hidden gem of Himachal Pradesh has many wonderful experiences to offer. The snow-capped mountains, cold desert valleys, rich flora and fauna will amaze you with its natural beauty. It is also called as Indian Tibet which offers you a lot of beautiful places to visit in Spiti , making it a must-visit place. When you go on a vacation, choosing a safe and comfortable hotel is of paramount importance. Hotel Spiti Sarai is one of the top hotels in Spiti, is a trusted option to stay during your trip to Spiti valley. It has one of the most friendly staff who has all the local knowledge which you will need for exploring beautiful places to visit in Spiti Valley. One of the major concerns while on vacay is finding a comfortable stay! But, while you are in Spiti, it is recommended to stay at a place which can offer view of the beautiful Himalayan peaks. This Top Hotel In Spiti Valley has got it all covered for you! One of the best and safe hotel to stay in Spiti. Spiti Sarai Hotel rooms provides you views of Himalayan ranges, Key Monastery and Spiti River. They will surely give you a lot of Instagram worthy pictures. What else do you need, if you get a chance to get your hands into trying the local experiences. Top Hotel In Spiti Valley, Hotel Spiti Sarai has got them all. Enjoy this unique and traditional seating style of having meal at the hotel. Top Hotel In Spiti Valley, Spiti Sarai also organizes trek in the Kaza Area. This a pure blessing for people who want to make the most of their trip to Sipti Sarai. There are four different types of rooms at Hotel Spiti Sarai: With all basic amenities, your stay in this Top Hotel In Spiti Valley will be comfortable. They serve Indian and Chinese cuisine and the staff here are very welcoming. Lanza Village is famous for stories around fossil hunting and snow leopard sighting. It is located at an approximate altitude of 14,500 feet above the ground. Hikkim village is at the elevation of approximately of 14,000 feet above the ground. image source Chandratal Lake is one of the most famous place to visit at Spiti Valley. It is at the elevation of approximately 4,250 meter. Night camping by the side of the lake is a popular tourist attraction here. i image source If you are adventurous person, you must visit this pass. The dangerous and thrilled pass will take you closer to the Himalayan ranges giving you a lifetime experience. image source Known as little Tibet, Spiti culture is greatly influenced by the Buddhism. A home to multiple ancient monasteries such as Tabo, Dhankar and Kye. Your trip to Spiti is not only going to be thrilling but also peaceful due to the calm culture here. Spiti can be reached by taking a bus or car from Kullu Airport. Top Hotel In Spiti Valley, Spiti Sarai is around 240kms from Kullu, nearest Airport which can be completed within five hours. The nearest railway stations are Shimla, Joginder Nagar Railway Station. You can reach Spiti via a rented cab or a bus. There are many buses which run directly from Manali to Spiti or from Shima via Kinnaur to Spiti. The best time to visit Spiti Valley is from June to November where the roads are easily accessible otherwise the snow covered roads are blocked for travelling. So when are you planning to visit Spiti Valley? Here is the contact number ( 09418925003) of Spiti Sarai Hotel to book your hotel now at www.spitisarairesort.com
Spice up your Love Life at the Best resort for couples in Kufri:	Kufri, a hill station in Shimla, is a trendy destination inHimachal Pradesh frequented mostly by couples. Located among the Himalayas, ithas excellent panoramic scenery and receives snow throughout the year. Forthose couples in need of a romantic getaway spot far from the crowded cities,there is no better place than Kufri. Woodays resort is one of the best resortsfor couples in Kufri. Woodays resort, located at Kufri, Shimla has the distinctionof being the best resort for couples in Kufri. It is also ideally suited forsmall destination weddings, bachelorette parties or pre-wedding functions. Woodays resort, located at the heart of Kufri with itscomfortable Nordic styled wooden huts will captivate you. It provides a perfectsurreal setting for couples to spend some nice romantic moments together. Woodays resort has been receiving excellent reviews, and italso has been awarded a five-star rating by Booking.com besides being rated asa super host by Airbnb. A holiday at Woodays Resort will provide couples with somemuch-needed bonding time and also help them to reconnect with nature. The picture-perfect landscape of Kufri amidst the hills isthe best place you can spend quality time with your special companion. Nothing can be more romantic than a wooden cottage locatedamong thick Deodar forests with a spectacular view of the snow-clad Himalayanpeaks. The serene cottages are ideally located to provide the much-neededseclusion from unwanted crowds. The comfortable cottages made from high-quality timber and equipped with all modern amenities come attached with a balcony. They are also provided with a private washroom with an enclosure for showers. The staff is very polite and hospitable, attending to all your needs with great care. You can explore the panoramic locales with your companion by your side taking in the fresh, crisp mountain air that will completely refresh you and melt away all your worldly worries. Get warm near a bonfire at the open sitting area provided at Woodays resort and take amazing pics of you and your partner with the spectacular hills as a backdrop. Take your partner for a nice romantic dinner and dig intothe mouthwatering authentic Himalayan food or other multi-cuisine recipesprepared by the fantastic chefs at Woodays resort. You will enjoy some quality time with your companion at thewell-maintained beautiful gardens and explore the many varieties of plants andflowers there. Take part in the complimentary games provided like carom,chess, or badminton, or you can even bond together outdoors going horse orbicycle riding. The resort provides a great range of rooms to select fromand consists of comfortable standard as well as duplex rooms at reasonablerates with provisions for extra mattresses if required. The rooms are providedwith all luxury amenities like 24/7 hot or cold water, an in-room safe to keepyour valuables, free WiFi, and parking facilities. As can be undoubtedly seen, Woodays resort is the best resort for couples in Kufri , specially for those who need to spend a quiet and beautiful romantic time together away from the chaotic and stressful city life.
Stop Binge Eating Which Has Been Ruling Your Life:	Whenever you are hungry, you grab a snack, isn’t it? Sometimes, a packet of chips or popcorn or biscuits! Binge eating, mindless eating is how you get involved with fried and unhealthy food products. And, if you love watching movie or Netflix, then the amount of snack you consume is all your tiny secret! So, how does that snacking leave you with energy or makes you lazy or want you to have more of it? If it makes you lazy or sleepy, then you need to change your snacking options? It is quite natural for any of us to feel a drop in our energy levels, especially during the early afternoons or evenings when we are at work or home. After eating food in around two to three hours, our body again needs something to maintain its energy levels. Whenever we experience an energy drop or feel the need to have a quick bite, we instinctively reach out for a ready to eat packed product. That tasty bar of chocolate does seem to solve our energy crisis, but is short-lived. You tend to grab a piece of find which is in your vicinity. And, does that lead you focus and energy? Most probably no, right? It makes you feel sleepy and you tend to lose your mental focus, isn’t it? And you cannot work in a corporate, feeling sleepy and drizzy? If that has become a big reason why you should avoid having a snack, then look into what needs to be changed. Although, snacking restores the body’s energy levels and fuels you up in the middle portions of the day. A quick snack every time you feel an energy drop will boost your energy levels and bring you back on track. But, many a times overeating snacks leave you with guilt! Get over the guilt binge eating and start exploring new options for your snacking time. An increase in blood sugar levels causes the sudden rise in energy and also crashes immediately. It is because of the sugar plummets down lower than before. It can be seen that eating sugar-rich candies or chocolate bars is not an ideal solution. Similarly snacking on deep-fried foods like potato chips can also be harmful in many ways. Fried snacks are mostly made in processed vegetable oils and on heating, the oil can convert into trans fats. Trans fats are not good for heart. They are the main reasons for creating blockages in the blood vessels and causing heart diseases. Become choosy with the food you eat – look at the calories, ingredients – they speak the best about the product. And, oh yes, do not forget to see if you will love the flavor of these energy snacks! There are many best energy snacks in India which are a mix of flavoured and roasted nuts, dried fruits, and seeds. One such brand is Nutlings! Packed in pouches, it can be easily carried anywhere with you and eaten anytime you feel hunger pangs during the day, leaving you energetic. NUTS!!! They are energetic, healthy and the best choice for snacks. Nutlings are a nice tasty mix of nuts and seeds packed hygienically without a compromise on taste. Each variety of Nutlings are carry a unique flavor note with a different set of spices to add variety to your liking. Nutlings offer four varieties of product range in different combination of nuts, seeds and flavors. Make these energy snacks as a part of your routine. 
8 Hill Stations in Uttarakhand to Escape from the Mundane City Life!:	Just as they say that beauty is in the eyes of the onlookers, Uttarakhand proves this to be true. With more than fifty beautiful hill stations that will give you a treat to your eyes, it is one of the most sought-after travel destinations in India. Nestled between Tibet, Nepal, and Himachal; Uttarakhand is a gem of the nation. Home to beautiful snow-covered mountains, charming lakes, rumbling waterfalls, and a bloom of flowers; Uttarakhand is no less than a wonder at every nook and corner. There are many hill stations in Uttarakhand that will satisfy the wanderers and adventure seekers. With many snow sports activities and recreational activities that act as a cherry on the top, this beautiful state is a true treasure of the country. 	 Sl. No. Hill Stations in Uttarakhand 	 1 Mussoorie 	 2 Almora 	 3 Auli 	 4 Bhimtal 	 5 Naukuchiatal 	 6 Sattal 	 7 Chamoli 	 8 Nainital Image Source Often referred to as the ‘Queen of Hills,’ Mussoorie is the pride of Uttarakhand. Located in the lap of the beautiful Himalayas, Mussoorie holds a very special place in the tourism of Uttarakhand. It is one of the hill stations in the state that you need to visit at least once in your life. Be it the snowy mountains or the rumbling waterfalls, everything about this place stand up to its name. Known for its scenic landscapes and rich heritage, Almora in Uttarakhand is one of the most sought-after destinations in the country. Home for the hill temple and many other ancient temples in the state accompanied by stunning landscapes and weather, Almora is one of the best hill stations of Uttarakhand. Image Source If you are a snow baby, then Auli is the perfect choice for you! Be it skiing or snowboarding, Auli is the ultimate destination for all the snow sports activities. Offering panoramic views of the beautiful mountains at freezing temperatures, Auli will transport you to a different peaceful world. This mystical place is sure to give you utmost peace and relaxation. Image Source Known for its pristine lake, Bhimtal is one of the gems of Uttarakhand. Surrounded by magnificent hills and lush green borders, the lake of Bhimtal offers some scintillating views enough for your lifetime. Image Source Regarded to be the most unpolluted area of Uttarakhand, Naukuchiatal is one of the best hill stations to visit in Uttarakhand. Be it the beautiful sceneries or the utter silence, everything about this place attracts people from various parts. Image Source Home to a cluster of seven lakes, which breed many migratory birds, Sattal offers you a different kind of experience. If you can manage to visit the hill station at the right time, you can witness some amazing birds that you might not find in any other part of the country. Image Source Nestled in the Central Himalayan region, Chamoli is a great place to spend your holidays. It hosts a great range of activities like trekking in summers and skiing in winters for all the adventure seekers. It is one of the rarest and unpolluted gems of Uttarakhand that surely deserves a visit. Apart from this, Chamoli is also the home for some ancient temples for all the people who admire art and history. Image Source Words can never suffice the beauty of Nainital. Be it the Naina Devi Temple or the beautiful Naini Lake, Nainital has got a charm of its own. One of the most popular tourist destinations, Nainital is a place that should definitely be on your bucket list of places to visit. Stunning landscapes, panoramic views, and gorgeous lakes make your visit to Nainital worth every bit. If you love snow and some adventure added to it, then pack your bags and head over to Uttarakhand. Every place you visit here deserves to be on your bucket list, and is sure to never disappoint you!
These Healthy and Tasty Snacks in India Are Definitely Healthier Than A Bag Of Chips:	Are you the one who picks up a bag of chips when hungry – be it in the evenings or in the midnight or when you are just bored? These bag of chips are deep fried, calorific and not just healthy. Yet, you are unable to resist the temptation? Probably, because you don’t know if there are healthy and tasty snack options! With expansion of snack markets, a lot of innovation is leading to the development of healthy and tasty snack products. These products are not only yum but energetic too. So many times, you indulge in mindless eating habits which is deteriorating your health and also physique. Who likes that? Are you constantly struggling with tasty yet healthy snack shopping? Then, you should limit your power to purchase unhealthy snack. When you wont have an unhealthy snack with you, you will not eat whatever you grab. How do you limit the power to purchase these calorific bag of chips? Simple, just check the the ingredients and nutritional value of the products you intend to buy. They will give you a reality check and you will not what to buy and what not to! With sweet tooth, struggle is to get a toned body and also avoid those sweet snacks? A hard choice to make! But, all you have to do is stop having those products which contains sugar as their major ingredient. Being spoiled with choices, today even popcorn comes loaded with sugar! They are no good for your health. Look around for the healthy and tasty snack options which can serve all the purposes – hunger, taste and fitness! Are you confused about what snack should you buy then? Well, you must pick up the which contains nuts as they are low calorific, more energy generating and overall very healthy. Grandmothers and mothers keep asking us to have dried fruits like almond, cashews, walnuts regularly. Did you ever think why? Because, they are highly nutritious and powerful food products you can ever grab! If you do not like the plain taste of the nuts, then don’t worry, Nutlings got some nuts which your taste buds will love! Nutlings offers an impressive variety of delicious snack products which is revolutionizing the snack industry of India. Their products contain raisins, cashews, soya bean nuts, almonds blended with incredible flavours of garlic, mango powder, cumin powder. Coupling of healthy stuff with flavors can never be avoided. They are tempting, nutritious, energetic and overall a WOW product. The snacks product comes with colors, preservatives but Nutlings have gone beyond and above. Nutlings have curated their snack products with all-natural ingredients. You will not find any sort of chemicals added in any form to their products. Be it preservatives, colour or flavour – Nutlings have stayed away from using them in their product range. Nutlings currently offers four ranges of healthy snacks, and it is incredibly beneficial for those who are keeping a watch on their weight. Grab on!! These snacks are one of the healthy and tasty snacks in India as they are tumbler roasted and well balanced with the right flavours to suit your taste. Designed with a lot of precision, these snack products are definitely going to be your new bae! Do not skip your mid-day or evening snack as you now have one of the most healthy and tasty snacks in India.
Seven Most Wanted Things to do in Mashobra:	Before you kick start 2020, get on a roll with an adventurous trip. Mashobra in the district of Shimla is a fantastic place to visit and is one of the most offbeat places to visit this year. The fresh surroundings with beautiful valleys covered with thick trees of pine, oak and deodar. There are numerous things to do in Mashobra, which will make you pack your bags right away! An offbeat place in the Himalayas, Mashobra is known foradventurous activities and has something in store for everyone, no matter whatgender or their age is. Let’s have a look at the 7 of the best things to do inMashobra: Do you love biking on challenging mountain trails? Then,Mashobra is the place to visit. The route of Mashobra is surrounded by pinetrees, and you will thoroughly enjoy the gushing wind on the bike. There aremany resorts in Mashobra which can help you arrange biking along thetreacherous stretch of Mashobra. The Himalayas has been known for trekking for thepicturesque view of the hills, pleasant chirping of birds along with fantasticweather. There are many trekking options around Mashobra including thebeginners. You can also go around for leisure walks with your spouse/friends,and this is one of the best things to do in Mashobra. The breathtakingsurroundings amongst the pine trees will leave you in awe. Did you know that Mashobra is known for an incrediblevariety of bird species? Mashobra has the largest Asian watersheds which, alongwith the cool weather and lush greenery, attracts a huge number of birds. Youwill enjoy catching a glimpse of Partridges, Himalayan eagles, Pheasants andChikor. Mashobra is the perfect place to get into the arms ofnature. Camping offers several things to do in Mashobra such as bonfires,adventure activities, food and more. Summers are the best season to camp inMashobra. Riding bikes in water is now possible at Mashobra, Shimla.You will enjoy your quad biking with your squad on the river of Tattapani. Manyresorts in Mashobra offers an arranged session of quad biking. Do not go backhome without getting on a quad biking. Playing with snow is thrilling for all – skiing, snowfights, snowman are the most loved activities that the tourist looks up towhile visiting the Himalayas. Being uncrowded, Mashobra is one of the bestskiing destinations in India. River Rafting is one of the best things to do in Mashobra, Shimla in Tattapani. The freshwater stream lets you enjoy this adventurous activity thoroughly with the splendid view of the river landscapes. One of the most amazing activity to do with friends and you wouldn’t want to miss it which lasts no longer than 30 minutes, especially if your hotel in Mashobra offers that, isn’t it? By now, you know one of the best places to visit near Shimlais Mashobra, which is just 11 km away from the central city. Mashobra is knownfor thrilling activities and selecting a hotel which offers a package for theseactivities can be more fun. The Nilaya is one of the best hotels in Mashobra, Shimla offering hospitality not less than perfection, lip-smacking food, rooftop restaurant for you to catch a glimpse of hills drenched in mist. A customer winning feature of this resort is that it offers arrangement for activities to do in Mashobra. Here are some beautiful pictures of the Hotel The Nilaya which will leave you with no option but book it for your next vacations! Aren’t these pictures beautiful enough, these are just few, you should check out on The Nilaya website on what makes it the best hotel in Mashobra. 
Enjoy Mist Bathed Himalayan Peaks at This Best Hotel in Mashobra:	All of us look forward to vacations, and with so many choices of places and hotels, we often get excited and overwhelmed. To get relaxed and peaceful, selecting the best hotel becomes a priority. Luxury hotels are no more an option for the celebrities or wealthy but for all as they have become more affordable in India. There are many hotels in Mashobra which have got the luxurious amenities which is also wallet-friendly. Mashobra is a small town located in Shimla where you find the mountains bathed with mist and covered with clouds. This tiny town in Himachal has become one of the most preferred destination owing to its Himalayan peak views, deodar forests, apple orchards and adventurous activities. The hotel industry has transformed to a great extent, and they are not just about a room, but it has become about amenities and activities they offer. Hotels need to serve people in a way that they not only relax but also enjoy their stay thoroughly. Holidaying in Himachal can be more fun if you choose the best place to stay. Mashobra hotels such as The Nilaya hotel offers amazing view along with amazing features which will give you not only quality time while you are here but also memories once you leave. Spoiled with choices, there are many Mashobra hotels, and you must pick the best hotel that provides a wide range of activities along with a beautiful surrounding to rejuvenate yourself. Here are some reasons which will make you book your stat at The Nilaya, one of the best hotel in Mashobra. Indoor Actic: The Nilaya has a huge room dedicated to carom, pool table and many board games, which will be a total family or friends time. In-house library: If you are a book-lover, you will totally enjoy your time here as the library is stacked up with books of different genre. Nature Walk : The Nilaya offers a complementary nature walk to the nearby areas to all its guests which can be the most exciting part of the trip Stargazing: Visiting Shimla with your spouse? Then, nothing can become more beautiful than gazing at stars, planets with your partner at 11 pm in the night. If you are lucky, you can catch a sight of shooting stars. Personalized Adventurous activities: Enjoy thrilling activities of Mashobra such as Trekking, Biking or River Rafting with The Nilaya’s staff who are ready to arrange it all for you. The Nilaya offers spectacular, amazing, stunning, heavenly view of the Himalayan peaks covered with a layer of cloud. The picture speaks it all With all the fun and activities, we all wait to get on the cosy hotel beds in a well spacious rooms. Nilaya has rooms with a beautiful back view and valley view, which can make all your mornings a great start. When in Himachal, do not miss on relishing Himachali dishes and thali which are completely exotic. The Nilaya offers one of the best buffets, and you will instantly fall in love with the taste of the food. They also serve continental, oriental and North-Indian cuisine. Along with food, they have a well-stocked bar with wines, spirits, beer and liquors. What can get better than delicious food with breathtaking views of the surroundings. The Nilaya has combined these two with their design of Rooftop Restaurants for their guests to completely enjoy their stay. With everything in place and trained staff, The Nilaya is one of the best hotel in Mashobra for a beautiful vacation in the hills!
This Luxury Resort is the Best Resort with a View in Dharamshala?:	Dharamshala is a place that’s no news for travelers looking for break from the everyday life, in the mighty Himalayas. The breathtaking beauty and peace diffused seamlessly in its air does magic on you, reviving you from the inside out. To make this wonderful love affair with the nature, culture and inner-self happen, all you need is a good hotel for a comfortable stay. Nibaana Resort located here offers you this perfect opportunity. Surrounded by snow-clad mountains, lush greenery and unparalleled natural vistas, it is certainly the best resort with a view in Dharamshala. But that’s not all that goes into making it the best. There are many things which make Nibaana Luxury Resort one of the finest options for a memorable stay in the hill station. Here’s why you need to s A truly spectacular view of snowy mountains Fresh and clean mountain air serenading your senses Close proximity to nature Calm and peaceful atmosphere Nibaana resort offers luxurious and cosy rooms to make your stay a memorable stay in the middle of the nature. Nibaana resort has the best staff offering impressive hospitality and services to all the guests. They ensure to warmly welcome their guests, attending them at the earliest and offering the best services for them to relax and rejuvenate in their hotel. Another plus point of this resort with a view in Dharamshala is the tasty and delicious foods. Be it breakfast, lunch or dinner, they have sumptuous menu for their guests. Nibaana resort offers various fun and adventurous for all the members in the family. They have some amazing activities like bonfire, couple dates, get-together, picnics, walk in the hills and games for kids. Spend an entire day in this beautiful resort and see how well you will enjoy the place, the surroundings, the mountains surrounding it, the activities, the food – name it and they have all for you. You can also try Paragliding at Bir – this is one of the biggest reason of increasing tourism in Dharamshala. The bird eye view of hills while paragliding will astonish you! If you want rekindle the romance, then you must surely visit Nibaana resort – one of the most romantic resorts in Dharamshala. They offer candle light dinner activity under the starry sky which will captivate your heart and bring you close to your spouse. Who doesn’t want to grow close to the spiritual and cultural activities of their vacay place? Nibaana will bring you close to Dharamshala by organizing sight seeing tours. Dharamshala, is the home of Dalai Lama and Nibaana takes you one of the amazing spiritual venues where you can interact with the Buddhist monks. You will experience spiritual peace and this spiritual tour will be a lifetime experience for all the guests at Nibaana. With so many facilities and amenities offered by Nibaana Resort – one of the best resorts with a view in Dharamshala, you must definitely visit this place for your stay. Undoubtedly, you will enjoy your stay here with great hospitality services and the clean surroundings. 
This Temperature Controlled Swimming Pool Resort With A View in Mcleodganj is A Must Visit:	Fed-up of the 9-5 city life or the noisy traffic that makes you feel like you might go insane someday? If you are reading this article with a hope that you will find yet another cliché holiday content, wanting to make you pack your bags; then you are absolutely wrong. Because today we are talking about a place that is more than just an escape from the monotonous life back in your city. We are talking about Mcleodganj and One Of The Best Resort With A View in Mcleodganj. I’m sure you must have if you are interested in looking about places. Nevertheless, if you haven’t, let me tell you a little something about this wonderful place. This cute little town in the lap of Indian and Tibetan cultures, the beautiful Mcleodganj is a place of harmony and peace. It is often referred to as the ‘Little Lhasa’ of the bountiful hills bearing idyllic vibes and giving us yet another escape from the traditional hikes and trails across the country. All these historical and natural eye candies exist in the beautiful town of Mcleodganj, giving you all the reasons to visit the place. However, what is the fun in visiting a place when you don’t enjoy the luxury that is offered there? Making its place as one of the Best Family Resort in Mcleodganj, the Asia Health Resort promises you everything you need to stay comfortably in this conglomeration of vibrant cultures. Located at the lap of the pristine hills of Mcleodganj, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa is a synonym for luxury in hills. These resorts give you an amalgamation of 4-star facilities and beautiful views, that make it one of the Best Resort With A View in Mcleodganj.  What more? They even have the unblemished Dal Lake located a few minutes away, giving you yet another place to check out. Let us look at some other things that this place offers us: The fact that separates the Asia Health Resorts and Spa from the other places for stay in Mcleodganj is the stunning views it offers. When you take time out of your hectic schedules, the views should obviously be worth it, right? Waking up to this view in the morning from your room is nothing less than heaven! Just. Imagine. Only resort in this region offering a temperature controlled swimming pool, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa take comfort to the next level. You can access this pool either in cold winters or hot summers. Temperature is maintained as per the climate by the resort. Offering an elegant, yet intimate space for you to dine with your family, this resort’s restaurant is a beauty in itself. Extended to the restaurant is a perfect place for clicking pictures and enjoying the views of Mcleodganj, the terrace garden, which is an added advantage to the beauty of Asia Health Resorts and Spa. An extension of the wonderful restaurant, this terrace gives a stunning view of the Pong Dam lake alongside Kangra Valley. Enjoy the exotic views of Mcleodganj as you tipple over your favourite drink at the Bar Lounge in the Asia Health Resorts and Spa. They offer an exclusive collection of wines, tipsy cocktails, and a lot of other spirits coupled with the perfect snacks to make your day better! Alongside, they also have a nice music system for setting a mood for relaxed day with a fire-place, that will make you feel comfortable, setting the mood for a relaxed evening. Have any event to host? Then the Asia Health Resorts and Spa is prfect destination for you to spend your party or any other function amidst the beautiful mountains and soothing views from the Banquet Hall and Terrace. They have a seating arrangement depending on your requirement. You can comfortably organise your meetings, functions, or parties here alongside fine dining facilities. Serving you a scrumptious choice of barbeque, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa wins on this one! Offering you an opportunity to gorge on some light barbequed food at the restraunt . You can also get live barbeque for the events you organize there. Relax your muscles by indulging your body in a wonderful spa session offered by the resorts. This will make your holiday even more special with the additional relaxation that you get offered. Here is a brief description of what is offered at the Spa: Body Massages, Foot and Head Massage, Body Wrap, Body Polish, Hand and Foot Spa, Facial. What is a good spa without sauna and steam bath? Taking this into notice, the Asia Health Resorts and Spa also offer you a steam bath and sauna that will take you to the relaxation heaven and put you to sleep like nowhere else. Equipped with the one of the best of gaming facilities, there is a complete package of entertainment offered in the games room of the resort. Have some fun time with your family on vacation by playing with both adults and the kids. Some of the games offered here are: Pool Table, Air Hockey, Play Station 3, Carroms, Chess, Ludo, Fuss Ball. Apart from all expected amenities like refrigerated minibar, LCD TV, Tea Coffee maker etc you also get free access to temperature controlled swimming pool which makes the offering of Asia Health Resort unique choice among other resorts in Mcleodganj. With all these facilities here, is there any place else you want to be on your holiday to Mcloedganj? If your answer to this is a NO, then what are you waiting for? Visit http://asiahealthresorts.com now and book your rooms before you are left on the waitlist!
Offbeat Private Cottages In Munnar For A Perfect Family Vacation:	Munnar – mini Scotland, is a beautiful town located in Kerala, house many tea gardens making the entire hill station drenched in lush green beauty. This makes Munnar, a perfectly picturesque location and a popular destination for thousands of tourists in India and from abroad. When in Munnar, it’s very important to wisely select the location of your stay for making your holiday memorable. If you are looking for truly offbeat private cottages in Munnar , Deep Wood Munnar is the perfect location for you . Surrounded by masses and dense green forest, of cardamom fields and green forest, it will give you the feel of being into the lap of nature. It is an exotic resort which offers a perfect place to enjoy the serenity of the forest, finding peace of mind away from the hectic days of the city life. The green landscapes with the cool breeze surrounding the resort will add life to your real life, and this will be a blissful experience to you and your family and friends. A resort in the deep forest which has 11 number of offbeat private cottages is spread over 220 acres of land. Deep Woods, Munnar is so vast that they have made Bolero car arranged for pick up and drop facility from reception to cottages. Deepwoods Munnar is located 11 km from the town inside a forest and is spread across 220 acres of green forest which makes it a special place to stay when you are in Munnar. This resort will provide you with a blissful forest experience . The constant chirping of birds, tall trees, lush green beauty are enough reasons to make Deepwood perfect offbeat private cottages to stay in Munnar. As the sun sets, the insects sound intensifies, and in the chilly nights, the misty air with the feel of the forest will make your experience a lifetime experience. You cannot think to miss this experience! The staff of this one of the best private cottage in Munnar will take you on the nature walk through the dense jungle of Munnar where you can also spot elephants, deer, cardamom plantation, tea plantation and a few tree houses where locals stay. Isn’t that something you have always wanted to do? Don’t forget to wear your sports shoes and be ready to explore the nature walk through thick and dense jungle safely. Take a good bath under the waterfalls here and with a group, this activity becomes more fun! You can also spend some time in the Gazebos near the waterfall for a get-together. Trust us, you will have a wonderful time. Another excellent experience of relaxing in one of the best private cottages in Munnar is the bonfire arrangement made by Deep Woods Munnar. image source All you need to do is a request for the arrangement and have a good collection of music. Sit back and warm yourself during the chilly nights and campfire can add beautiful moments to your vacation. You can also request private BBQ at your cottage from the reception. image credits Being in South India, this is one of the best place to relish on lip-smacking dishes offered by Deep Woods, one of the best private cottages in Munnar. They also have room services if you are not in a mood to go to the restaurant here. They have a recreational activity club just above the restaurant where you can enjoy some indoor games as a pass time. Enjoy the indoor games after having lip-smacking dinner. Deepwoods have chilling weather, and the thrilling forest experience will make you fall in love with this beautiful place soaked in nature’s glory.  They have deluxe rooms, 2 bedrooms, 3 bedrooms and 4 bedrooms private cottages. For booking, you can all at 09809993286 and book your private cottage with DeepWoods, Munnar. 
10 Offbeat Destinations Of Himachal Pradesh For The Real Traveller In You:	If you are tired of the same tourists infested places, why not explore the rather untouched and unspoiled Himachal? These offbeat places in the soothing realm of the Himalayas is sure to give you the much needed break from the monotony of life and bring you closer to the nature and yourself. So, given here are 10 such wonderful offbeat destinations in Himachal Pradesh that you must visit on your next get away. image source One of the biggest villages of Kinnaur district, Kalpa is best known for its plush green pine nut forests and the spectacular landscape that the snow covered Kinnaur Kailash paints against it when they are bathed in the morning sunshine. The numerous apple orchards, apples being the main cash crop of the region, only add to the breathtaking colour palette the nature offers. image source The sacred Kailash Shivling rock that changes shades with the different times of the day can be beheld from here. At a distance of 11 km from Kalpa a temple devoted mainly to goddess Chandika is situated. The finery and uniqueness of the architecture of the temple makes it a must visit spot when here. It is unlike that of any other temple in the city and the goddess' idol, placed in tghe central shrine is instilled in gold which makes it magnificent as is.   image source In addition to being a positively beautiful place, Barot also prvides one with ample opportunities of outdoor activities. The river Uhl that bears it on its shoulders to sustains the life of the inhabitants, foliage and wildlife of the region, also serves as the breeding centre for the fishes, primarily trout and has several fishing farms which popularize for angling as well. Across from the river is located Nargu Wildlife Sanctuary which is the home a variety of unique Himalayan beasts including Himalayan Gorals (from the goat family), Himalayan Black Bears and a many different pheasants. image source The valley has evergreen forests with Deodar trees in abundance. With many trekking trails, with one that cuts through the sanctuary to Kullu, makes it very popular among the tourists for hiking and trekking. The temple of the local deity of rain, Dev Pashakot that makes for a fine place to visit, is situated across the river Uhl.   image source Chitkul is a small hamlet in the Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh, perched undisturbed on the Indo-Tibetan border. Interestingly, it is the last inhabited village on the border and the last destination in India that can be traversed to without the need of a permit. One can comfortably stay at Sangla and make a one day trip to Chitkul. The river Baspa runs all along your small journey making for a splendid companion. image source The valley provides one with a striking vista of the tempting fruits laden orchards, mustard fields plush green vegetation against the stark white of the Himalayas as the background. The valley is famous for its fine quality peas and potatoes. The weather up here is quite harsh and cold and usually unpredictable so it's advised to be prepared. image source A homage to the goddess of Chitkul who resides in a 500 years old temple is a must by the Parikrama Pilgrims. A must visit indeed.   image source Hidden from the overbearing crowd of the rest of the world, Malana is a small village asleep peacefully in the Kullu district of Himachal Pradesh. The most intriguing fact about this offbeat destination is that its people are believed to be the direct descendants of Alexander the Great. In fact, this place has its own set administrative laws and practices that closely resemble that of the Greek administrative system, language, social framework and their notion of purity. image source The local deity, Jamlu rishi is can be thought of as the one responsible for the origination of this village as well as formation of its society, its laws and ways. The Chandrakhani and Deotibba peaks lumber over the village as if to protect it from the outside world.   image source Alive with it's beautiful apple and cherry orchards, Thanedar gives unparalleled  joy to the nature lovers. You can enjoy plucking the fruits from the myriad trees that supply lakhs of cartons full of juicy apples all over India and abroad and biting into them or can savour the chewy slices of apples that the localites dry on their roofs. There are many resorts overlooking the plush orchards that give one the experience of staying close to the nature. image source The nearby places that you must visit are the Nag Devta temple, standing along the Tani-Jubbar lake, St. Mary's church which also happens to be one of the oldest churches in India and Hathu Peak that provides mesmerising vista of the snow clad peaks of the Himalayas. image source Unblemished by tourism, Shoja provides one a fine place to relax and breathe in the fresh mountain air away from the maddening city life. image source Located in the Seraj Valley, it is famous for its Serloskar Lake, that is known for its striking vista at the sunset. One can take a leisurely stroll around or find their way into the refreshing meadows of the region. It is only a short walk to the waterfall here, where they can take a chilling bath or just soak in the sun while enjoying a drink.   image source Nicknamed Trout Country because of the abundance of Trout fishes found in the Tirthan river, makes Gushaini a great place for fishing. Besides, for those tourists whose idea of the perfect holiday is camping and spending time in the lap of mother nature, Gusahini offers the perfect escape. One can set up a portable tents on the banks of the river to enjoy a vacation of solitude and self searching with the melodious music of the flowing water in the background to rejuvenate them. image source About 20 km from here, is situated The Great Himalayan National Park where one can find a huge variety of flora and fauna since the denizens of the park include a good 30 species of mammals and 300 species of birds. A walk into the park by the way of cedar woods is highly recommended and is sure to make one’s trip memorable.   image source Undoubtedly one of the best trekking trails, Jalori Jot is a bestowed with nature’s best. One can stay up at Shoja and drive down to Jalori Jot to continue on hike to the popular Sareyol Lake adjacent to the Jalori Jot temple on the left from the main street or can take the right towards an ancient fort; both spots being equally ecstatic. A word of caution though; one must wear good pair of trekking shoes for this trail to ensure better gripping and higher safety since the trail often tends to get slippery especially in the monsoons. The hiking trail is good 4  km long before one reaches the lake. Thankfully, there is a good dhaba that one come across just before they reach the lake that’s good to get one’s batteries recharged for continuing further. image source Adjoining the lake there’s a temple giving tribute to the Old Serpent Queen who is much worshipped by the locals.   image source Tucked away in the quaint Parvati Valley in Kullu district, Kheerganga is one of the most beautiful offbeat places of Himachal Pradesh. To reach here, one needs to go up to Barsaini from where they have to take a four hours long trek to Kheerganga. image source It is said that Lord Shiva meditated in this region for thousands of years. However, the most spectacular feature of this place is it’s hot spring, where one can truly unwind and get rejuvenated after the long journey; since this spring is also believed to contain healing properties.   image source The Rakcham valley is yet another unspoiled and unexplored terrain of Himachal Pradesh which is surrounded by silvery mountains and mesmerizing verdure of vegetation. With the river Baspa meandering by its side, Rakcham is like the path to heaven lain halfway between Sangla and Chitkul. image source Since, the Indo-Tibetan border lies not far off, Rakcham as one would expect is a blend of Hindu and Buddhist ideologies with two Hindu temples and a Buddhist temple concurring in the same town. Although the soil here is quite fertile making for the growth of a huge variety of cash crops, still the town is less flourished than the other Himachali towns, with only a handful of stores to provide for the basic necessities of its inhabitants.The region around is alive with a number of mountain animals, including Musk Deer, Goral, Brown Trout, Blue Sheep, Himalayan Black Bear, and Leopard.
Iconic Winter Destinations Near Delhi – Self Drive Road Trips:	Winter is the best time to see the Himalayas in their glory. Imagine the setting sun blending a bright orange with evergreen pines on the foreground while sipping on a hot beverage. This would be just another day in the famed hill stations of North India. Delhiites love their weekend getaways and the coming months provide a good chance for people to take a break from the city life and head into the mountains. With a self-drive car at one’s disposal, an adventure full of pleasant surprises is in store. Here are some quintessential winter destinations for the eager traveller. Manali For the bohemian and the adventurer both, Manali has its many different attractions. A 12-hour road trip north from Delhi is completely worth it as one touches down in a place surrounded by ethereal beauty. Travellers can just unwind in the main town and dig into the tasty food available in the cafes, or they can make Manali a base for further exploration higher up. The wooden Hidimba Devi temple is a mystical place surrounded by thick forest while the Rohtang Pass is another place to visit if the roads allow it. Shimla Shimla is a town that blends natural beauty with a unique heritage. It was the summer capital during the British Raj and a lot of the buildings here reflect a style that is right out of the European countryside. Today, these buildings attract lovers of architecture from all over the country. Some of the most famous landmarks of Shimla are the Viceregal Lodge, known for its opulent Jacobethan building style and the neo-Gothic inspired Christ Church. DorjeDrak monastery was built using the Oriental, specifically Tibetan style of architecture and is known for its calm, soothing ambience. The viewpoints around Shimla are fun to drive to and travellers get rewarded with stunning vistas of the surrounding mountains. One of the most popular spots is the hilltop Kamna Devi temple. Mussoorie Mussoorie conjures nostalgic images of the quintessential Indian family vacation. The town is where many weary plains people come to experience snowfall but there are many more attractions here. The tranquil Mussoorie Lake is the centrepiece of the town while the Mall Road is a good place for a stroll and some surprise bargains. A drive up to the summit of Gun Hill is recommended. Choose Self Drive The best road trips are done on one’s own terms. For such scenic routes as the ones in Himachal and Uttarakhand, a sturdy well-maintained rental is the best. For those looking for a self drive car rental Delhi offers the top option. App-based platform Zoomcar boasts the latest hatchbacks, sedans, and SUVs suiting everything from a trip for two to a group jamboree. Affordable rates, complete privacy, and extra space make rentals ideal for long trips and 24/7 on-road support is another good assurance. The crisp air, the tasty winter snacks, and the amazing historical and natural sights are just some of the beautiful moments in store for those who venture up north. From behind the wheel, this experience becomes that much sweeter.
Things That Definitely Happen When You Are Badly Running Late:	All havoc befall when you are seriously running late for work or for anything for that matter. You just can’t expect everything to go smoothly and reach on time. You are never meant to reach on time. These annoying situations will make sure just that. image source / Yash Raj Films   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   image source   image source / Eros International /  Featured Image Source / Tips Music Films
13 Footballers Who Can Make A Complete Indian Family:	Juan Mata is a Spanish footballer who plays for English club Manchester United and the Spain national team. image source Igor Pita is a Portuguese footballer who plays for C.F. União as a left defender. image source  Nana Ofori Twumasi is a professional footballer who plays as a defender for Yeovil Town in the Football League Championship. image source Nani is a Portuguese footballer who plays as a winger for English club Manchester United and the Portugal national team. image source We could not miss sharing this deadly celebration by NANI image source Kaka, is a Brazilian football attacking midfielder who currently plays for Italian Serie A club Milan and the Brazilian national team. image source Baba Diawara is a Senegalese professional footballer who plays for Levante UD on loan from Sevilla FC in Spain, as a striker. image source Eugène Dadi is an Ivorian football striker who plays for Manado United in the Liga Primer Indonesia. image source Luís Boa Morte is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Hampshire Premier League Division One side Four Marks. image source image source Mamadou Diallo is a former Senegalese football striker. image source Getty Images. Mami Yamaguchi  is a Japanese football player image source  Getty Images. Messi is an Argentine footballer who plays as a forward for Spanish club FC Barcelona and the Argentina national team. image source image source If you like this story, pass it on to your friends on facebook.
14 Reasons Why This Resort Is The Best Family Resort in Jim Corbett:	Jim Corbett National Park is a perfect destination to explore the raw preserved wildlife in Uttarakhand. Approximately 240 k.m. from Delhi makes it an easily accessible destination for a perfect weekend gateway and a family vacation. When you are travelling with your family for a vacation, choosing the right resort for your stay which can offer you a list of new experiences is of paramount importance. But the million dollar question is still unanswered “Which is the best family resort in Jim Corbett?”. Well, let us unveil the suspense – The Golden Tusk Resort in Jim Corbett is one of the best resort for a perfect family vacation in Jim Corbett. Surrounded by the local villages gives you opportunity to explore the Kumaoni Culture. You can enjoy both indoor and outdoor recreational activities with your family and kids. The activities include: Rappelling, Wall Climbing, Flying Fox, Spider Climbing, Ladder Climbing, Badminton, Pool, Carom, Chess, Table Tennis and more. You can experience the soothing flute or live guitar performance every evening in the garden area. You can order your favorite snacks and drinks and enjoy the live music with your family. It is indeed a very soothing experience. A perfect dinner date with your wife or partner. You can inform the hotel staff and they will arrange the same for you at a cost which is totally worth it. Very few places in India offer you the experience of water dining and The Golden Tusk is one of them. This should be in your to do list for sure when you visit The Golden Tusk. This has probably every thing which you want to drink. Relax and have a sip of your favorite cocktail. image credits: goibibo image credits: goibibo The Golden Tusk Restaurant Chef is passionate to get delicious food of different cuisines for your breakfast, lunch and dinner to ensure you enjoy the taste. On top of it you can also enjoy live music during dinner from 8:30 p.m. in the restaurant. The Golden Tusk has an in-house naturist who will take you for the nature walk tour to explore the unique plantations and local village area. You will surely come back with a lot of new learning about the flora and fauna. Once you are done with the Nature walk, you can enjoy your breakfast and then relax for a few hours and then hit the swimming with your family and kids. The Golden Tusk has 7 categories of rooms – The Golden Tusk has an in-house booking system for the forest safari. You can just call the reception and they will guide you the rest. Icing on the cake – The Golden Tusk is a Pet Friendly Resort. You can visit with your pet and enjoy the vacation with your furry friend. Leaving you with some more pictures of The Golden Tusk Resort. Isn’t is beautiful? You can visit and book your stay on The Golden Tusk website .
Did You Too Believe Santa Claus Was From North Pole? Get Your Facts Right With This Awesomely Funny Video:	So, you too thought Santa Claus lived in the North Pole and was a Christian? Horse Shit! He is as much desi as you and me. Don’t believe us? Then it would really do you some good get your facts right. Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Niko
10 Indian Tongue Twisters That Still Make You Go ‘Whhaaaa?!!’:	‘She sells sea shells at the sea shore, the shells that she sells are sea shells I am sure.’ Tongue twisters are always fun to get that tongue rolling! One of the greatest tricks to harass and irritate your friends and adults alike, they have always been your favourite pastime in childhood. And even now, whenever we see Amitabh Bacchan make people go crazy in Yaarana with a tongue twister challenge, we still can’t stop ourselves from trying it out ourselves! So, starting from Mr. B’s fave, here’s a list of 10 most herculean Indian tongue twister of all times! image source   image source / Dharma Productions   image source   image source   image source   image source / Cape of Good Films   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Walt Disney Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Dharma Productions   Featured Image Source
15 Signs Your Wife Is A Typical South Indian:	There are a lot of stereotypes about various regions and the people belonging to them. Take for example Punjabis, Marwaris or Bengalis. The moment we hear their names, some or the other cliché’s storm our minds. South Indians are one such species that are favourite with the jokers. But those who know them , know them for their intelligence and calm and polite behaviour. And when you are living with a South Indian, you know how much. image source / Eros International   image source   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source   image source / Eros International     image source image source /UTV Motion Pictures   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source  / UTV Motion Pictures   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source / Dharma Productions   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures /  Featured Image Source
11 Things All Vegetarians Are Sick Of Hearing:	It may be your choice to be a vegetarian or maybe your family’s tradition, but the non-vegetarians simply don’t stop bugging you with these stupid and extremely overused lines. It’s not just about chicken actually; I can’t eat many things like  wood and paper. image source   Huh… Scuse me! image source   Ever heard of the word ‘daal’? Say it.. “D-A-A-L”… daaaalll.. image source   Are you crazy? I also have air and water to go with it. image source   You know you would do good to remember it one of these days. image source   Oh it’s simple you see. I just take a bite with my teeth, chew it and gulp.  image source   Oh please just shut up. image source   Excuse me, but did just take out your brain and filled your head  with cheese too. image source   No. I leave the eggs alone for you to eat them when they turned into chicks. image source   Ya, and you were also born without clothes you moron! image source   Yoo hoo! Congratulations! You nailed it bro! image source / featured image source / Yash Raj Films [mashshare]
12 Most Annoying People You Face When You Are Out Of House:	People can really get too annoying at times. When you are out in public you often get tramped by such of their small but too irritating to be ignored actions. image source   image source / Reliance Entertainment   image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Balaji Motion Pictures     image source   image source   image source   image source   image source / Reliance Big Pictures   image source / Reliance Entertainment   image source   image source / Excel Entertainment- Big Pictures /  Featured Image Source / UTV Motion Pictures
9 Things Couples Need To Stop Doing In Public Right Now:	It’s one thing to be affectionate and totally other to make the people gross out with your over the top PDA. Couples do look good and make us go awwww…. but when it becomes ‘too much’ it really makes us sick, isn’t it? And here is what couples need to know, what is this ‘too much’ really that they may be doing, and which Needs. To. Stop. Now. image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Eros International   image source / PVR Pictures- Hari Om Entertainment   image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Eros International   image source   Featured Image Source / Reliance Pictures
13 Things Every Girl Who Has A Guy Best Friend Is Tired Of Hearing In India:	We all have friends, both girls and boys. Girls generally have one of their girlfriends as their BFFs because they are more connected to them and other times just because they don’t want to make their lives a hell by having a guy friend as the best buddy due to sometimes the  choti soch and at others due to the stereotypical upbringing and even influence of stupid Bollywood movies!! But those who dare to have a best friend that’s a guy, really has a tough time. You know why? Because starting from the first point and unfortunately the one idea that is unanimously bored in the heads of our people and sealed with Amantium!! And we really don’t know who to blame for it… Us ourselves or Mohnish Bahl??!!! Is it your stereotyped attitude or your love for Bollywood talking? image source / Rajshree Productions   What are friends for? Haven’t you heard?!! image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd.   Yeah of course I like him… That’s why he’s my friend’!!! image source / Yash Raj Films   WTF!! Why are you always with your f***ing iPhone? Wo tera bf hai kya ? image source   OK sarva gyaani maatey ! Bravo! image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   Jab tak hai jaan. Jab tak hai jaan. Jab tak hai jaan.  image source / Dharma Productions   Haan hain na . And he’s best of all of them. Okhayee mom?!! image source / Yash Raj Films   Whatt?!! Seriously. Whatttt?!! image source / UTV Motion Pictures    WTF! I have my own life too you know?!! image source   OK. Thanks for reminding me again dear. I will set it in my reminder to discuss the matter with him. (And laugh at it. Yet again.) image source / PVR Pictures- Anil Kapoor Films Company- MAD Entertainment Ltd.- Eros International   Ya haaa… and much much more. And that’s why you aren’t but he is my best buddy Miss. Channel Vogue. image source / Eros International   Are you stupid?!! I have my mom and many girl friends too to talk girl stuff. Besides, why should it be such an issue anyway?!! image source / Red Chillies Entertainment   Oh Goddddd!!!!! For the 75,38,921th time…. We Are Just Friends!!!! image source / Yash Raj Films   Featured Image Source / Yash Raj Films
15 Signs You Are An Indian Bachelor Working As A Software Engineer (for 18+):	You are an IT engineer and that too a bachelor right? Yeah, we know it. A life of a software engineer in India is both taxing and exciting. The sense of freedom they get when they move away from homes is something else. But it also brings up too many problems and hassles and a typical IT engineer lifestyle! Well check out the tell tale signs of a typical software engineer in India yourself. Yup… No need to go through the map. That pretty much summed up your options. image source   image source   And P.S. None of you have an idea who’s going to keep it when you switch. Not that you care. image source / PLA Entertainment   image source   image source   Only to have them made yet another mop! image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   You couldn’t have dared bring her home, let alone have her stay with you in your room. image source   Who can miss a live porn next door, even though its just sound no visual. “ Ahhh. .” Oh yes, there it goes. image source
14 Most Annoying Things About Your Best Friend Which Only He Can Be Excused For:	Everybody has that one friend who is extremely annoying, irritating and too self-welcoming. But then again, that is also the only friend who is excused for it all and more. Because he has been, is there and and you know, he will be there for you always; because he is your best friend. Though so excused, he can be very annoying…. image source / UTV Motion Pictures Which in their defence, was too important to wait till the morning.   image source / Reliance Entertainment (worldwide) You know you can never do a wrong thing around them (unless of course a they are a part of it too! 😉 )   image source / Dharma Productions This is the reason why you experted in mentally blocking someone.   image source / Eros International But you keep with it because you know if and when you find the perfect one for you nad happen to screw it up, they will be the first one to slap you hard across your face!   image source / Eros International And you love to pig out with them anyway, so it’s always cool!   image source Also if, if the ton of the samosas they order is just for themselves!   image source Arrgghhhh…. wish they were not your best buddies!   image source You know that even if their eyes are on their phone screns, their ears, minds and hearts are all intently listening!   image source / Eros International You expected it.   image source Bid your xbox farewell, for which you had been saving for months.   image source / Eros International Only to make your parents get after your life to know what he meant!!   image source / Balaji Motion Pictures You know you can never win with them here!   image source Nothing can be sacred with them around!   image source / Dharma Productions OK if they got away doing this one… they are definitely best buddies to you!! 😉 🙂   Featured Image Source / Dharma Productions
14 Things That Prove You Are Madly, Incomprehensibly And Inseparably Addicted To Technology:	Technology has taken over the planet!! Help! But you are definitely been abducted and done unspeakable experiments on… because you have become what we can say an alien prototype of a typical technology addict! We don’t even recognize your face if you do not have that smartphone in front of it! Yeah, that’s right; technology has become your identity! So if you have the following signs…. You need help my friend! image source   image source   And with a AI security system, cctv cameras in the hallway and remote controlled (or better bluetooth enabled) home appliances. image source   image source   image source   OK maybe, just maybe 1-2 in the real world. image source   image source   image source   image source   You are an expert at chatting all day on Whatsapp, browsing internet and watching some into-the-future-heavy-technology Hollywood movie is a routine. image source   image source   Why to type when you can make things done by just speaking. image source image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
22 Sign Boards In India That Will Make You Go WTF!!:	Here is to the fun that is never ending, thanks to these numerous signboards raiding our roadsides. May you guys keep putting up such disastrous signs all the time. LOL                                                 All the images are sourced from here . 
13 Dogs Who Are Badly Annoyed By The Cats:	Dogs are adorable gentle creatures we all know it. And cat… well they are the ones who take the undue advantage of the fact. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
16 Small Things That Instantly Send You In A Blinding Rage:	Some things really drive you to the edge. And they need not be huge boulder sized incidents. Some seemingly harmless nothings can do the trick just right. These stupid things make you so much angry you would never call them small! image source   image source   image source   image source Yeah there I am. Flying 8th from the left, second row. Like.   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
10 Reasons Why You Absolutely Hate Monday’s:	Oh God!! It’s That darn Monday again!! What’s good about it? Mondays officially suck. It’s proven. These are those worst days of our lives that we just can’t seem to get rid of. And to make matters worse they are there to torture us every single week!!!   image source /    image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Vishesh Films   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source / Reliance Pictures/  Featured Image Source / Reliance Pictures
Spice Jet Mid-Air Holi Dance Which Went Viral Globally:	The video of the SpiceJet performance – which shows several passengers clapping as the crew, standing at equal distance all along the alley, carry out a coordinated dance – has since gone viral on the Internet. Its a sweet gesture by SpiceJet (  much like what Finnair did during India’s Republic Day  ) It turned out to be one of the biggest free Viral PR activity for SpiceJet. If you love watching what they performed mid-air to make Holi special for passengers, share this with your friends. Here is what happened! Video and featured image credit:  Youtube If you think this entertained all passengers and you would have appreciated too, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
10 Things That Man Really Needs To Invent For The Lazy Person In You And ASAP (Read NOW):	For the love of lazing around. Man has reached moon… and those who have watched Interstellar will agree…beyond. But there is still much to be done here. Your lazy brothers and sisters implore you.. Come save us from the hassles of ‘work’! image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source  / featured image source
8 Things That Will Happen When IPL Ends:	With IPL craze grazing the whole nation wide, there have been many changes that have occurred in these two months. People hardly care for movies, hardly watch anything but IPL matches on TV and there’s hardly anything that goes around as word of mouth than the same matches again. So, when such a thick blanket of fanaticism is holding us in it’s tight grip, it is a matter to think about what would it be like when the IPL 2017 finally comes to an end. So, here’s a sneak peak into the now, very near future. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   AA Films
A Short Film Shoot In Kolkata Which Expresses The True Essence Of Life In India:	A city bustling with Bengali, where most words go ’O’ in the mout h and where there is order in chaos , a city that amaze, inspire, and enchant everyone is none other than Kolkata . From yellow cabs to hand pulled rickshaws, time seems to stop in Kolkata preserving the memories, making millions nostalgic just by its name. In this video  Nitin Das  expresses a short lesson learnt while traveling through life in India. In case you ever get a chance to visit Kolkata, I am sure you will have your own story to tell. Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  Nitin Das If you like this story, don’t forget sharing the same with your friends.
Little Girl Donates A Coin To A Street Musician, Gets The Surprise Of Her Life! #GoingViral:	We love the moment of ‘unity’ an act like this can create.  The onlookers are oblivious to anything else around them.  And even if just for a few minutes, their petty differences didn’t consume them.  Life was… amazing …and  simple . For their 130th anniversary, Spanish finance group BancSabadell commissioned a symphony orchestra flash mob at a city square in Sabadell, Spain in May 2012. Check this here. Video  and featured image credits: Youtube  via  Banco Sabadell   If you like this story don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
Watch what this cute child do for mother love! This Video Will Leave You Speechless:	Mother is the name for God in the lips and hearts of little children.  Some of us unlike most of the privileged one’s, value and solely desire mother’s love. Video and featured image credits: Youtube If you feel love for your mom watching this story, don’t forget to share it with your friends.
A Boy Selling Books At Traffic Signal Caught An Educated Man Throwing Thrash And Taught Him A Lifetime Lesson:	A boy selling books for livelihood at traffic signal teaches a lesson to the man who belongs an elite class and probably does not care about any one other than his family, not even his own country. On what the literate kept mum, a book seller at traffic signal spoke out loud and clear which taught him a lesson which all should follow.   After all each one’s action multiplies and creates the environment we live in ! More than the leaders we elect, we ourselves are responsible for the surroundings we keep.  Be morally conscious and ACT.  Watch the video and decide for yourself.. Video and featured image source: Youtube via  Inglorious Films ‘  One alone can blow a whistle…it takes an orchestra to create a symphony !’ ……………so make sure you are a part of it by simply sharing it!
This Beautiful Love Story Called “Speechless” Will Leave You Speechless:	A great film, neat script and no dialogues but still it grabs our attention. This short film was made in 48 hours for 48hfp Mumbai 2013, and went on to win 5 awards. Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  Srikant Kekare This short film is about the language of love. Hope you enjoy watching it! Spread the joy by sharing it with your friends.
7 Truly Romantic Places to Visit in Munnar:	Every place in a hill station seems romantic and then there are some places to visit in Munnar that turn you so The charming hill station of Munnar located in Idukki district of Kerala needs no introduction. The enthralling natural beauty of this destination is enough to draw thousands and thousands of tourists every year to spend some time in the lap of lush nature. However, it is the pleasant and romantic aura of this hill resort which attracts honeymooners and couples in love in the biggest number. So, for all the lovebirds out there, here are the top 11 romantic places to visit in Munnar which we highly recommend you witness with your bae by your side. image source Known for: Echoing of sounds within 3 seconds, spellbinding greenery and cool breeze and most importantly the rare Neelakurinjini flowers Activities: Nature walks, picnic or boating with your beau, trekking and camping   image source Known for: The hypnotic beauty of the fierce waterfall (especially during monsoons), that’s accessible only via a charming wooden bridge Activities: Jungle Trekking, nature photography and picnic with your beloved   image source Known for: Magnificent view of the hills around and the city below, rare Neelakurinjini flower and bluish hue of the atmosphere due to the extraordinary proximity of clouds Activities: Trekking, nature photography, hiking, camping and paying a visit to the Neelakurinji Sanctuary   image source Known for: A must place to visit in Munnar due to its unmatched natural grandeur with cascading Chinnakanal waterfalls, and sprawling tea plantations all around Activities: Trekking, hiking, taking a refreshing dip in the pool formed below the falls, and nature photography   image source Known for: The largest population of endangered Nilgiri Tahr, 26 different species of mammals and staggering vistas of Western Ghats Activities: Wildlife spotting, nature walks and wildlife photography   image source Known for: A vast variety of roses of almost every colour and an equally astounding variety of birds Activities: Nature walks, birdwatching, relaxing and nature photography   image source Known for: Bewitching natural beauty with crystal clear lake water and surrounding rolling hills Activities: Boating or riding in a lovely shikara Although there are a great many places to visit in Munnar, each one more beautiful or more engaging than the other, these seven places are the most romantic ones that every couple needs to visit on their tour to this amazing hill station. Have you been to any of these places? Let us know in the comments below.
Top 14 Things to Do in Scandinavian Countries:	The term Scandinavian Countries is given to a group of European countries which includes Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Finland and Iceland. While it is established the whole of Europe is surpassingly beautiful, it is these Scandinavian Countries which hold the title of being the most gorgeous and enigmatic countries. Scandinavia is known for its remarkable legends, striking landscapes and engaging traditions and culture which don’t just attract the tourists but set them apart from the rest of the continent. Just to glimpse that celestial beauty and learn more about their fascinating culture and history, tourists flock to Scandinavia from across the globe. But what are the best and must things to do in Scandinavian Countries? Let’s find out.   Get a natural spa therapy dipped in its sulphur and other minerals rich water image source   And appreciate other modernist art pieces as well image source   image source   Two km long trail of unlimited fun and thrill image source   And embrace the Eskimo style of living you won’t ever forget image source   Feel yourself getting awestruck exploring the details of its sublime French architecture image source   You will find moss-covered grounds, beautiful forests and open meadows all across this 50 miles trail at the elevation of 1,100 ft. image source   Or try a humble Fika in Stockholm image source   Try Amager Beach in Denmark or Langholmsbadet and Smedsuddsbadet in Sweden image source   image source   Get ready to spot a variety of whales including minke whales, orcas, blue whales, humpback whales, sperm whales and more! image source   Explore the area’s lovely palaces, parks, events and activities. image source   image source   image source
This Is Neither Dubai Nor New York. Yes, Its An Indian Airport…WOW!:	The film will take you on a journey of discovering the new terminal T2 at  Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport Mumbai. This mind blowing architecture and world class facilities deserves unbiased appreciation from everyone. Impressed with the new Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport Mumbai? Check f ew thing about T2 terminal you must know: Bonus information: For best rates on Mumbai Dubai Flights , do check AkbarTravels Data Source: CSIA website Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  CSIA Mumbai If you like this story, don’t forget sharing this with your friends.
A SIMPLE MAN Goes For Rs 800 Hair Cut, But What Happens Next Will Make You Feel Sorry For Him!:	A simple man wanting to have a simple hair cut for his wedding drops into a professional hair styling parlor and ends up paying Rs 950 (Rs 800+taxes) for a hair cut …. which was as good as before! i.e no difference in the ‘BEFORE’ and ‘AFTER’ state! The simpleton is so frustrated but being the simple man he is, he gulps his disappointment and goes to the ‘ MTWP – Mango tree waala parlor’….. 😀 Video and featured image source: Youtube via  humaramovie If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
Mumbai to Goa ferry – The convenient way to Travel:	Are you planning to spend this vacation at the stunning beaches of Goa? Then you can quickly cover the entire distance within just 7 hours. Well, Mumbai to Goa ferry cruise service is going to give you a beautiful journey with their fantastic services. Now you will be able to enjoy the festivals with some exciting plans and then travel to the state of beaches and sunshine by the all-new ferry service! Image Source  This exciting service of Mumbai to goa ferry will help you all the tourists. The ferry will undoubtedly carry the travelers and tourists between two places. The entire route will be through the Arabian Sea and stops in Panjim. Goa vacation industry is actually going to boost even more. You can accurately reach the sunshine city of India in numerous ways from the Mumbai city. Some wishes to fly while other love road trips. Some may also love taking the overnight train or bus to be there. Soon ferries, as well as cruises, will turn out to be an extra mode of transport for all visitors. The Mumbai to Goa ferry service will start from Mazgaon in Mumbai, and it will have few stops in Raigad, Ratnagiri district as well as Malvan, before docking in Panjim. This cruise will actually leave from Mumbai port at 5 pm, and it will reach Goa almost at 9 am in the next day. This will return to the Mumbai port on alternate days. This cruise is also expected to be completely air-conditioned, and it can hold up to 300 passengers. Image Source Numerous ships have been just operating between the proper routes right through the years. One was the Scandinavian-built vessel, which took each and every traveller from Mumbai to Goa by the beautiful ship. If you love to travel, then this would be absolutely perfect for you. Eventually, the ships offer some fantastic services to the travelers. Image Source There are ample amount of ferry services available, which come along with the excellent facilities and amenities as well. But, as a matter of fact, Mumbai to Goa ferry service offers excellent facilities and amenities to their travelers. According to the tourists, the ferry might provide tiers for different amenities and rates along with food and drink facilities. You can also book the Mumbai Goa Ferry trips right through online just like booking for trains. This contains the kid’s activity area, open deck as well as first aid service.
9 Magical Honeymoon Places in South India:	Just as North of India is famous for its splendid hill station, the numerous beautiful and romantic honeymoon places in South India are the region’s glory. Couples are always looking for a destination that doesn’t just has a lovely weather and natural beauty but which also speaks to them letting their love grow more. The southern part of the country has the arsenal to rescue them on that front. With places like Munnar, Pondicherry, Wayanad, Coorg and many more, you can always be assured of finding that dreamy honeymoon place in South India that perfectly resonates romance, beauty, passion and serenity; everything that newlyweds and couples desire. So, here are the top 9 places in Southern India which are ideal to plan your honeymoon. image source Nearest Airport: Trivandrum International Airport Romantic Experiences: Leisurely stroll along the lighthouse, watching the stunning sunsets or basking in the sun at the beach, enjoy a candle-lit dinner with fresh seafood and try adventure sports like kayaking or water-skiing   image source Nearest Airport: Cochin International Airport Romantic Experiences: Spend memorable time with your beloved in a luxury houseboat, take a boat cruise which runs daily at Vembanad Lake, enjoy kayaking together, and take a romantic walk on the Marari beach watching sunset   image source Nearest Airport: Bangalore International Airport or Mysore Airport Romantic Experiences: Spend some quality time sightseeing architectural marvels of Mysore like St. Philomena Church, Mysore Palace and Jagmohan Palace; go for birdwatching at the lovely Karanji Lake etc.   image source Nearest Airport: Puducherry (Pondicherry) Airport Romantic Experiences: Walk with fingers entwined at the pristine beaches of Pondicherry like Auro Beach, Rock Beach and Promenade Beach; or explore Pondicherry riding a bicycle, enjoy delicious French cuisine, go for boat rides or adventure activities like scuba diving, canoeing, camping etc.   image source Nearest Airport: Cochin International Airport Romantic Experiences: Take pleasant nature walks around beautiful tea gardens, enjoy breath-taking sites of waterfalls and sunset points, and spend quality time together relaxing in its tranquil environment   image source Nearest Airport: Mysore Airport Romantic Experiences: Enjoy simple pleasures like vistas beautiful landscape, wildlife spotting at Bandipur forested area, walks along Kabini river, couple spas and watching sunsets   image source Nearest Airport: Mysore Airport Romantic Experiences: Trekking across tea and spice plantations, floating in a romantic coracle, birdwatching, visiting vantage points and waterfalls and enjoying activities like river rafting, camping or nature photography   image source Nearest Airport: Coimbatore Airport Romantic Experiences: Take romantic nature walks exploring the beauty of the place or go trekking along the hilly trails, and visit places like Doddabetta, various gardens and orchards   image source Nearest Airport: Visakhapatnam Airport Romantic Experiences: Find peace and spend hours just talking to each other amidst the spectacular beauty of the land, go for long walks hand in hand along the pretty streams and spend evenings watching beautiful sunsets  
Indulge in the Beauty of Famous Pykara Falls:	Pykara is the famous and beautiful getaway set at a certain distance of almost 21 km from Ooty. This is considered as one of the very well-known tourist places in Ooty. The lake is very scenic, and boating amenities are also available. The falls contain an entire series of small waterfalls that join together to form the vast Pykara Falls . Image Source Pykara is the beautiful village along with the voluble river that has a dam and a power plant. Because of the dam, the entire backwater forms a massive lake that is actually called Pykara Lake. At the end of the dam, the river falls from the height that is also considered as Pykara Falls. This is how Pykara turns out to be the picture-perfect picnic spot. The magnetism is all set amongst lush greenery along with the breathtaking sights that appeal people from different corners of the world. If you are a nature lover and want to explore lots of beautiful places, then Pykara Falls would be one of the exciting places to visit. Pykara has each and everything that a travel buff needs for the perfect vacation with your family and friends. People have the choice of enjoying the boat ride in the lake along with relishing stunning scenery around the lake. There is a beautiful boathouse where visitors can relish sumptuous food and relax. The place is absolutely a must visit for those who wish to relish some quality time amongst the beauty of nature and peace. Pykara Falls is one of the beautiful and stunning places that are loved by lots of tourism lovers. So, apart from the scenic beauty, you will be able to witness some fantastic activities over there. Golf lovers should not miss the massive golf course over there, which is set at the altitude of almost 7200 feet and it covers the arena of 193 hectares. You can also be the witness some beautiful and famous temples such as Elk Hill, dedicated to Lord Muruga, mostly prevalent for Thaipusam Festival. There are numerous activities to try around like Kamaraj Sagar Dam, a famous picnic and film-shooting spot on slopes of Wenlock Downs. You can also visit a picturesque botanical garden, rose garden, tea museum and more. The Pykara Falls is also known as the Queen of Hills, Ooty is a picturesque city that is basically encircled by the attractive Nilgiri Hills. The place has a charming climate all-round the year because of the perfect location. The winters in Ooty are also colder than the rest of south India. The most beautiful time to visit this attractive hill station is from the month of October to June. In these months, the temperature remains wherever around 25°C that provides the lovely climate. This is an absolutely perfect time for sightseeing and traveling. During these months, nights are also comfortable as well.
Have You Heard About Lonar Lake? – A Crater With An Impact:	Whenever we look at the wonders of nature, it makes us realize how mysterious the universe is. No matter how much we claim to know and understand it, there are and will always be phenomena that are beyond our comprehension. One such wondrous gift of nature is the Lonar Lake, one of Maharashtra’s best-kept secrets. The product of a prehistoric cosmic event, the lake has attracted visitors for its natural beauty, historic significance and religious references. Lonar is a small village in Buldhana district of Maharashtra and is about 380 Km from Pune, 370 Km from Mumbai, and 140kms from Aurangabad. You can book an trustworthy taxi service from Pune and visit Lonar. The Lonar Lake and its neighbourhood is the highlight of its namesake village and make for a quaint combination of science, religion, and folk culture. The natural water body is said to be formed some 52000 years ago, when a meteorite, weighing 2 million tonnes, crashed on the earth’s mantle at an estimated speed of 90,000 kmph. The impact of this huge astral body was profound enough to create a 1.8 Km wide and 150 meters deep hole. The current diameter of the lake is 1.2 Km and the water level is 137 meters deep. Major research and development institutions like the Smithsonian, the United States Geological Survey, Geological Society of India, the University of Sagar and the Physical Research Laboratory, etc. have conducted endless and extensive studies of both the Lonar and the Amber Lakes and its perimeters, with the objective of understanding the level of its cosmic impact. Over evolution of the planet, natural vegetation and rain water fed the crater, turning the void into a serene and verdant zone. The lush landscape has been a paradise for nature lovers, trekkers, and geologists, each with their own search of comprehending this mysterious landmark. While travelers find this greenish water body visually delightful and make this their escape into nature, scientists seek answers to most pertinent questions. A National Geo-Heritage Monument, the Lonar Lake is the only known hyper velocity impact crater in basaltic rock anywhere on Earth. Also, it it’s the only water body to be found today which is both alkaline and saline at the same time which is believed to support micro-organisms that are not found anywhere else on the planet. Geologists have also discovered that some areas of the crater makes any compass or measuring device dysfunctional, adding to the enigma of this blue-green ecosystem. A small circular depression called the Ambar Lake, lies about 700 meters from the main crater, and is said to be caused by the splinter that created the Lonar Lake. Locally, this smaller water body is also known as the ChhotaLonar (small Lonar). You can also find a Hanuman Temple near the lake area, whose idol is believed to have magnetic properties. The two distinct layers of water (outer saline and inner alkaline) have their own flora and fauna, making it a complete natural enclave. This entire zone is a haven for numerous rare and exotic species of plants, animals, and birds. In cooler months like monsoon or winter, you can spot plenty of resident and migratory birds like the black-winged stilts, common and ruddy Shelducks (European migrants), Shovellers, teals, herons, red-wattled lapwings, rollers or blue jays, Baya weavers, parakeets, hoopoes, larks, tailorbirds, magpies, robins, swallows, and many more. There are also lots of peafowls, chinkara, and gazelles, roaming in the forested areas adjoining the lake. Very recently, the entire lake area was declared as the Lonar Wildlife Sanctuary, in order to protect its life forms. Visually splendid and naturally bountiful, the mystical and mysterious Lonar Lake has a lot more to unearth its secrets that are still lurking in its bed, even after thousands of years. Travellers from Mumbai can book a trust-worthy and cheap car rental service and explore this unique region.
URI gives a Surgical Strike to Conventional Marketing Strategies:	The Vicky Kaushal and Yami Gautam starrer that entered the theatres in early 2019 has been acclaimed by all the sections of people. All of this success is nothing but a fruit of the stunning storyline, talented actors, and the ingenious marketing strategies that kept Uri in the race till today. With the brilliant marketing campaigns held by the team, the movie’s promotion has excelled on attracting the audience of all fronts. Lead by the Trigger Happy Entertainment Network (THEN), RSVP’S Uri – The Surgical Strike has garnered the right attention from all kinds of people and has shown the movie industry a new era of marketing. If you haven’t watched the movie yet, then watch URI now while we brief you through the quirky yet brilliant marketing ideas that came along with it. The Vicky Kaushal and Yami Gautam starrer Uri: The Surgical Strike, that released in early 2019, has been praised by all the sections of people. All of this success is nothing but a fruit of the stunning storyline, talented actors, and the ingenious marketing strategies that kept Uri: The Surgical Strike in the race till today. With the brilliant marketing campaigns held by the team, the movie’s promotion has excelled on attracting the audience of all fronts. Lead by the Trigger Happy Entertainment Network (THEN), RSVP’S Uri: The Surgical Strike has garnered the right attention from all kinds of people and has shown the movie industry a new era of marketing. If you haven’t watched the movie yet, then you should watch Uri: The Surgical Strike now . But before that, let us brief you through the quirky yet brilliant marketing ideas that came along with it. The Beginning of the Surgical Strike with the #UriDeceptiveStrikes and the Strike Videos The first marketing campaign that gained anticipation among the audience about the movie is the “Strike”  videos. Generated and executed successfully by the Trigger Edge, these videos are five promos named as Night Vision, Revenge, Stealth Mode and others that were part of the film’s narrative. This was the beginning of the attention-grabbing process of the movie’s promotions. #UriDeceptiveStrikes Briefly after this, they came up with #UriDeceptiveStrikes that came up as a surprise to most of the people watching them. They conducted a press conference with Yami Gautam where she was asked a bunch of questions by the team. When the question about the surgical strike popped up, all the soldiers along with Vicky Kaushal resurfaced from behind, showing the theme of the entire movie. It turned out they were standing in the background the entire time and went unnoticed until the end, talking about how they want to attack their enemies in silence in their movie Uri: The Surgical Strike . Step Two of the Strike With The Google Assistant: “talk to the surgical strike” Vicky Kaushal from a still in Uri The marketing team of Uri went to another level and collaborated with Google Assistant through Dentsu Webchutney. They made a clip of Vicky and Yami interrogating with a suspected terrorist while asking their audience to do the same through the Google Assistant. The audience just had to say ‘talk to the surgical strike’ , and they would get the opportunity to interrogate the terrorist themselves. This marketing campaign was a massive success and was lauded for its smart use of tech. People have been talking to Google Assistant about this and sharing videos of the same on social media networking sites like Instagram and Facebook and spreading the word about the movie. #HowsTheJosh Using the famous hashtag #HowsTheJosh, all the actors and crew of Uri especially the lead actors have garnered the attention of the viewers by encouraging them to chant their dialogue “How’s the Josh? High Sir!” and upload videos about the same . This strategy has helped them reach every single person in households of the viewers, pulling them all to the screens to see about how high the josh is! The Ultimate Anti-Piracy Surgical Strike The Anti-Piracy Video Even after releasing the movie, the makers of Uri have been keen on avoiding piracy to help their business from collapsing. When they noticed the torrents uploaded on the website, they took them down and instead replaced them with a 3.8 GB video that they made by themselves. Falling in the trap, a lot of people have downloaded and opened the video to find the lead actors Yami Gautam and Vicky Kaushal asking them not to watch pirated movies and encouraging them to watch the movie at the theatre. They also depicted how they carried out a ‘surgical strike’ on the audience who wished to watch the movie through piracy. This has impacted a lot of viewers who saw it as a brilliant move. Keeping aside the striking marketing campaigns, Uri: The Surgical Strike made its place in the hearts of the viewers through the wonderful taking of the movie alongside actors who gave their best. It really has set the josh high and now even if you ask a kid, “How’s the Josh?” he’s going to reply, “High Sir!” The first marketing campaign that gained anticipation among the audience about the movie is the “Strike”  videos. Generated and executed successfully by the Trigger Edge, these videos are five promos named as Night Vision, Revenge, Stealth Mode and others that were out of film content. This was the beginning of the audience attention on the process of the movie. Briefly after this, they came up with #UriDeceptiveStrikes that came up as a surprise to most of the people watching them. They conducted a press conference with Yami Gautam where she was asked a bunch of questions by the team. When the question about the surgical strike popped up, all the soldiers along with Vicky Kaushal resurfaced from behind, showing the theme of the entire movie. It turned out they were standing in the background the entire time and went unnoticed until the end, talking about how they want to attack their enemies in silence in their movie Uri . The marketing team of Uri went to another level and collaborated with the Google Assistant through Dentsu Webchutney. They made a clip of Vicky and Yami interrogating with a suspected terrorist while asking their audience to do the same through the Google Assistant. The audience just had to say ‘talk to the surgical strike’ , and they would get the opportunity to interrogate with the terrorist themselves. This marketing campaign went to leaps and bounds that reached the audience on a larger front. People have been talking to Google Assistant about this and sharing videos of the same on social media networking sites like Instagram and Facebook and spreading the word about the movie. Using the famous hashtag #HowsTheJosh, all the actors and crew of Uri especially the lead actors have garnered the attention of the viewers by encouraging them to chant their dialogue “How’s the Josh? High Sir!” and upload videos about the same. This strategy has helped reach every single person in households of the viewers, pulling them all to the screens to see about how high the josh is! Even after releasing the movie, the makers of Uri have been keen on avoiding piracy to help their business from collapsing. When they noticed the torrents uploaded on the website, they took them down and instead replaced them with a 3.8 GB video that they made by themselves. Falling in the trap, a lot of people have downloaded and opened the video to find the lead actors Yami Gautam and Vicky Kaushal asking them not to watch pirated movies and encouraging them to watch the movie at the theatre. They also depicted how they carried out a ‘ surgical strike ‘ on the audience who wished to watch the movie through piracy. This has impacted a lot of viewers who thought of it as a brilliant move and went on to watch the movie in the theatre. Uri – The Surgical Strike released on 11th January 2019 and went on to enter the 100 crore club very soon. Keeping aside the striking marketing campaigns, Uri made its place in the hearts of the viewers through the wonderful taking of the movie alongside actors who gave their best. It really has set the josh high and now even if you ask a kid, “How’s the Josh?” he’s going to reply, “High Sir!”
Buy Flats And Apartment in Dubai with Azizi Developments:	Most of us share a common dream. The dream that makes us feel like we belong somewhere in the world, a dream that gives safe heaven to stay for the rest of our life. The dream of buying a house. When buying a flat in Dubai, the location you choose plays a significant role in determining the value of the investment that you put in buying the apartment. Owning a house in Dubai these days is an excellent investment from an ROI point of view and of course, it gives a good feeling to own a flat in Dubai. Not only this, but the additional facility you get in the area is the easy to travel metro line that is being added in this locality owing to the Expo 2020. The Expo 2020 attracts traders from all over the world, eyeing for properties in Dubai to increase their investment. So it would be best to get your hands on these offers before they get to it. You can also reach to the famous Dubai landmarks easily from this place and get the best-in-class amenities that you would be looking forward to. In addition to this, you also get the best payment plan that is flexible to the core, offering an ROI higher than 10%, and also you can obtain your house by just paying 10% of the down payment fees. This wonderful development located amidst the Sheik Zayed Road and the Mohammed Bin Zayed Road has flats for sale in Dubai for every one of you. They have 1 bhk flats for sale in Dubai for those who are looking for a compact house and 2 bhk flats for sale in Dubai for those eyeing the spacier ones. You name it, and they have it. Here is how luxurious the projects under Al Furjan will look like: Azizi Samia: Closest to the EXPO 2020’s location, the Samia Azizi offers Studios starting from AED 489,881 for all those who are eyeing the EXPO 2020. Azizi Star: The Studios in Azizi Star start from AED 501,107; offering your the best of services that you can think of. Azizi Farishta: The Azizi Farishta’s Studios begin from AED 489,138 and they are right after the Star, with a stellar location advantage. Azizi Plaza: Located right beside Farishta, the Azizi Plaza offers Studios starting from AED 486,119 alongside all the location advantages that Farishta has got. Shaista Azizi: Last and the most luxurious one, the Shaista Azizi offers a single bedroom starting from AED 828,008 owing to the uniqueness it holds, that makes it stand apart from the crowd. Imagine being able to move into the house after paying only 10% of the amount. The rest you can pay 75% on handover and the other 15% after the handover. All this along with 3 years of free service charge. What else do you need? Go ahead and book your studios before it’s too late and you lose your opportunity on an excellent investment. Contact at +91 8826636393 by call or WhatsApp for your flat booking inquiries at Al Furjan, Azizi Development
Is She the Most Popular and Photogenic Cat in India – Plowythecat?:	You must have seen a lot of cat pictures and videos online. However, this cute furball named Plowy who is one of the most popular cats in India is sure to win your heart. Watch her move from one corner of the room to another, playing football with the small tennis ball! Gaze into her lovely eyes and you won’t want to look elsewhere. There’s nothing more adorable than to play with her by dangling a paper in front of her. The way she jumps high in the air to catch it can make your heart swoon. It wouldn’t be wrong if we say she’s one of the most photogenic cats in India. Instagram handle :  plowythecat (loved by 25000+ followers) So, did you fall in love with her 🙂 … You can follow this adorable cat Plowy (one of the most popular cats in India) on Instagram for her regular updates. Plowy’s Instagram handle : @plowythecat Plowy the cat is fond of a high quality food rich in proteins. She likes her food with a balanced amount of fat concentrations. Plowy the cat is very picky sometimes if it is about her food. Plowy being a Persian cat (one of the most popular breeds) is always high on her energy. At the same time, she loves to relax and rest. Plowy, one of the most popular cats in India is a very well behaved and a friendly cat. Plowy the cat loves purring. Her meow is very rare to hear but simultaneously her purring is quite often. Plowy being a popular Persian cat do a lot of purring. If groomed properly, taking care of combing your cat’s hair daily can reduce in shedding. Plowy being one of the most popular cats in India is groomed and combed daily which results in less shedding. Bathing your cat on a regular period is also an important factor. Photography credits : @vivekverma0909
Visiting Palampur? Check Out This One Of The Best Hotels To Stay In Palampur:	Palampur, a beautiful hill station in Himachal Pradesh is the tea capital of Northwest India. The beauty of the place enhances 2x when there is endless streams flowing from in the region. Who doesn’t like clicking Instagram worthy pictures besides a river? Looking for a perfect weekend getaway to relax in the lap of nature? Well, you will be left spellbound by Palampur’s lush green tea plantations and panoramic views of the snow-capped mountain range. One of the major attractions of this exotic location is its adventure sports – paragliding! Get an adrenaline rush with Paragliding at Bir Billing Touch the sky by flying in the air and the aerial view of Himachal Pradesh surrounded by snow-capped mountains. Temple visits Palampur is an outstanding location to seek blessings at various temples.  Seek blessings at the famous Baijnath Temple, one of the oldest temples of Lord Shiva. Trek to the Birni Devi Temple to enjoy the scenic view of the valley from the top. A pleasant stay during vacation can double the fun. Bagora Heights Hotel, approximately 20 minutes from Palampur Bus Stand is one of the best hotels to stay in Palampur which offers great hospitality and a splendid view of the mountains which will make you re-visit Palampur. The view from your room’s balcony will rejoice you with its beauty as the sun hides between the mountains and this astonishing view will remind you of your childhoods painting of sunset amidst mountains. Bagora Heights also offers you hot and cold air conditioning in the rooms which makes this place comfortable to stay in all seasons. Who wouldn’t want to get the picturesque view from the hotel in a hill station of North India? A picture perfect is the main reason why the hill stations of the Himalayan region are in our bucket list today. Now, that you have to come here for the splendid view, the view from your hotel should be picturesque and Bagora heights meets all your expectations without fail. Bagora Heights Hotel is surrounded by snow-capped mountains throughout the year. Bagora Heights Hotel offers you a well-maintained garden within the hotel to relax in its lush green beauty. Away from the pollution, and citie’s hustle-bustle, enjoy nature in its full glory with fresh air which you will totally miss once you are back to your city! This picture perfect location makes a beautiful place for your pre-wedding shoot. The view of the surrounding makes this a romantic place for couples. Excited for Paragliding? Here is the sight of paragliding visible from Bagora Heights Hotel and prepare yourself for this adventure sport. Fly through the air to get an astounding view of the snow-capped Dhauladhar range. So, get ready to touch the sky and fly like a bird. Bir Billing is approximately 1 hour 20 minutes from Bagora Heights Hotel. 20 mins from Bagora Heights Hotel , this picnic spot is perfect for spending quality time with family and friends. You can sit near the water stream and relax yourself. Bagora Heights offers home-like amenities to its guests well complemented by highly efficient staff. It is one of the best place in Palampur to enjoy the home like stay. Bagora Heights Hotel is one of the best hotels in Palampur that offers accommodation at reasonable rates. The rooms are well equipped with all the modern amenities like Wi-Fi connectivity, HD Television, and Intercom Connectivity. Bagora Heights Hotel offers some of the best services in a town like 24-Hour help Desk, tight security round the clock, Airport Shuttle and restaurant that offers lip-smacking food options. These facilities offered by the hotel ensures comfort at all levels. By Air The nearest airport is about 35 kms i.e. the Dharamshala Airport. Take a taxi to reach Palampur in an hour. By Train Palampur hill station is well connected with all the trains passing through Chandigarh, Shimla, Manali and many other tourist destinations. By Road It is about 490 kms away from Delhi and there are many buses and taxis available which connects Palampur with major cities like Mandi, Pathankot, Shimla in Himachal Pradesh. The prime location of Bagora Heights will make you appreciate the beauty of Palampur in Himachal Pradesh. Watch the serenity of nature, enjoy the splendid view of the beautiful Himalayas and chirping sounds of the birds. Who wouldn’t want to get complete peace of mind with nature at its best serving us to appreciate its beauty? You can book your stay with Bagora Heights On Their Website: http://www.bagoraheights.com Bagora Heights contact number +91-8447839703 e-mail: bagoraheights@gmail.com
Best Hotel With Swimming Pool In Shimla:	Planning your next vacation on the hills? Well, then Shimla is one of the best places to visit in northern India. The cold wind, tall snow-covered mountains, and greenery all around are so dreamlike that you’d want to stay a little longer. To have a comfortable stay throughout your journey is very crucial, and in Shimla, Hotel Hot Spring is a right choice for a luxurious stay in Shimla. Hotel Hot Spring, is the best hotel with swimming pool in Shimla provides a homelike feeling to the guests and has facilities that you will not find elsewhere. They are specialized in Healing, Wellness SPA, Ayurveda Yoga, Retreat Detox Programs, Relaxation Programs, Slimming programs, Massage.  And if you love swimming, it has a swimming pool as well, making it the best hotel with swimming pool in Shimla! You must have been to various hotels during your vacations, but what makes Hotel Hot Spring special? Well, the kind of facilities it offers is commendable. The unique facilities and services provided by the hotel are: Don’t you think this is exciting? Then, book your accommodation in Shimla at the earliest and enjoy their hospitality. You will taken aback with the hospitality they provide. Hotel Hot Spring is known for its involvement in both outdoor and indoor activities. You can also visit some romantic locations around Shimla. The view and surrounding of the Hotel will definitely give you some beautiful Instagram worthy pictures and add them to your social media. Your friends and family will surely message you are asking about the place, and you’d definitely want to recommend Hotel Hot Spring to them. Click on the link below and experience the serenity like never before at the best hotel with Swimming pool in Shimla!
All You Need to Know About Pro-Kabaddi League 2019:	Dream 11 has continuously been into tuning your sport strategy skills and this time dream11 is going to do that with Pro Kabaddi League 2019. Pro Kabaddi League came into existence in the year 2014 and this 7th season has begun since July where twelve teams will compete on the mats to win the battle. The matches are going across the metro cities of India. Contenders of Pro Kabaddi League 2019 Following is a list of 12 teams who are enthusiastically participating in PKL 2019: Following is a list of 12 teams who are enthusiastically participating in PKL 2019: Patna Pirates: Masters of PKL, Patna Pirates have set standards for other teams in point-scoring. They have been champions of three seasons and this is the team which is working hard to win the trophy. Selecting right players for your fantasy team is what makes you win the name and here is a list of top five players: 1.       Pradeep Ranwal: Captian of Patna Pirates, who has already bagged the title of most valuable player can be a significant asset for your team. 2.       Vishal Bharadwaj: A young defender from Telugu Titians is known for his fantastic game sense. His robust defence and attack on raiders have always grabbed the eyes of other teams and the audience. 3.       Fazel Atrachali: Awarded as the best defender, Fazel Atrachali will make it impossible for the raiders to overcome this defence. Labelled as a dominant player, he is one of the most successful players of Pro Kabbadi League. 4.       Nitesh Kumar: Star defender , Nitish Kumar has scored a century of tackle points in the last season. Raiders cannot overcome his ankle attack, and he can change the game with his great sense of timing. 5.       Parvesh Bhainswal: He is a defender, left cover player is dominant, quick and dart well. Aged about 20, this player has come back with more strength and power to perform better. Fans are eagerly waiting for their favourite teams to play every day and we cannot wait to see who’s going to brag the trophy this season. So tune in to PKL and keep the excitement alive! Featured image source: hotstar
Plan a Perfect Getaway with Your Better Half In Himachal Pradesh:	Himachal Pradesh isone of the best states in India to pick up for holidaying. With mountain peakscovered in snow, deodar thick forests, apple orchards and snowfalls cities likeMashobra, Shimla has become one of the most preferred destinations of the tourists.If you are planning a trip with your spouse to sparkle the romance, then youmust select one of the best hotels in Mashobra Shimla. Planning a holiday can be exciting and selecting the right hotel for your stay can be confusing! Here are some handy tips which will simplify your steps for choosing the best hotel: A room with a view is a must – Holidaying in Shimla and other hill stations cannot be complete without a panoramic view of the Himalayan outside your window or balcony of the room Look for the activities they offer – you need some time away from the city noise and outdoor events. Check if they havea dining option – you wouldn’t like travelling back from the hotel in search offood after a tiring day. Check for romanticactivities offered – if you are travelling with your significant half to spiceyour love life then do check if they provide passionate services. With these things in place, your holiday can become one of the most memorable experiences with the best hotel in Mashobra Shimla you choose to stay with. You can spend an entire day at The Nilaya Resort admiring the natural beauty of Himalayan Peaks drenched in cloud and snow. The Nilaya offers a nature walk of 20 to 120 minutes in the nearby areas of Mashobra, which is going to be a lifetime experience as you pass through thick deodar forest. Like it happens in movies, The Nilaya has taken a step to make it happen in the real-life of couples. They offer star gazing activity after 11 pm in the night, which is going to be the most romantic time for both of you.   You will enjoy your time with your partner at The Nilaya as they have rooftop restaurants, patios where you can enjoy some music, food and the Himachal beauty. Himachali thalis are known for its fantastic taste and variety, and you must try them. The Nilaya Resort also offers various cuisine. Indoor games are fun, and The Nilaya has arranged a room for indoor games like foosball, pool table, carrom and many other board games. Games can really bring fun and laughter along with bringing out love for each other. Mashobra is known for many adventurous activities, and one fun activity for you as a couple would be biking! The Nilaya is regarded as the best hotel in Mashobra Shimla as they arrange these activities for you on request so that you have all the fun and do not go back home with incomplete exploration to Mashobra. Mashobra is locatedaround 11kms from Shimla, and you can reach via a taxi or bus. Nearest Airport:Shimla Nearest Railway Station: Shimla and Chandigarh. The Nilaya is best with arrangements for couples – be it in the woods or on roof top. The Nilaya has surprises in store for proposals, pre-wedding shoots, wedding receptions and also anniversary celebrations .
Few People From Bangalore Were Asked Questions On Current Affairs and They Left Everyone In Total Shock:	Trinnggg! Alarm;wake up; answer nature’s call; bathe;breakfast; (some of us have a walk in between 😉 ….work, lunch, work , back home, bathe, eat, watch TV or read paper and sleep……in short ‘subah hotee hai , shaam hotee hai; zindagi yunhee tamaam hotee hai’.The context I write this in is -it is extremely easy to get sucked into daily routine (I would call it rut!) ….but there are a few of us who take to the streets and ask people ;with great chances of being snubbed off and getting humiliated ; about something which effects all of us in our daily lives; CURRENT AFFAIRS…..just to spread awareness. Watch it here! Video and featured image source: Youtube  via Karan Gill Disclaimer : These are few people whom Karan Gill asked these questions and of course such small group of people in the video do not represent the entire Bangalore. If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
Video Of Sarita Devi Returning The Bronze Medal To Silver Medalist In Protest With Pride:	Sarita Devi refused to accept the bronze medal in protest of unfair decision in semi-final against a Korean player at Asian Games 2014 in Korea. Sarita’s performance was dominating throughout the semi final match and she even left the Koren boxer with a blooded nose. Sarita was seen crying with a broken heart during the ceremony. The Indian boxing contingent lodged a protest after paying a USD 500 fee however the appeal was rejected later. [Click on the video to play] // <![CDATA[(function(d, s, id) { var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0]; if (d.getElementById(id)) return; js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id; js.src = "//connect.facebook.net/en_US/all.js#xfbml=1"; fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs); }(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));// ]]&gt;
Internet Users Are Shifting To Mobile Devices But They Are Still Making Huge Impact By Selling Desktops:	Major chunk of internet users are now shifting to mobile for surfing. Even on viralstories.in we see 40-50% visitors reading stories via mobile devices …This is an indication that we are moving from laptop or desktop to mobile for normal browsing but these facts are going to blow your mind.. As per Census 2011, less than 1 in 10 households have access to computers , which counts to just a 9.5% IT penetration in India opening market for requirement of 600 millions of affordable computers in the next decades.   Mukund BS and Raghav Boggaram started RenewIt with a vision and mission sell refurbished computers at an affordable price to make more and more people access to computers which can create more jobs across the country! Incredible Video and featured image source:  India Ahead If you like this story, don’t forget sharing the same with your friends.
From Tea Vendor To Prime Minister, Check Out New N.A.M.O Youth Anthem:	Narendra Modi who used to help his father selling tea near railway station in Vadnagar during childhood is now  one of the most popular politician in India and abroad with one of the highest number of follower on twitter and facebook worldwide. This time we witnessed lot of creativity In marketing of political parties during Elections in India due to growth of social media and creative agencies. Check N.A.M.O anthem created by  Sugavanam Krishnan   for Narendra Modi as a token on appreciation.  Video source: Youtube  via  Sugavanam Krishnan , Featured image source If you like this story, don’t forget to share is with your friends.
Rajdeep Sardesai Abused And Attacked NRI’s Outside Madison Square:	While the entire nation is mesmerized and thrilled by the speech of Indian Prime Minister  Shri Narender Modi at Madison Square, New York which highlights his vision to create a better and a truly Incredible India ; with lots of economical and social inititatives ; there was a shameful event outside Madison Square!!! Which involved an Indian too!!! Extremely disgraceful. Its hard to believe what happened and how a senior media journalist lost his calm and composure to deal with people gathering there. You have to watch this video and share your comments below. // <![CDATA[(function(d, s, id) { var js, fjs = d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0]; if (d.getElementById(id)) return; js = d.createElement(s); js.id = id; js.src = "//connect.facebook.net/en_US/all.js#xfbml=1"; fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js, fjs); }(document, 'script', 'facebook-jssdk'));// ]]&gt;   Our intention in sharing this video is to spread a message that, “Whoever you are, whatever be your profession, whatever your thoughts about individuals/ groups etc…you have no right to disgrace our Country . One person sitting inside is trying to project a shining India and some handful outside are undoing his efforts!!! Follow @allviralstories !function(d,s,id){var js,fjs=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],p=/^http:/.test(d.location)?'http':'https';if(!d.getElementById(id)){js=d.createElement(s);js.id=id;js.src=p+'://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js';fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js,fjs);}}(document, 'script', 'twitter-wjs'); [mashshare]
Amul Vs. Neha Tomar: Who Is It At Fault? Or Is There Any?:	image source: dudhsagardairy.coop When as a common customer, we experience a folly from our favorite brand what do we generally do? As a responsible customer, it is both our right as well as duty to bring the authorities to notice the problem faced by us and request them for an appropriate action. This is what a just a commoner of a customer, like you and me, Neha Tomar did. When she experienced some alarming issue with her usual brand of Amul Gold Milk, she lodged a complaint with the Amul people. image source The not so cold war, took an ugly turn when the Amul authorities posted an explanation of the allegations posed on them by Ms. Neha Tomar  on their official Amul page on Facebook. Now, the hurt and disappointed customer is narrating her side of the story, claiming Amul’s allegations to be baseless. Video Source: Amul- This is unfair! What I projected as a concern, being a true consumer of Amul, came to be projected as WAR. On the night of 9 October 2014, my husband bought 3 ltr (6 packets of 500 ml each) of Amul gold milk from a vendor outside our society. It was duly refrigerated, only to be opened by my mother-in-law the next morning. She noticed a sour smell in the first packet, and then eventually in the second one too. She took the rest of the four unopened packet to the vendor, who refused to take it back. Like any other middle class consumer, we thought of making paneer out of it instead of throwing it away. When the milk was put to boil, the look of it changed to a stretchy gooey substance, despite the fact that nothing else was added to it. It was nothing but scary to see that mass, which could have been consumed by my family, including an infant. Being a responsible consumer, I called up Amul customer care where the executive noted down my contact details and told me that some Amul executive will visit me in 4-5 working days. I was taken aback because it was a serious problem and needed immediate attention. The executive mistook me to be overreacting, and disconnected the call without giving any complaint number, even after my asking them for the same. I tried calling again, but lines were busy and I could not get through. It was then that me and my family thought of taking the help of Facebook, which is the most active networking site these days and also has pages of all big brands. I posted details and pictures on Amul’s page, and my own Facebook page on 10 October at 11.55 a.m and again at 11.56 a.m. Amul officials got into action, contacted me and met me on 11 October at 6.30 p.m. However, my post is no longer visible on their page and no new post can be posted too. I humbly attended to and met Amul officials and explained to them my predicament and disappointment. They replaced the milk, and gave me promises that appropriate technical guys will look into the matter and will resolve this. I narrated this whole meeting incident on my Facebook page on 13 October at 10.53 a.m, impressed that the Amul officials were helpful and promised to take cognizance of the matter. Later that evening, 6 Amul officials came to me and explained to me what that stretchy substance could be. However, they accepted that customer care executive was not correct in saying that the complaint will be addressed by Amul officials in 4-5 working days. They informed me that the customer grievances are taken care of by third party and that the Amul head office will look into it. They showed me videos also, which I believed and said that being a layman, I do not know what came from my milk and it is good that they took the effort of explaining the whole reason. I thanked them, happy with the effort they took in addressing the consumer complaint. The very next day, 14 October 2014 at 10.38 a.m., I shared a post again on my Facebook page showing victory and also that how the officials came and met me and explained. And I also praised Amul for its complaints solution and efforts. Like a good consumer I was happy and satisfied in the end. But that same day, Amul posted a post on its page at 3.16 p.m., which read more like a threatening message. Not only were the facts misrepresented, but also the wrong and tampered screenshots of my post were posted. I posted my grievance on 10 October, whereas Amul showed that I posted it on 9 October. This can be seen here . Amul also edited their own post on their page three times with different edited versions. Below mentioned highlighted portions are the edited versions. First post of Amul on their page was posted on 14th October at 3.16 p.m. This is regarding the Facebook post that Ms Neha Tomar has shared on her wall. The details of the matter are as follows: The consumer called our customer care on 10th morning at 9.22 am and shared her experience of using Amul Gold Milk on the very same day. She also emailed the complaint to our official email ID on 10th afternoon. As informed by her, the “use by” date of the Amul Milk was 9th of October. This means the consumer had used expired milk in the first place. It may be also noted that the consumer has been misusing her office to publicize this story on Amul. We hope that she has informed her office regarding the same as we shall hold her office too responsible for her actions. Edited version of first post again posted at 7.10.p.m The consumer called our customer care on 10th morning at 9.22 am and shared her experience of using Amul Gold Milk on the very same day. She also emailed the complaint to our official email ID on 10th afternoon. As informed by her, the “use by” date of the Amul Milk was 9th ofOctober. The milk got expired in her fridge, later used by the consumer. We do not understand that why the consumer used her official position to make such complaint without knowing the fact. See the link for detailed edited posts. Link the link and see the edited section at the post. It is clear how Amul realized that they have threatened me in their first post, thanks to many comments on the thread, and they edited the post. There is no clarification needed for their mala fide intentions. Secondly, I did not give any time promise to Amul officials to upload my feedback. This is a lie and a clear attempt to play with someone’s faith in them and their service, and only to twist facts in their favour. Thirdly, Amul tried to threaten me by involving my office name into highlight which is again totally wrong at their part. I posted everything on my personal level and not on behalf of my organization. Nowhere have I written that I am representing my organization for raising this issue. Nor I have posted my position anywhere. It was clearly mentioned by me that it is my personal experience, and my office has absolutely nothing to do with it. Amul tried to defame the name of my office also, to which they have no right. Fourthly, Amul accused me of having mala fide intentions. Perhaps the first thing I should have done was to sue Amul and claim handsome monetary compensation. That would have defined ‘mala fide’ for Amul officials. But that I did not do. I am not a publicity seeker. Perhaps behaving cooperatively or humbly with Amul officials made them believe that I was an easy consumer to mislead or defame. If indeed I wanted to gain publicity, I would have very initially gone to the electronic and print media. What I did was as an everyday aggrieved consumer, who has seen this brand being used from the very childhood. I had faith in the brand and that’s why I approached the people concerned. I was never having personal grudges against Amul, and there was no reason for it. I was angry on the product, Amul gold milk, which was not up to the required qualitative standard. I brought the issue in the light because nobody takes consumer complaints seriously in India. I took the help of these platforms so that the senior officials and authorities could access the issue and take steps for it being repeated. I stand proud at the step I took and have no guilt at having done so, and the way I did it. The entire country has faith in Amul, and so did I. But the way Amul threatened me was unimaginable. By maligning a consumers image, Amul has only dug its own grave, has ruined the name that has taken so many painful, hardworking years to build. I was an angry consumer and so I took recourse of those platforms, so that my concern could be heard. Adulteration in products is nothing new in India, and milk is a basic daily need of ours. I was scared and terrified after seeing what we were consuming every day. Being a mother, I was terrified with the consequences that could have happened if that milk would have been given to my seven month old daughter, or any other family member. All I expected was a quick and polite response. I am no scientist to know what happens to milk in particular conditions, and a straight forward explanation was all that was needed. No threats. No tampering posts. And no blame games. There is no war between me and Amul. Like an ordinary consumer, I wanted Amul to solve the matter, and also being a big brand they have some accountability towards customer grievances. But the way they solved and manipulated the whole issue was totally unexpected and hurting. I happily posted everything good about Amul on Facebook after their response in appropriate time. Being humble is the quality of the wise; threatening a vice of the arrogant/ ignorant. Just this one mistake from a few officials has not just soiled the brand name, but also lost many good consumers. I would have been very happy if Amul would have ended this on an amicable note. A proof of which is over one lakh people who shared the post on Facebook and shared their comments and observations. A brand is made by its consumers; it is never the other way around. I could have taken legal measures to respond to the public threat by Amul, but I did not, because I do no hate Amul. But Amul Gold milk has lost its customers, one is me. As a regular Customer of Amul products, I only tried to bring to the notice of the Customer Care and management an issue which needed immediate attention. It was construed by Amul Management that I was working on behest of other Corporate, and I had malafide intentions. I never expected this kind of response from Amul, a brand I have grown up consuming in various forms. It is sad day for consumer rights! [mashshare]
Pepsi Got A Scare Worthy Reply In Return From Coca Cola On Halloween While Trying To Scare Them:	The war of the brands is not anything new. It has been there since maybe the Dark Ages. Pepsi and Coke being rivals for decades now, have always been clashing and cleverly coming up newer ingenious ideas to show each other dirt. image source image source  / credits: PepsiCo  and coca cola, The Coca-Cola Company
She Taught This Auto Rickshaw Driver A Lesson Which Every Girl Should Watch:	Despite of continuous effort by common people, government, celebrities to spread awareness and stop crime against woman, there are few breeds of people who has no scope for change and continue do crimes secretly by living in the same society and never get caught. This is a story of  Rujuta Diwekar  who is author by profession. She was molested by an auto rickshaw driver in Mumbai but she fought back with courage and bravery and taught a lesson to the criminal on spot. This happened about 3 days ago. So yes, I am a woman and if you molest me, I will run after you, hold you by the collar and create a ruckus. Through all this drama, there was a woman slightly older than me who helped me both physically and emotionally to deal with this guy. Huge thanks to you mam, I dont know your name, but I remain indebted for all the help. About the man, don’t know his name too but his breed is growing.. Rujuta is a great inspiration to all woman in India and across the globe. Spread this article as much as possible to get this rickshaw driver caught or at least inspire females to act strong in such situation and get criminals caught. [mashshare]
Secret Ingredient To A Breaking News (Only for 18+):	What is the recipe to a breaking news? Breaking “NEWS” you said? Isn’t that supposed to be news and not something ‘cooked up’? Hahaha… You would think so, wouldn’t you? The way news channels show us the so called Breaking News which they miraculously manage to obtain every single day, is something beyond imagination for a simple and humble human being. It is a matter of great thought and perseverance to cook up a news that not only appeals to the appetite of every audience but also pleases and scintillates their taste buds!! Mmmm….lip smacking! Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via TVF (Disclaimer: This video is uploaded for a harmless humor and we do mean to hurt anyone’s emotions, because you are awesome!)
Arnab Goswami Trolled LIVE By Subramanian Swamy. Liar, Stupid, Dumbo, Mentally Retard:	A lot of people even assumed after watching this clip that that S Swamy was drunk but the fact is that Arnab,in the very beginning of the argument alleged Swamy of writing a letter to Rajpakshe asking him to hang the fishermen. This baseless allegation was in itself, outrageous. Arnab could not prove it at any point during the debate, even when Swamy kept on inciting him for doing the same. This turned out to be the most hilarious thing happened to Arnab LIVE on his own show. Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Gondor Mordor
30 Years Since The Bhopal Gas Tragedy Yet The Pain Echoes In The Air. 9 Painful Images Inside:	It was the night of 2nd December 1984 when there was a leak at Union Carbide Corp pesticide factory, in Bhopal, India that exposed as many as 500.000 people to the poisonous methyl isocyanate gas. They suffered unthinkable permanent and temporary injuries; with the death lulling about 25,000 of those innocent and unsuspecting people into a deep slumber from which they could never again rise. And the large scale soil and water pollution is still affecting the people of Bhopal. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Video Source: YouTube via euronews
The Relentless Snapdeal Soap Affair..This Will Tell Us How Materialistic We Have Become:	images source Yeah folks, that’s right! A Mr. Lakshminarayan Krishnamurthy was one such lucky brute who got to sway high with such a thoughtful and personalized treat when he ordered a mobile phone from one of India’s biggest online shopping portal, snapdeal.com . Oh no. Snap! You can’t take away the credit! It was all the effort put into by a thoughtful courier man or a seller, not you! Evidently, Mr. Lakshminarayan ordered a Samsung phone for his wife, trying to make use of Snapdeal’s Diwali Bumper Sale; but as it turned out some jolly good fellow in the festive spirit of Diwali switched the phone with a Vim bar to give him a Diwali Dhamaka!! My! What a brilliant idea to surprise somebody and at the same time connect at such a personal level! image source Anyway, unable to understand the pure soul, the naive customer got a little upset over the the Samsung box containing a used up dish washing soap-bar instead of a fresh one! Sigh… Some people can just never be pleased. C’mon man! That’s the beauty of the prank…it was a humble attempt to connect to the customer with the daily lives of the retailer. Nevertheless, Snapdeal came up to be a spoilsport and refunded the whole amount apparently “good-heartedly”. Not only that, even Hindustan Unilever Company gifted him with the Samsung Core Duo mobile phone along with Vim Liquid soaps! Can you believe that?
Watch This Hilarious Parody On The Comical Episode Of Arnab Being Trolled On His Own Show By Swamy:	You watched how Arnab Goswami was trolled by Subramaniyam Swamy on his own show. It was by far the worst what could have happened to Arnab live on National television. But indeed it made a great watch and a super risible at that, for us! However, the cynical episode doesn’t just end there. Watch this amazing video in which Arnab and Swamy clash has been trolled even further but with a musical and a yet funnier touch! Video and Featured Image: YouTube via  TheSurfingViolinist’s India Adventures
Narendra Modi Temple In U.P:	image source We have earlier heard of people worshiping Ranjikant, Amitabh and Sachin earlier and now its the P.M of India. This temple was created at Kaushambhi district in U.P. This lord shiva temple where Narendra Modi is worshiped is now named as Namo Temple. The priest in temple also seems to be dressed in BJB colors and also kept a Modi style beard.
Bollywood Is Contagious. Don’t Believe Us? Ask Obama.:	image source Video Source: YouTube via Ayushi Bhargava
6 Easy Steps To Open Account On Paytm Bank:	Indian digital payment and e-wallet giant Paytm has launched its full fledged bank in India. The bank is  operational for customers from 23rd May 2017.   This move by Paytm will make all the private and national banks run for their money as new customer acquisition will not be easy for any bank from here on. Paytm wallets is widely accepted by Indian audience and Paytm bank is expected to create huge traction in India market. It will be interesting to see what strategies private and national banks adopt from here on to compete with Paytm bank. Here is everything you need to know about Paytm bank 1. You can deposit upto INR 1 lakh in Paytm bank 2. You can open both savings and current account 3. You can avail banking services like Debit Cards, Online Banking and Mobile Banking 4. Paytm banks are not allowed to lend to customers, however it can tie up with other financial institution to offer this service 5. It will have physical branches and you can visit the branch operational from Monday to Saturday 10 a.m. – 4 p.m. (closed on 2nd and 4th Saturday 6. Paytm bank head office will be based out of B-121, Sector 5, Noida – 201301 6. You can just scan the QR code to know more about the Paytm branch services, seems most of the services will be self served and very easy to use. 1. Go to your account on Paytm app and tap on open account 2. It will show you a screen which will say “Welcome to Paytm bank”. Click on “Proceed” 3. On the next page set your Paytm passcode 4. After setting you pass code the next screen will allow you to set a nominee on your Paytm bank account 5. Fill details of your nominee 6. You are done! Its that simple Here is the gimps of the Paytm ATM. Looks like the ATM machine will have a fingerprint sensor to withdraw money from the ATM. Story source: PayTm founder Vijay Shekhar Sharma fb post , featured image source
After Indian Internet Audience Support Finally The Good News:	In big conferences we talk about growth of internet penetration in India and how big brands can be benefited by the same. However the power of internet is much larger if used in the right way. This is proved once again. As per latest update on the story, Ashwani Uppal’s 15 year old daughter who went missing on 15th April 2017 from Delhi has been finally found . The internet audience came together to spread the word and help finding this daughter of our nation. The facebook post requesting help finding his daughter got  259,457 shares   and his public help request video got 69 lakh + views  which restores faith in humanity. Here are few pictures of his daughter and the video appeal. Thanks internet audience Gif source , image source
Expectations Of How Life Would Be When You Grow Up Vs. Reality:	As a child, when you looked at the grown ups you felt a surge of admiration and excitement to grow up as fast as can so that you could live their dream like lives. Sadly, what you expected then is not half of what you got as reality. image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source   image source image source   image source image source       image source image source   image source image source   image source Hold man, hold…I’m busy! image source [mashshare]
12 Things You Do When You Are Broke:	We all must have been broke some or the other time and even though it is a really pitiful situation, we can always laugh our worries away… At least that’s something we can afford when we are broke. 😉 image source  /UTV Motion Pictures   image sources   image source   image source / Mukta Arts image source   image source / Vinay Pictures   image source / Reliance entertainment   image source / Reliance Entertainment   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source / 8Tracks Radio image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source: T-Series / Via Imaan Sheikh   image source/ Reliance Entertainment   image source / Dharma Productions- ShowMan Pictures-Yash Raj Films
21 Signs That Proves To Others That It Is Your Last Year In The College:	College days are in every way that can be said, truly memorable days. All the moments be they happy or sad, of friendship or rivalry, or winning or losing, are never to be forgotten. And when it’s your last year at the college, this all starts coming to you like some atonement achieved. image source / Geetha Arts- Reliance Entertainment- ShowMan Pictures   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source  / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source /Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source  / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source   image source / Reliance Entertainment   image source  / Reliance Entertainment   image source   image source  / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   image source   image source / Yash Rajb Films   image source / Dharma Productions   image source  / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   image source  / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions/  Featured Image Source
Breaking 45 Typical Indian Stereotypes To Stop Presuming Everything:	We live in  a world where everyone and everything is presumed. We have reservations for all. It’s hard for us to look at anybody with a  fresh outlook and welcome his differences. And not just that, we are ourselves constantly in the race of trying to fitting ourselves in! Why? What is the need to  stereotype things? It’s really a high time we start looking at the world with a new and prejudice free glasses.                                                                                              
11 Types Of Irritating Breeds You Find On Facebook These Days In India:	You can’t do without Facebook these days, but it’s more difficult to survive it when these irritating people are there to annoy you to your core. image source / Sony Pictures -Meteor Pictures   image source  / Eros International   image source   image source   image source   image source  Sony Pictures -Meteor Pictures image source  Sony Pictures -Meteor Pictures   image source   /Yash Raj Films   image source   image source  Sony Pictures -Meteor Pictures   image source   image source   image source
8 Things You Really Need Take Care Of This Diwali:	Though maybe unknowingly, lost in the excitement of Diwali we often become careless and insensitive. Let us take a look how we do that and make this Diwali a brighter one. image source   image source   image source / Reliance Entertainment   image source / T-Series- Eros International image source / Vinay Pictures   image source / Eros International   image source / Red Chilies Entertainment   image source / Balaji Motion Pictures   image source  / featured image source :  readitt.in [mashshare]
13 Awkward Situations You Can Never Get Away With:	Some situations are just tailor made to make you most uncomfortable creature on earth. There is no escape. You can only try and try until you get more awkward. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source
16 Things You Desperately Want To Say To Her On The First Date That You Probably Musn’t:	A first date is always special. But often your hopes of a wonderful evening with a charming and a beautiful girl turns out to be quite boring and annoying, everything that you had hoped not for. In that scenario when you can hardly stand her or her nonsensical antics, you are practically at a war with yourself when one side is trying to look all gentlemanly and interested and other half is dying to say these things to her! T-Series Films- M M Films   image source / Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Productions   UTV Motion Pictures   image source   Eros International Ltd.- Red Chillies Entertainment   Yash Raj Films       Eros International   Dharma Productions   image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / Sridevi Productions   Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures   Trimurti Films     Eros International     image source / Yash Raj Films   Featured Image Source / Fox Star Studios- 20th Century Fox
10 Things That You Will Understand If you Are The Only One Married In Your Group:	It’s hard to face your friends when you are the only married person in the whole of your group. image source / SLB Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Yas Raj Films    image source / Amir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / Eros International   image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Dharma Productions   image source / Mukta Arts   image source / Amir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   image source / ShowMaker Pictures   Featured Image Source
Difference Between Being In A Relationship When You’re 18 Vs. When You Are 30:	At each stage of life with get crushes, get into relationships, make them to last  a life time or break them up for good. But our relationships differ with our age? image source image source   image source   image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source   image source image source
Expectations Of A Guy From A Girl Before Marriage Vs. The Reality After It:	There are certainly side effects of marriage. It’s a strange institution which makes us dream all kinds of rosy things but when we are actually living that life, then we get to know, what we expected from it, may not be something that we are actually getting. And your wife is not an exception in that scenario. image source image source   image source image source / SLB Films   image source / Reliance Entertainment- Viacom 18 Motion Pictures- Hari Om Productions image source   image source / T-Series- Rawail Grandsons- Sohail Khan Productions   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source /Sony Pictures- Meteor Pictures   image source   Featured Image Source / Balaji Motion Pictures
16 Signs Which Prove You Were Born To Travel:	When it comes to travelling, there’s nothing more you love. Out with your trekking shoes and that sleep bag you are always ready to see the world! What does it take to be a traveller then? Yes, mango sized mosquito bites, exotic diseases and stinky bathrooms may be a part of it but when travelling doesn’t remind you of those but words such as adventure, people, history and architecture than you are born to be a traveller! image source   image source / SLB Films   image source / Warner Bros. Pictures   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   image source   image source   image source / Eros International   image source   image source   image source
Affordable Car on Rent Online at Rentickle:	When traveling to a new place, local commuting to visit places is a major challenge everyone faces. Going from one place to another in cabs can become stressful and expensive, right? To solve this problem, Rentickle offers you affordable car rental services in Gurgaon. Noida, Delhi, Hyderabad and Bangalore. Guess what? It is at the cost of almost nothing! You get a wide range of cars from which you can select the one you want to drive Add a bit more luxury to your travel by selecting a sedan for your trip. The prices are such that you will not want to miss upgrading from hatch back to sedan. Give yourself a comfortable and spacious travel with a group of friends or family in your choice of SUV Look at the catalogue and choose the car that you want to take on rent. They have all different varieties of cars that can fit in all your needs. Right from small and compatible cars to SUVs, you name it and they have it. Like every legal renting, the car rent services at Rentickle also have a requirement to submit some basic documents to prove your credibility. You will need to submit a copy of PAN Card, Bank Statement of the last six months and an address proof to seal the deal. Once they are verified, you will confirm your order by making the payment. You will need to pay a refundable amount that you will receive once you return the car alongside the rent amount. After confirmation of your order, schedule the car for delivery on a comfortable date. They would deliver the car at your doorstep and pick it back as and when you want to return it. There will be no additional charges for the delivery or pick-up, which makes it all the more amazing. You can also relocate your location at a free cost. Enjoy your car rides and make the most of it while you take care of any extra cab rides that might rob you of your happiness in the city. The electronic products delivered home by Rentickle, come with a manufacturer warranty as given in the contract. All the items are of high quality and a manufacturing defect is an unlikely scenario. However, on the event of the same, there will be free repairs done by Rentickle during the period of your contract. As it is very clear about the prices of the cars that can be taken on rent, it is safe to say that the prices are very affordable and reasonable at this point. Apart from this, Rentickle also offers its free services that act as a brownie point for the cars. Get your wheels ready by the time you reach the city by booking a car on Rentickle at the best of rates!
9 Things You Need To Do With Your Mom If You Are Soon Getting Married:	When it is the time of getting married nears, is when you realize what an awesome mother and and an amazing woman your mom is. You start feeling miserable you won’t be able to cry in her lap when you feel upset any more, won’t be able to get a taste of her famous gajar ka halwa whenever you want and much much more! 🙁 But girl, it isn’t too late. Make the most of the time you have now in your hand, and enjoy to the fullest with her!! You both deserve and need this. 🙂 image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   image source   Featured Image Source
Excellent Furniture Rental To Make A Home Away From Home:	Have you heard of online furniture rental services? If no, then have you moved to a new place and missed the essence of your own home? Moving out of a home can be a tedious task – especially when you are attached to that place, and you cannot move on quickly. That being said, setting up a new house can be both expensive and stressful. Finding the right furniture, home appliances, and other useful home decor is of paramount importance to make you feel like being at your dream home. Rentickle is a leading online furniture rental company that will make your home a dream home at the cost of almost nothing. Their main motto is to “make your house a home, with a little help from us” and they stand true to their words. Rentickle offers the right kind of furniture for all the rooms in your house right from the living room to the bedroom. Apart from that, you can also rent out appliances, room packages, purifiers, fitness supplies, cycles, and rentals for your kids to give your home a beautiful finish. You can get one of the best furniture for your home that will give you all the required furnishing right at your doorstep. Rentickle offers a wide range of furniture which you can choose from. The furniture look and feel is designed to give your home a fresh new look. You can rent a wide range of appliances online from Rentickle. From television, refrigerator, washing machine to air purifier, Rentickle has got everything under their offering! The first step to your perfect home is to select what you need to make it perfect. Go through the entire catalogue of Rentickle and choose all the products that you need. They will have prices attached beside the products that will help you decide if it fits in your budget or not. Choose or customise a package that will fit in all your needs and make a list of them. You will need to submit your ID proof and you are done! The documentation is hassle free. After the legible verification of your documents, your order will be will be dispatched in a maximum of 5-7 days. You can even return the products or exchange them easily with the website. 1. Free Delivery and Installation:  Rentickle is one of the best furniture rentals that offer you free delivery of your products and a free installation of products without any additional charges. 2. Free Maintenance:  Taking furniture on rent has its regular wear and tear. But fret not! Rentickle covers all of these wear and tear while using the products at free cost. 3. Easy Returns:  Don’t like a product? Then e-mail the details to Rentickle, and they will come and pick your products from your place. They have a policy that they “don’t like to impose.” 4. Quality Products:  Rentickle provides ideal packages for you to make the process easy and offers packages based on preferences. You can also pick and choose the products you like and place your order to get the best online rental furniture delivered at your home. Everything you take for rent at Rentickle are all intelligently designed to give you functionality alongside comfort and to make your home a great place stay. Rentickle is one of the best furniture rentals company in the market, offering you everything you need at your doorstep in Delhi, Gurgaon, Bangalore, Noida, Hyderabad. What are you waiting for? Book your furniture now at Rentickle and enjoy a home, far away from home. 
Personalized and Unique Kids Products Online:	Namefame.in cordially works in spreading smiles to the kids by personalizing every item they use. Your bundle of joy deserves the best items in the world and Namefame.in is here to make your kids special. From personalized steel tiffin boxes to kids pillow to bags, everything can be personalized with the child’s name. Namefame.in offers branded personalized steel tiffin boxes, which are food-grade, airtight and comes with personalization. Personalization gives a personal touch which excites the kid, and these personalized lunch boxes can be a fantastic gift to the kid next door! Any day, the personalized steel tiffin box is safer than any plastic boxes. There are plastic boxes which come with a label of BPA free, which are considered to be safe, but they are not at all safe. The chemicals from the plastic steel box can interfere with the healthy metabolism of the children. Drinking water from personalized steel bottles is better than using plastic bottles. These personalized steel bottles are ever-lasting, free from dust and entirely safe for use. A personalized steel tiffin box is easy to wash, sterilize and durable, and anti-bacterial, which means you can maintain hygiene, these boxes can last for years and ensures complete food safety. You can always educate your children by using these eco-friendly objects as to how important they are to save and maintain out Mother Earth. Buy personalized steel tiffin box and bottles at Namefame .in Name any kids product, and Namefame.in will customize it for you. They have a range of fresh and funky bags which can be used during travel while schooling or heading to a picnic. Personalization of the bags with the name can help in easy identification and also brings happiness to kids. You can buy personalized school bags from Namefame.in online. Get your baby a smooth and comforting personalized ac quilt and pillow. You can track your baby’s growth with this cotton based quilt. These are personalized ac quilt and pillow to beautify your kid’s bedding. You can also check their milestone blankets on the website namefame.in Colorful bedding comes with a quilt and a pillow set which you can select along with your children. These can be an attractive décor to your bedroom too. Another wonderful personalized kids products offered by Namefame.in is Pillows and cushions. If your kid throws tantrums while sleeping, then you must get them these personalized kids pillow and cushion of their favourite colour. You can always pamper them with their pillows! These personalized kids pillow can enhance the beauty of the room and also you can gift them to the kids on any occasion like birthdays, school performance, Christmas presents. Namefame.in has got many personalised kids products to offer. Visit their website and have some fun time with your children while selecting the product range.
Best Website for Dads to be And Dads in India – What a found!:	Becoming a dad brings out a mixture of emotions – excitement, nervousness, anxiety and what not! With so many thoughts wandering about, dadtribe.in is the best website for dads to be and dads in India where you can find every single information related to paternal parenting, i.e. fatherhood and also on becoming an ideal husband! Every father has thoughts on daughter – about her wellbeing, happiness and safety. Fathers can go to any extent to make their daughter happy and cheerful. Dads cannot see their angel girls crying. Are we not, right? We all know this, and this fact cannot be denied anywhere in the world. Daughters are blessing to dads who bring a lot of joy and cheer in their life. The bond shared between is their prized possession. You can find good reads on  relationships between daughter and dad  – this will bring you both closer and create a healthier bond! Not all dads are the same as every man is different by nature, habits, interests, profession, and characters. So there are  different types of father  and which are you? The geek one – who loves and relates well to comics and characters or the sports dad who enjoys playing sports and would make sure to play with their child too. In today’s health freak world, every daughter wants their father to be fit.  High-intensity interval training  is a fat-burning process which dad can do it in their homes. We completely understand how difficult it is to take some time out, but we believe 15 minutes can be spared. So, for the love of a daughter, will you give in 15 minutes to get in shape? There are  different types of marriages  in India. Any disturbance in married life can affect your child’s mental well being. The best type of dad’s do not let their child suffer any emotional disturbance due to such family problems. These are the type of dad’s who bond with their son is like close friends. They gel with their son so well that there is full comfort between the two. These type of dad’s are always there for their son whenever they need them the most like a friend. Its almost like living the childhood again with his son. Dadtribe.in has a wide array of content, and you can find all your answers to questions. This is the best website for dads to be and dads in India where you can find everything from grooming techniques to parenting things to managing the marital relationship to celebrity blogs. Dadtribe.in is all about becoming a better father and husband, and this is how you can make your entire family happy and blissful.
5 Fun Ways To Spend Father’s Day:	Aren’t our Fathers the best thing that has happened to our lives? As much as we love our mom’s, we can never imagine a life without our Dad, can we? In fact, If it weren’t for him, we would have never had the life that we have today. He chose time over money and you over anything else in this planet every single time. Yeah!! We know he might not show his love for you like your mom, but do you really expect him to do that. So this Father’s day let’s do something for the man who can take down any superhero with a single punch – your Father! Here are 5 fun ways you can spend this Father’s Day with your Dad. Remember the first time when our Dad took us to the nearest theatre and introduced us to this amazing thing called movies. Since then, we must have sat through hundreds of movies and have also started binge watching on weekends. So, it’s high time that you thank him by taking him out for one. But since its falls on Sunday, his only rest day, you can also choose to stay put and binge watch movies with him. I would advise taking turns while deciding on the movies to watch on Father’s Day . Take him out for brunch , and this time around let him choose from the menu. Nothing tops food and that is why we put this point right after movies. Also, as we suggested in the previous point, if you are planning to stay put with your Dad and binge watch movies, then do it the right way by ordering in some pizzas. We can bet that for most of us, it’s our Dad who taught us how to throw a ball or the dos and don’ts of your favorite sport. We think maybe it’s time we show our gratitude by spending this Father’s day with him, playing it. Also, remember to go a little soft on the old man. We are not asking you to lose but maybe not win this time. Come on, that’s the least you can do for him. Going through old photos: No! Keep your phone aside and take out the photo album from the closet. Trust us, we know that your screen is hi-res, but it will never strike you with nostalgia like an old photo does, that you thought you lost while moving forward in life. We are pretty sure that this is going to put a smile on his face. Or better, look back at some of his old pictures and see how great you Dad used to look. Tell him about the girl or boy you like, just kidding, don’t do that, unless of course, it’s the right time. But do you sit down for a coffee with your Dad anymore or tea, whatever floats your boat? Talk about those cherished memories or foolish memories and laugh over it?  This might get a little emotional, so we would advise keeping some tissues handy. Like we said at the beginning of the article, Every Father is a SuperHero , and we just cannot stress more on that. So, on this Father’s Day, let’s treat him like one.
Funny Moments Of Football Which Will Make You Go WTF:	Football fever is all across the globe but did you ever see a water boy saving a goal? Did you ever see a double head shot? and much more funny and crazy moments of Football in 2013-2014. Video and featured image source:  NFootballHD If this story made you smile, pass it on to your friends.
Best Car Perfume In India That’ll Make Your Car Feel New Again:	A pleasant fragrance in the car can really keep you fresh and good mood during your busy rides to the office and even to long rides with your friends or loved ones. When you spend a lot of time driving your way to work and other things, the car interior gets exposed to a lot of things like food fragrances (more in case you accidentally spill), dust, sweat, heat etc. which can be a turn-off. You can have one of the best car perfumes in India handy with you, to rid off such an unpleasant smell. If you are one of those car enthusiasts who take care of their car really well – do not eat, smoke in the car, then listen YOU STILL NEED A CAR PERFUME because many a times car tends to attract road odours and it can be unpleasant. Every car has its own peculiar smell which can be masked off with a fresh fragrance and moreover, it can add the freshness of the scent. Enhance your driving experience and enjoy the pleasant smell in your car with Maxolen Perfumes. Maxolen Perfumes offer pleasant emitting fragrance which reaches the corners of the car and eliminates all kinds of odour present anywhere in your vehicle. These perfumes come in spray format, and thus it doesn’t get a pass over ventilation system. Hence, there will be a reduction in wastage, and it will last longer compared to the other perfumes. Maxolen Perfumes offer two varieties: Auto Perfume Carrisma and Auto Perfume Maximum. A Davidoff luxury perfume which can mask any kind of odour in your car – be it sweat, heat or food. It has a musky fragrance and can give a fresh feel to your vehicle. Spreading sweet smell of vanilla, fruits and spices, Auto Perfume Maximum will give your car a pleasant aroma of fruits and herbs. You will absolutely love the freshness and sweetness in your car coming from Auto Perfume Maximum. Car lovers love maintaining and welcoming car essentials, and you cannot miss car perfumes now after reading the wonders it can create to your driving experience. A good, soothing and pleasant smell with your favourite songs can uplift your mood and make you fall in love with your car – like never before.
Kolkata Knight Riders Dancing On Pharrell Williams HAPPY, Check If You Can Discover Sunil Narine Smiling:	IPL T-20 brings entertainment to our  life every year and the best part is that it becomes better every year regardless of controversies. This year in 2014 we witness some nail biting matches like Mumbai Indians Vs Rajasthan Royals at Wankhade (Mumbai) last league match and Kolkata Knight Riders Vs Sunrisers Hyderabad at Eden Garden  (Kolkata) where Kolkata chased down 161 in 14.2 overs ending up being in the Top 2 teams at points table after league matches pushing Chennai Super Kings down at No.3. Kolkata Knight Riders players have played upto expectations of the team owners and their supporters . They have won 9 consecutive matches  and the 9th win gave them opportunity to lift the IPL 2014 trophy . They have all reasons to celebrate after they beat Punjab in the IPL 2014 Final. Its time to watch your favorite cricketers dancing on the beats of  Pharrell Williams’s ‘Happy’ song …they’re well and truly ‘HAPPY’. Check out Shakib doing the SRK pose, Andre Russel dancing underwater and Umesh,Vinay, Robin just rocked with their moves. Also check if you can discover Sunil Narine smiling at least here 🙂 Video and featured image source: Youtube  via  Kolkata Knight Riders – Official If you like this story, don’t forget sharing it with your friends.
Mumbai Girls Asked Simple Questions About Football! Get Ready To Laugh Out Loud:	Football fever is on its peak at social media platforms like facebook and twitter and even if you are not watching a match you are told everything about it on social media by your friends.  We all know that  in this crowd of football crazy people there are even those who behave that they are also one of them who follow football! … though they don’t know the F of football!. Few girls from Mumbai were asked some simple questions about FIFA world cup 2014 and football in general! Q # 1 Which is your favorite team in world cup and  why ? Q# 2  First thing that comes in your mind  when you hear the word football?  Q# 3 What is the  full form of FIFA ? Q# 4 What is the  off side rule ? Q# 5 Who will win the match between  Holland and Netherlands ?  (both are same country) Q# 6 Which country does   Messi play for ? Get ready for a load laugh….hahhahahahhaha Video and featured image source:  Youtube  via  TVFRecycleBin If you enjoyed this story, don’t forget sharing this with your friends.
Check what Happens When Arvind Kejriwal Bids for a Team at IPL auction 2014:	Satya explains the entire story of fixing, from media to match in a funny way. Kejriwal Super Kings was the best one of all ” Yeh bowler meri team ko fast bowl daalta hai, Yeh corrupt hai” Enjoy watching it here! Video and featured image credits: Youtube  via  The Satya Show If you like this video, don’t forget to share it with your friends
Some Delhiites Are Confident That India Is Going To Win FIFA World Cup 2014:	Whole nation is going crazy about Football world cup and each event of the match is shared extensively on social media specially twitter.  Everybody knows that India did not qualify for Football World Cup 2014 but when a very popular YouTube channel  SorteddTv  went on asking few people from Delhi    about   “What they thought on India’s performance in Football World Cup 2014?” and ” If they thought India could actually win the Football World Cup 2014?”….. you won’t believe a lot of Delhiites are positive that India is going to win the world cup! just check the video below. Video and featured image source:  SorteddTv If you like this story, don’t forget sharing this with your friends.
This Ground Breaking Cricket Video Will Leave You Giddy With Laughter:	Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via The Satya Show
ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 Complete Matches Schedule. Gird Your Loins.:	India has always been the odd pool of crazy die hard fans of Cricket. It won’t be wrong to say cricket is a religion in its own here. And so when it comes to world cup series, what else can you expect but a month long gearing up and absolute madness! The ICC Cricket World Cup, 2015, to be jointly hosted by Australia and New Zealand is scheduled to commence from 14th of February 2015 and up till 29th of March, 2015. So, here we bring to you the precise date, day, teams and every damn information that you need to prepare for your madness overloaded days starting next month!! image source  : ctvnews.ca
15 Hilarious Photoshop Images Of Roger Federer On His Request To Indian Fan On Twitter:	In the past India has contributed a lot in making Gangnam style the most popular video on youtube. We even witnessed Maria Sharapova getting publicity (negative) when Indian social media went mad on her after her comment on Sachin. Roger Federer seems to also have got his place under the sun…his popularity has soared going by the tweets he is getting when he asked a harmless question! A very warm welcome to Incredible India … Roger. India, here I come! Looking forward to playing two matches in Delhi on December 7th & 8th. I’m beyond excited! — Roger Federer (@rogerfederer) September 22, 2014 I need some help from my supporters in India. I’m only in Delhi for a few days, so can’t visit all amazing places that I’d like… — Roger Federer (@rogerfederer) September 23, 2014 Maybe you guys could help #PhotoshopRF ? Show me where I should visit and I’ll retweet the best pics! — Roger Federer (@rogerfederer) September 23, 2014       @rogerfederer You have to enjoy #Navratri in India. 🙂 #PhotoshopRF @deepikapadukone pic.twitter.com/SgqDArU8qy — Niral Desai (@niraldesigner) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer @rogerfederer you can go to the beautiful hills of Tiruvannamalai #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/tvYaVuiQKO — Danielle Mauron (@dm_mauron) September 23, 2014 Look, Haha.♡ RT @rogerfederer kanha national park? #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/RTjNpVwXiz — Juli ± (@Bossanova_Asz) September 23, 2014 HEY RF! do come to chitradurga, KA, India @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF . its a wonderfull place! 😉 #chitradurga pic.twitter.com/9nToeACUDk — Adarsh Davanageri (@adarsHere) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF You could maneuver a coracle in the Hogenekal Falls pic.twitter.com/nBdehF694p — Darshu Tikle Tukaye (@darshutikle) September 24, 2014 Finally Roger Federer will see India and India will see @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/ZiTFVAlSVO — Detelina Genova (@DetelinaVarna) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer You should try out selling bananas as well when you come to India #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/m2lCJjtQTN — Lijo Isac (@lijoisac) September 25, 2014 Federer… like you’ve NEVER seen before: http://t.co/5quAG5etMp #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/KPp4i3b2Ns — Sheena McKenzie (@sheena_mckenzie) September 25, 2014 #PhotoshopRF #rogerfederer @rogerfederer Expierencing Indian culture <3 pic.twitter.com/NwKQGVwGUB — Imperfect_wolf (@Imperfect_wolf) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer This is how Roger Federer enjoys NAVRATRI @ Gujarat. #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/PVeluokhFl — Anil Gupta (@anilgupta003) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer nice car Roger. ..fancy one. How do you see yourself in one like this? Besos .. #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/gR8lugFuju — silvana galdi (@silvyG) September 23, 2014 You need to watch Gunda! @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF #Bollywood pic.twitter.com/IxadbO409p — Sharath (@Sharath14MUFC) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer Get “Fed Up” #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/RhOeY0MHmB — Vijay Menon (@menongitis) September 24, 2014 #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer tries to travel incognito in India… and fails. pic.twitter.com/Y0I5bCe4pU — Jan Van Assche (@janvanasscheB) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer in south indian style !!!! welcome to india Fedex !!! we are waiting 😉 pic.twitter.com/6IZzKLcz9Y — itsmerajhere (@mrajhere) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer refresh yourself amidst the beautiful backwaters of Kerala #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/jItHBba0OR — Arjun Surendran (@arjun_surendran) September 24, 2014 Roger Federer s’amuse avec ses fans indiens #PhotoshopRF http://t.co/FFe43rd2GU pic.twitter.com/cPYatCYLVw — Yves Bourgoin (@YvesBourgoin) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/SMV4ZCSnii — ├┤ⓟⓞⓜ├┤ (@pilouofmontreal) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer in marina beach tamilnadu #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/Q8HKNSLceV — Aravindhsibi (@aravindhsibi) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/7QGYoHSZq4 — Aravindhsibi (@aravindhsibi) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer come to Rajasthan ! Get ready to rock the moustache & turban 🙂 #PhotoshopRF #myfirstTweet #justdoit pic.twitter.com/ygzGzwVPUm — ANJALI SAH (@MsAnjaliSah) September 24, 2014 @themumbaikars Wishes @rogerfederer a Happy Navratri #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/VIfJ4M8qNx — TheMumbaikar (@themumbaikars) September 24, 2014 “ @tweetfromjitu : @rogerfederer hanging out in mumbai local 😛 😀 #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/Htt8qvlrV7 “Ultimate bro — Nikhil Kotian (@Nix_Rising_Star) September 24, 2014 I hope Delhi’s panipuri/golgappas are not too spicy for roger federer… #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/XUUzvFJoIh — Barjinder Singh (@barjindersingh) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer @iptl Getting a taste of the Delhi Street Chaat #PhotoshopRF #Delhi #Chaat pic.twitter.com/EKS0TOZ2R6 — Aastha Mantri (@OCDmantri) September 24, 2014 Omg whoever did this for #PhotoshopRF yesterday,this is epic 😉 pic.twitter.com/LeXRvvfeDl — Yami (@Yamistic) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer You Should Visit #Matrimandir At #Pondicherry Once!!! #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/TqiGj7I9Fl — Gowtham (@GowthamSg2013) September 24, 2014 @rogerfederer In Bollywood Singham Style #PhotoshopRF #singhamreturns #Bollywood pic.twitter.com/BOFQvkiUdq — Sarang (@sarangsp) September 24, 2014 It is too late? my contribution with #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer sirvió para desestresarme y reír 🙂 pic.twitter.com/Ft4nIWAR2B — kpi (@kpicol) September 25, 2014 #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer pic.twitter.com/HyzayyOaSi — John Rowe (@johncarync) September 25, 2014 #Federer visits #Mysore . He seems lost. #PhotoshopRF #india pic.twitter.com/LPGr036hc4 — Vinayak swamy (@VinayakSwamy) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF Federer in action at the Kerala Boat Race!! pic.twitter.com/S1ctGhrkXZ — abhishek leslie (@abhishek_leslie) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer Don’t forget to visit #Rajasthan #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/KVFTbbJDEK — Gopesh Bhatra (@1GBTWEET) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer Don’t forget to visit #chokiDhani #Rajasthan #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/9o9PUq6zFf — hardeshsingh (@hardesh23) September 25, 2014 here is tough competition for you @rogerfedrer #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/pZhZYL9wMR — Sagar Heerani (@SagarHeerani) September 25, 2014 You’re a very courageous person! #PhotoshopRF @rogerfederer pic.twitter.com/YnNaH1Onuv — ö.o (@pemberencir) September 25, 2014 #PhotoshopRF Your Match in Delhi @rogerfederer pic.twitter.com/9KgAqX2ZPd — Micko (@Mikz99) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer playing in India is finally inching closer to reality! #PhotoshopRF #LotusTemple pic.twitter.com/XCrzfTGyE3 — christo shajan (@christoshajan) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer And then there is H.P. lovely places like Kalpa, Sangla, Thirtan Valley, Manali, Shimla #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/sGoeCe3pqu — Beatrice (@Happy_1) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer Sir, maybe we could spot some on field bonding ? Face-off perhaps! @sachin_rt #Legends #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/o4tfjN7xzG — ARUN (@arun_architect) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer go to the Red Fort #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/o13eOBbkxl — Lucía (@brillantino) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer #PhotoshopRF Get your beard trimmed by an Indian Celebrity! You may need to grow a beard first Rog pic.twitter.com/ifO3jcEZpo — Ya Boy Akshat (@TheRajanStudios) September 23, 2014 @rogerfederer Swaminarayan Akshardham in New Delhi #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/LSDKfyDBqY — Sharad Patel (@Sharad2020) September 23, 2014 #PhotoshopRF #rogerfederer Lungi Dance pic.twitter.com/69MOfMwgUV — Sebash Carmel (@sebashcarmel) September 25, 2014 LOL. That look on his face! RT @krishashok : #PhotoshopRF Roger Leela pic.twitter.com/NPllqP8XAg — theSubDude (@thesubdude) September 25, 2014 “ @BBCNewsMagazine : The images of Roger Federer in India, created by his fans http://t.co/5FFFWwJra2 #PhotoShopRF pic.twitter.com/7vEUgF6vq9 ” — Shanks (@vermashanks) September 25, 2014 @rogerfederer and Mirka in Kerala to resolve the – “Who’s turn to do nappies” – debate once and for all! #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/1IRqQ8XjoY — Subin Jacob (@sozigzag) September 25, 2014 . @rogerfederer When you take a break, don’t forget to take home some sarees 😉 #PhotoshopRF pic.twitter.com/wgBsKLGd8J — HomeShop18 (@HomeShop18) September 25, 2014 images source: twitter.com [mashshare]
11 Best Winning Moments In Indian Cricket:	Cricket in our country is nothing short of a religion, with Sachin Tendulkar as the God himself. This epitomizes the madness of cricket in India. Here we live again some of the greatest winning moments that every Indian has witnessed and have made them proud. Nobody gave India a chance against the fearsome West Indies pace attack but a rookie Sunil Gavaskar led the Indian charge and ultimately to a famous series win. image source   India came in as the underdog with West Indies looking to complete the hattrick of World Cups, but like in earlier one, the West Indies juggernaut was halted by determined and dogged Indians led by mercurial Kapil Dev. image source   Many considered India’s victory in the 1983 World Cup as a fluke, but victory in final against the arch rival Pakistan cemented India as the force to reckon with. image source   It was the second World Cup in India and Bangalore witnessed the pulsating quarter final between India and Pakistan which India went on to win with young Ajay Jadeja demolishing Waqar Younis still fresh in every Indian’s mind. image source   It was Tendulkar against the Australian team. The master blaster single handedly led India to one of its most memorable victories. image source   Australia won the opening test match in Mumbai and was on its way in Kolkata as well. But what we saw after India was forced to follow on was an absolute master class from VVS Laxman and Rahul Dravid. Their heroics not only bailed India out of the trouble and made likes of McGrath, Warne and Gillespie look ordinary but along with Harbhajan Singh made sure India won the test and level the series 1-1, which India ultimately won. image source   Chasing 325 runs to win, India was struggling at 146/5 with all the big guns back in the pavilion and not much could be expected from new comers like Yuvraj Singh and Mohammed Kaif. But what transpired after that is considered on the greatest one day comebacks of the modern times. Yuvraj and Kaif (not out till the end) along with the tail enders’ took India to a famous victory. image source   Some consider this innings by Rahul Dravid which gave him the nickname “The Wall”. He single handedly took on the Australian attack and scored a wonderful double hundred in the first innings and a gritty 70 odd not out in the second innings that took India to victory and also not to forget the spell Ajit Agarkar bowled to skittle Australia out for less than 200 in second innings. image source   Mahendra Singh Dhoni led a very young and inexperienced Indian team to its maiden T20 World Cup that helped lift the gloom over the Indian cricket which had surrounded after a dismal 2007 50 over World Cup. image source   India registered arguably one of its most famous overseas test victories when they defeated Australia in Perth (considered to be the fastest pitch in the world) and gave the Aussies a test of their own medicine. image source   Sachin Tendulkar after all those years of sacrifice and sheer determination led India to their second ICC 50 over World Cup, thus giving billions of Indians a reason to smile and to be proud of. image source
Sangakkara Trolled Ahmad Shahzad By Pretending A Run Out:	Sri Lanka’s legendary cricketer Sankakara trolled Pakistani Ahmad Shahzad in a cheeky way by pretending that ball has reached him and trying to run Shahzad out without ball in his hand, the funny part about the whole incident was that it made Ahmad Shahzad dive in full length which will make you lol. 🙂 Video source:  HD Streamer  /Sony Tv live
This Simply Awesome Pingpong ball Chain Reaction Is Nothing Like Anything You Saw Before:	Video and Featured Image Source: YouTube via Pepsi Max
15 Sure Shot Signs Of An Indian Sports Fanatic:	We all happen to know at least one such person who is a total sports whiz! They eat, play, watch and pray sports. It could be football, cricket or just about any game…. Uh oh… that brings us to our first sign of a sports fanatic…. image source / Ronnie Screwala   image source   image source / Yash Raj Films   image source / Red Chilies Entertainment   image source / Sony Pictures- Meteor Pictures   image source / Dharma Productions- Eros International   image source / UTV Motion Pictures   image source / Red Bus Film Distribution- Fox Searchlight Pictures   image source   image source / Shemaroo- UTV Motion Pictures   image source   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source  
Chris Gayle Slams Selectors For Pollard And Bravo But No One Stood Up For Yuvraj:	West Indies cricket board and Clive Lloyd-led selection panel announced list of 15 members squad for Cricket world cup 2015 which did not include two West Indian all rounders Kieron Pollard and Dwayne Bravo.  After playing a match winning knock of 90 runs in the second t-20 match against South Africa Chris Gayale hit out at selectors for emission of two most experienced all rounders from the West Indians side and labeled this emission as “ ridiculous “. Gayle said . ” That’s really sad for us. Its really a big blow for us to actually loose two key players and two key all rounders as well who are also good in the out field.  I do not know what is the history behind it but its RIDICULOUS selection from my point of view. I do not know where out cricket is heading with this sort of situation but its really sad.  It really heart, but I am glad that we won this series for Pollard and Bravo. For me it looks like victimization for those two guys.. Its sad!! Common guys, its  RIDICULOUS..i mean RIDICULOUS..it really hurts RIDICULOUS…honestly. I spoke to Bravo, and he told me that the team which we have build for the World Cup is actually rebuilt for the next World cup which I can’t understand what Bravo is telling me as this team is not selected to win the World Cup but basically rebuild it for the next World Cup.. which is RIDICULOUS and I can not just understand what Bravo told me.” source: cricinfo.com featured image source I’m just thankful. Bravo & Pollard – Long Live The King!! Can’t and won’t keep a good man down! http://t.co/K4FHCSBlSc — Chris Gayle (@henrygayle) January 11, 2015 When Indian board selectors left out Yuvraj Singh in the final 15 world cup squad even after scored three back to back centuries in the Ranji trophy matches. No one from the Indian team stood up and spoke about what they feel after the same. They even did not react on inclusion of Stuart Binny in the final 15 for the world cup.
Shoaib Akhtar’s Scathing Attack On Misbah: ‘I’ve never seen such a coward captain’:	After Pakistan’s 2nd defeat in World Cup 2015 against West Indies, Shohaib Akhtar who is currently watching all matches closely in details during his contract with Start Sports as a Hindi commentator blasted Pakistani team including the coach Waqar. Shoaib Akhtar snaps out !! The level of frustration … do watch !! Video source:  Sushmit Nath  / Geo news channel
Its Getting Better And Better. This Will Make You Dance In Mauka Mauka For Sure:	If you are an not from mars, you must have seen at least one of the “Mauka” ad campaign by Star Cricket which has made success beyond the expectation of the channel. Its getting better day by day. If Indian keeps on winning we will definitely witness more of such ads coming up. Whoever is behind this ad deserves an award for sure. Mauka Mauka..Mauka Mauka 🙂 video and featured image source:  Star Sports 
How to choose the best online betting site?:	As online gambling has only ever increased its popularityamong punters, more and more online betting sites have cropped up that offeryou incredible value for very little effort. It is said that the search for theperfect online betting site is like having a little adventure , and for many, adventurescan be daunting. Thus, the best online betting sites in India , is sure tohelp you narrow your search as much as possible. There are several key themes that determine what makes anonline betting website good. The more tick boxes each site ticks the better. Wehave covered what we think are the most vital concerns that one may have while choosingan online betting website. Gambling, including its online iteration, has to deal withlegal issues. There are a lot of regulations that concern gambling . Games areoften divided into games of skill and games of chance, and the latter arebanned in several nations, as they fit more into the idea of betting than theformer. Often, online casinos try to violate established regulations, puttingthe customer at risk. In a few ways, online gambling might be safer than itsoffline counterpart, as it eliminates misinformed bookies, but even then, itnever hurts to be safe. While it is not always possible to know every possiblelaw in the book regarding gambling, some quick research about what is allowedand what isn’t goes a long way in keeping you safe. In theory, if a gambling website is good, you should neverhave to resort to customer service at all. However, things are rarely, if atall ideal, and a good customer service goes a long way in ensuring a goodexercise in betting online. What you should be looking out for, while gamblingonline include: There are several varieties of customer care services that are offered. Thesecan range from simple emails to calls to a team of customer support. Some sitesoffer live chat-based customer services, which means that these sites areobviously better in the way they approach customers and there also existsguaranteed response to your question. The problem with emails is that they takea long time to get replies from, while calls have no guaranteed response.Moreover, most betting queries are minor issues that can be resolved by asolitary quick question and do not need a call or an SMS. Thus, websitesoffering live chats are often preferred. Online casinos often have reward systems in place that seekto incentivise players to continue on their site, instead of rival websites.These seek to improve your chance of winning, increase your pay-outs or sometimes even do both. The methods in place includesign ups and referral bonuses for first time gamblers to a website, as well asscore multipliers for veteran punters. Free bets may also be offered where youcan play a risk-free hand and also keep the pay-outs. These bets although, aremostly lost. The most exciting of these offers though, is the increased odds ofwinning. They tend to modify the probabilities the game is based on, resultingin a higher odd tailored to you, so that you have a higher propensity to win agame. Sometimes offers can be clubbed together, making winning even better. Sites which offer variable payment options, covering mostkinds of credit cards, mobile wallets, UPI etc. are always preferred. Immediatedeposits are more often present on sites and need not concern you. Withdrawals are a different headache. Most sites will notlet you withdraw funds once deposited, requiring the entire money invested inthe site to be gambled, often a frustrating experience. For sites that are okaywith withdrawals, quite a few of them take an unending amount of time todeposit the money back to your bank account, which is always a cause ofanxiousness. Thus, your choice should be restricted to sites that give you backyour money within one to three working days of making the request for awithdrawal. Probably the most helpful guide in your choice of the perfect gambling website, is the opinion previous gamblers have about a particular website. Reviews can exist both online and offline. You can ask your peers and colleagues who gamble, about a particular site, or take their recommendations for the best sites, based on the games you want to play. Internet review websites exist, where punters comment on their personal experience with regards to gambling, and it always helps to only restrict yourself to websites that have most, if not all, favorable reviews. Featured image source: screenshot from here 
When Someone Cares They Don’t Make An Excuse They Make An Effort:	You don’t need to be a genius to figure out someone likes you when they send you flowers, offer to drop you back home or something as simple as getting you a cup of coffee. When they care about you it shows. It shows because they make a sincere effort towards making you comfortable. And what is care anyway but just that? A relationship is only as strong as the efforts put in by the couple. If one person keeps on making dinner plans and other keeps on making excuses to put them off it only brings negativity in the relationship. Such behaviour when goes on for a considerable amount of time and sadly unexplained, only leads to one thing and that’s ‘we need to talk’. However, it is very easy to jump to the conclusion that it’s only you who makes efforts to save your relationship or keep it happy and interesting while your partner only makes lame excuses to avoid them. It so can happen that what you perceive to be your beau’s disinterest and fading love can actually be a result of their mental and emotional stress. Here, is when you carefully need to tread waters to find out the real reason of their drift. It could very well be something related to their work, family or friends and also, although difficult to believe, something you may have done. So, if your bae actually cares for you, they will be open to discussion and put an effort to revive your relationship but if they don’t, it is better to end things gracefully than to stay in a toxic relationship where only one is dedicated and other either oblivious or trying to very hard to be one. Featured Image Source
10 Sure Shot Signs Of Girls Who Are Engaged:	Midway between your maiden and married status, engagement fills your world with happiness and colors! Read on; to find out the 10 signs that you have got engaged. image source: tumblr.com image source: dailypop.in image source: travelnewszone.info  image source: tumblr.com image source: wifflegifs.com image source: tumblr.com/ viralstories.in archive.  image source: tumblr.com image source: bollypop.in  image source: bollypop.in  image source: tumblr.com Featured image source [mashshare]
Is this India’s Best Bowling Attack in Last 2 Decades?:	It is notsurprising to infer the importance of sports in one’s life—right fromgerminating stages, rural India has pushed its children right into the kabaddiground, or maybe in a kite-flying competition, whilst urban India took tohorse-riding, or polo—the ones meant for the esoteric masses, basically. However,there is one game of sports that is a common ground for both aforementionedsections of the country—cricket. The importance cricket plays in the life of anIndian is dividend of the fact that cricket is not just hailed as a game, buthas taken the role of something as astound as the culture of the country—as isevident from the unity one can observe during cricket matches, or in moments that etchitself in history books . Through innumerable victories and losses—Indians have always felt united in times of cricket matches, especially national ones. Similarly, what isn’t surprising is the credibility of the current generation bowling attack—whilst or armchair analysts at 10Cric.com might argue that the bowling attack two decades ago was rather intimidating, there is substantial evidence that the current Indian bowling attack is not just promising, but oozing with potential. While thebowling front led by Kapil Dev might have had a fair amount of success, thereis no denying that the current Indian bowling line-up has proven to beexponentially more effective. Here are a few key elements that have proven tobe profitable for the Indian cricket team, and the individuals responsible forthe success of modern-day bowling in the country. If one isbeing brutally honest, there is no denying that Jasprit Bumrah is possibly thebest fast bowler the country has had in decades. It is a common misconceptionto assume that fast bowlers lack intellectual prowess, and are just about brawnsans brain, but Bumrah proves otherwise; while he has a reputation ofshattering the stumps to oblivion , he is also known to exercise a great deal of intellectduring matches, especially during death overs. Being anexpert in limited-overs format, Bumrah has shown time and time again thatvariable pace and consistent line and length is the key to success—sticking tobasics goes a long way—and this is even more apparent in the IPL where he isfamous (or infamous, depending on which team you support) for conceding aminimum number of runs due to incessant yorkers. Either way, Bumrah can becredited as the single-most important reason why the current bowling attack ispossibly the best the world has seen in decades. It may beslightly unfair to tag Ishant Sharma as a “veteran” per se, considering howconsistent he has been over the span of the entire decade, but there is nodoubt in the fact that Sharma has been a boon to the Indian bowling side. Whileone might have witnessed his recent fantabulous performance in theIndia-Bangladesh test series, it is just a small example of how useful he hasbeen to the Indian side over the entire course of his career, and can berightfully held as one of the pioneers of modern-day fast-paced bowling—thereis no doubt that Sharma is one of the most important reasons why the currentgeneration Indian bowling is so dominant, and why the current bowling ispossibly the most successful in their endeavours. While thepost of Chanakya in politics might becontroversial, there is no doubt that in the Indian cricketing scenario,Yuzvendra Chahal takes the cake. With his sleight of hand and deceptive action,it becomes difficult to read what bowl Chahal will be bowling next—making him asintimidating and effective as his fast-paced counterparts, if not more. He is also known to have a cooltemperament , and him staying calm and collectedhas also resulted in squeezing matches out of losing-lane, no matter howminuscule the margin. Chahal is equally effective in the fieldingdepartment—making him one of the most important assets of modern-day Indianfielding. While the previous generation of bowlers witnessed the spectacularspells of Anil Kumble, there is no denying that Chahal, in his own ways, hasbeen spectacular with both bat and particularly with the ball, making themagician one of the reasons why Indian bowling attack of today is possibly thebest the country has ever witnessed. There might be individual contributions to claim the effectiveness of Indian bowling of today. However, another reason that makes Indian bowlers of today better than any other generation is their efficiency in the field too. A doosra might lead to taking a teesra wicket, but the fundamentals of cricket still remain the same— catches certainly win matches . Featured image source 
Love Changes Your World. Question Is, ‘Should It?:	Love is a magical feeling, without any puns intended and without any fancy (or borrowed) attempt at making it look all dreamy and wonderful; because it actually is. Those who have been down this road will agree to it. When you are in the right relationship with the right person it is what it feels like, spellbinding! But can we say love changes your world? Or let me reframe the question, should you let love change your world? The answer to the former question we all know. It does change your world. The moment I asked this all must be dancing inside screaming delightfully ‘Yes it does’. But when I asked the second one, you either fell silent or trying to make yourself sound smart, answered ‘No’, because as you are so intelligent you instantly figured out that the right answer must be ‘No’. Well, you are correct. You shouldn’t let love change your world but unfortunately when you are madly in love you are actually just that, ‘mad’ and forget the very meaning of love. It is something that makes your life more beautiful but often you mistake it to be your very life. All you do is be in love. No, I’m not saying you spend sleepless nights or stop eating like how they claim in movies. But with a little twist, you spend sleepless nights talking and chatting with your bae till 3 am. You either rush through your food so that you can resume your attempt of causing your thumbs an overuse injury or conveniently bring on your chatting fiasco to the dining table itself, behaving as if either you are invisible or those at the table with you are. Even when outside of house its no different. All you talk about is your SO and all you hear is the message tone when he sends you an another text, blocking out all the live noises of your colleagues you are hanging out with at the lunch break. You start declining the days’ old plans with your bestie because your boo just called and told you to get ready for a movie. But don’t be embarrassed (as yet) since you explained to your friend how you are so down with a sudden stomach ache due to the rajma your aunt brought, so she wouldn’t feel so bad at you cancelling your BFF time. You may think this is so natural and common when you just enter a relationship and though unhealthy, it cures with time. Sure, that is. But it would have been okay if it were just that. Most of you don’t even realize when your beaus emotionally manipulate you into not hanging out with some or the other friend or making you hang out or talk with them a little more instead, without you even realizing when you completely changed from a free, socially active and a true blue family person to a commodity with an exclusive right of their beaus over them. Has ever any of your friends contacted your bae to ask about your whereabouts? Well, then it proves. I’m not blaming your beau for anything. They are as much in love as you may be. So, the thing to give a piece of brain to is that, even you do the same to them and again unconsciously. Any relationship, pardon me, any healthy relationship needs space.  When you become his and he yours life, things get messy. Then truly your world changes and that’s definitely not for the good. You had so many things you adored that you may have abandoned due to the lack of time because all your time when you are not with them has to be spent on studies or work. Or did I wrongly say it around. Ehh…. Now, this is when it becomes alarming when you can add to it, ‘or vice-versa’! If you love to travel, love to paint, have dozens of other friends whom you constantly hung out with or left the dinner time singularly for your family, don’t break the chain just so you are in a relationship now. Your love life must be a part of your life not your life itself. Though hard it may sound, you need to carefully juggle with your time, energy and priority for all the people and the things you enamour. Don’t turn yourself into a ghost of your single self. Be in love but don’t let it change your world. Featured Image Source
14 Images That Sum Up Valentine’s Day In The Cutest And The Funniest Way Possible:	Valentine’s Day is just the blink of an eye away. While most girls would be ready to faint with excitement, guys would be all be trembling expecting the worst outcome or better shall we say, out’go’ of their hard-pinched pocket money! Go on. have a look at these hilarious pictures that could actually be speaking your heart (for girls) and minds (for guys)!! 😉 🙂                                    
Do You Also Feel Shy To Ask A Man Out?:	There’s your crush, passing by in front of you, giving you that warm smile that melts your insides and leaves you all warm and tingly. But he doesn’t have the slightest idea how you feel about him. Not that even being in your 20s, you scribble his name in your diary and play FLAMES, stealthily. Not that you hated coffee but now drown a cup every half an hour just to catch a glimpse of his dimpled cheeks from the vending machine. And not even this, that he doesn’t even know how may times you have tried to ask him out, but each time ask him for a pen instead, since apparently you have had lost yours! Why is that so? It’s not just you being timid and nervous to ask him out but also the fathomed embarrassment stemming from ‘a girl’ asking a guy out. Our society is brimming with such nonsensical do’s and don’t’s for a woman and a man. Asking out is a guy’s thing they say, only it’s not. It’s not about women empowerment but a matter to think about. If you are smart, independent and attractive why can’t you go about asking a man you like on a date? Why wait for him to get the cue? Or worse, let him be with someone else, while you are waiting all this while. Yes, being shy could be a serious issue for you, tying up your hands but then think of it as a casual meeting. Don’t you ever tell a friend let’s go out sometime? Butterflies in your stomach can make it hard but that’s a good thing too. It will make him know, it’s not just a friendly approach but something more than that. Take things one step higher each time. You need to put in an effort to look good, which I’m sure you must already be doing. Smile big and greet him warmly whenever you see him and yeah, start flirting harmlessly; maybe compliment him over his new hair cut or gently touch his hand while talking. He’ll get the hint. Then casually ask him if he’s free for dinner next week. Pulling things slowly and steadily will set the wheels in motion. So, stop procrastinating and ask him out already. It’s your date and when you are smart woman and know what you desire, you don’t need any preconditioned norms to stop your feet. Featured Image Source
Why You Hate It So Much When You Don’t Get A Text Back?:	It is a matter to ponder upon how easy it has become to make someone realize they are ignoring you. All one needs to do is to ignore your text message; a well crafted, well thought out and expectant text which took you about 3 re-reads of their message and 5 whole editing sessions of your own, before you pressed that ‘send’ button.  Now is the perfect time to insert this phrase ‘Technology Sucks!’. It’s not that you have never been the culprit yourself; it’s only that this time it is you who is at the receiving end of this seemingly nugatory but actually too mortifying action. The avant-garde of all what they can do to instantly make you feel embarrassed and vulnerable, leaves you all exposed to the person who you so expected to get a reply from but all that they sent you was a head full of thoughts and an exceedingly long wait. Still, what is that one thing that makes it so annoying to any recipient (ironic, since all you want is to ‘receive’ that reply!)? Perhaps, it’s the void that is left there, that makes it so vexatious! And why not, after all, even while typing the text, you conceived what would be their probable reply, and even smiled to yourself feeling silly. But not more than how silly or rather stupid you feel now awaiting their text which seems to be on a permanent hold. It is this void or space that is the nuisance at its zenith; for its the time when you get all kinds of self-doubts when you mercilessly shred every singly word of your text again and again in hopes to catch the miscreant that must have caused this person to tick off and stop responding to you! This is the time when the devil comfortably settles down in his little workshop and makes you think all kinds of nasty things they must be thinking about you and making you feel more and more empty and unsure of yourself. However, while you read this I know you would be thinking of all those times you have been through this foolishness even when knowing its nothing more than just that. But even so, you would still freak out and self contemplate every single time someone delays or forgets to reply you back. Featured Image Source
Before You Expect A Happy Relationship Be Happy Yourself:	Nobody can emphasize enough how important it is to keep smiling. I’m not telling you to follow Charlie Chaplin and keep making people laugh and cry when it rains so nobody can find out you’re sad. What I’m saying is that being sad is fine. Being upset is also fine. And so is being angry. These are as much part of life as is a smile, a laugh or a giggle. But don’t be a person who has secretly vowed to the Sacred Society of The Frown Brothers. Or Sisters, doesn’t matter. If you are annoyed or upset over something, no person can be better than your beau to pester with your tear tales. But the process must not be as common as the frequency of you taking your selfies in the loo. Okay, so you got it now. When you have a low self esteem or are unhappy with your own life, it clearly reflects in your relationship as well. If it becomes more of a constant routine, it starts affecting both of your lives and the relationship as well making it dull and painful. What you bring then to your dinner table is not the dazzling smile that lights up the atmosphere but something that turns it into a gloom fest. Do not misunderstand though. Your partner is meant to be there with you in all your happy and sad times with special reference to the sick ones when you have had a tad too much. But then they are there because they love you, which if we take out the clichéd Bollywood version of love at first sight, clearly translates into seeing you happy and smiling always. Now, by the same logic doesn’t that apply to you as well? If you want to see them happy and by a totally not far- fetched extension, your relationship, you need to start loving yourself first. How on earth can you ever imagine otherwise to love and take care of an another human being? And forget being thoughtful or romantic then! Being happy is not that a Herculean task either. Whatever that they say about meditating, taking a walk in fresh air, doing yoga or sharing your meal with your loved one is bogus, except it’s not. Do these and try to be content with your life. And when you do have to face untoward situations, please contact your beau. They’ll just be a call away to be there for you. Now, that’s another reason to smile, isn’t it? Featured Image Source
13 Things You Love And Hate When Your Beau Is A Kashmiri:	Like every region, group or community Kashmiri men to have distinct traits about them… and when you are dating a Kashmiri guy, you definitely have your own set of likes and dislikes associated with them. Let’s take a look. image source
It’s Either White Or Black In A Relationship. Not Grey.:	There’s this cute guy in your class with whom you grab a bite now and then. He asks you out often to catch a movie with him and you think or rather wish you are the only one he calls to for that. But of course you aren’t sure and even more than that can’t fathom asking him so. Similarly, he could be seeing this lovely girl next door who may call her to fix broken things or hang out after the gym but he has no way to know if that’s because they have something between them or if he’s just an another guy friend to her. Or worse…. he and maybe even you could be ‘on the hook’. If this is going on for a while now and you still can’t define this ‘thing’ between you two and aren’t even sure if it’s exclusively with you or the guy/the girl that you are kinda seeing now is actually seeing someone else too on the side (or behind your back), one thing is certain, you are my friend in the ‘grey’ area. You know, that gloomy shade that’s somewhere between the black and the white? You are certainly in that. Oh no. Don’t dare take it as something good. ‘Grey’ can be and probably is sexy and desirable only in the erotic novel, not in the real life. You are no Anastasia Steele and that grey area I’m talking about is nowhere close to Christian Grey either. In fact it’s something that you must be wary of from the start. Courtship period is something everyone desires and enjoys too. The uncertainty there is nice in its own unique way. That’s what makes you blush and excited at the same time. It’s actually healthy for a relationship to begin. But that’s the twist. It is good when you have at least this much of certainty that this half baked relationship (if it’s even that), that’s spurring between you is going somewhere. You have a feeling then that he/she may only be shy and not yet ready to commit yet but yes you know that there is definitely a green signal somewhere down the road that will be visible once you drive down the lane a bit further. But if that person is available at his/her own will alone, calls you to make plans only at the last moments and stays off the grid for long and without a warning beforehand, then be assured you are not reaching any green light. Believe it or not there’s not even a road ahead to reach anywhere. It’s the dead end or something far worse, it’s that darn Blair Witch Project that will make you go round and round but return you to the same spot with no progress whatsoever. For some, this could be a dream come true. With no strings attached and apparently no psycho girlfriend/boyfriend to put a noose around your neck, they are a free bird to wander and yet have a home to come back to. But unlike these, most of you who need and want something real, someone to actually call your man or your girl, to rely on, feel cared for and have some stability in life; it can prove to be a living nightmare. Being in the ‘grey’ area eats you up; at least emotionally it does. Most crave the more certain and relaxing black or white zones; a defined area which allows you to label them as ‘yours’; if black, then your friend (or the top name on your hit list) and if white, congratulations you got yourself a bae! So, getting stuck in the dull, gloomy, emotionally breaching and frustrating synonym for hell is no choice. Instead of sleeping on a wet sponge of a pillow and blaming and questioning yourself fruitlessly in the shower, gather some courage and shoot the question on them instead. At least they aren’t mute like your shower curtain; they’ll definitely have something to say. Good for you or bad that’s secondary. But anyway it’s always the best to define your relationship and mingle happily or even to stay single some more and enjoy the free and me time till you find the right one. Featured Image Source
19 Brilliant Date Ideas For The Artsy Girlfriend:	When your girl’s an artsy one you have to work it up hard to meet the level of creativity that she has. Planning a creative, artsy and fun date is one of the many such things. To impress and to show her what she means to you and how much you care and respect her interests, we have some brilliant date ideas for you to take her on for a memorable time together. Yash Raj Films image source image source Yash Raj Films image source/ Featured Image Source / Balaji Motion Pictures
8 Signs Of A Truly Trendy Girl And How To Cope With Dating Her:	Who doesn’t love a trendy girl? The girl rules every heart with her perfect look that’s the craze of the day. A trendy girl is not necessarily obsessed about fashion and latest trends but sure does love keeping herself chic and looking beautiful all the time. And why not, that’s her right, isn’t it? So, if you are hooked onto her, this is what you need to know about her and how to cope dating her. 1. She wants to look all; sometimes cute, others trendy and still others plain beautiful… so unless you can figure that out from her look of the day and deliver appropriate responses/praises, you don’t have it in you to qualify as her boyfriend. Eros International   2. This is the reason why you need to garner patience and brave the mini-fashion shows she would entertain you with after each session of shopping , which mind you would be quite frequent. image source / Featured Image Source / Dharma Productions   3. Zara and Pantaloons vouchers will always be welcome be it it for her birthday, anniversary or the numerous you-love-her days. image source   4. You should always be ready to freeze to almost death on winter night dates for she will never hide her cute dress she just bought for some lame idea of saving herself from cold winds, until of course she feels the cold and spots you! image source / Yash Raj Films   5. She is going to spend all her food money too on boots , so be ready to sympathise and occasionally lend her money for a new peplum dress or even a designer poncho. image source   6. As long as it’s trendy and in fashion, she’s going to try it all so don’t freak out if you see her one day in something you can’t make head or tail of or her hair dyed in mermaid hues. Yash Raj Films   7. Don’t be alarmed if she takes an hour in the loo every time she excuses herself from your ongoing date. She’s just doing touch up of every make-up article she has on her and taking selfies after each application. So, chill and eat your soup. image source   8. And she will say she doesn’t have anything to wear a lot. And so, even though you know it isn’t true, just be nice an nod your head but don’t ever try to pull out something from her wardrobe or advice her to wear the dress she wore in some party the other night. image source
15 Things That Prove Single Dads Make The Best Dates:	Are you looking for love but leaving single dads out? Not a good idea. For all you know, they have the potential of being the best dates possible. These guys are undoubtedly the most loving, caring and selfless persons you can ever date. Why you ask? That’s because they have their amazing toddlers cum grooming team to take care of that. Read on to find more. image source
19 Things About A Carefree Girl That Make You Thank Your Stars That You Are Dating Her:	It is a common thing for a person to find himself drawn to his stark opposite. So, if you are an uptight and careful person you are most likely to be attracted by a truly carefree and free spirited one. A carefree girl is not careless, it is just that she has learnt the skill of taking life lightly as it has always meant to be. It is both refreshing and amazing to date a girl like that. If you too are dating such a girl, you can’t help but thank your stars for you being with her. image source / AA Films
9 Signs Of A Truly Equal Relationship:	A happy relationship calls for equality between the couple. It is not something to keep on giving or keep on receiving but something where there is mutual agreement, understating and sharing. When there are equal efforts from both the sides, only then can a relation stand strong and stay loving throughout. Dharma Productions   Yash Raj Films   Reliance Pictures   image source   image source / Kaleidoscope Entertainment- Madras Talkies- Yash Raj Films   image source / Eros International   Yash Raj Films   image source / Yash Raj Films   Reliance Pictures
14 Commandments Of Dating A Go-Getter You Should Never Break:	A go-getter is someone who knows what he wants and how to get it. He is ambitious, workaholic and doesn’t and can’t stop at anything to achieve his goal. A go-getter has his aim sorted out and his passion is fiery. If you are dating or want to date someone like that, you should better get acquainted and accustomed to some of his ways which may seem cold and selfish from a distant look but are in fact nothing more than a reflection of someone who is passionate about his dreams. Here are 14 commandments that you must clearly understand and not break at any cost if you want to date this go-getter. image source / Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures He is making the best of his time to achieve his dreams, which is his foremost goal and then to be with you in the left time because he wants to be with you. So, questioning his liking for you on the basis of the amount of time he spends with you is not the right way to look at the relationship.   When there are two things that need his attention, his work and his relationship. He’ll pick the former one first always. That’s not because he does’t care but only because his work is his priority.   He isn’t the commitment type of a guy so trying to force that out of him is not going to work. Solution? Let him breathe, get comfortable and do it in his own sweet time.   He’s the type of guy who doesn’t have time for games. If he does commit to you it mean he really enjoys your company as much as he enjoys his work and given his love for his work, that’s a big thing. So, instead of doubting him on the basis of his priority or the amount of time he spends over work, is only duping yourself.   There will be a lot of business talk, project ideas and work humour when your are with him. It may sound like gibberish to you but he’s actually sharing his most loved passion with you and that’s all because he feels you are an important part of his life.   It will be a common scenario for him to suddenly transfer into a completely different zone when he hits on a solution for a work problem while in a conversation with you. What’s important to know here is that, it’s not because he’s not interested in what you are saying but because work is more than just a part of his life, so it is always on his mind.   He can celebrate his success for a day or two but don’t expect him to linger onto that forever. The next instant he’ll be at his workstation to give himself a reason to celebrate an another victory with you. You may think he is exhausted but in reality, this is just how he keeps going.   His work needs his undivided attention. Stopping to talk to you only breaks his train of thought which is bad for his work. So, wait till he finishes because he blocks away every noise and other disturbing elements just to concentrate well on his work.   When dating a go-getter, there is a lot of future plans in the conversation. He is so interested in the future because it helps him to keep his mind clear and him focussed on his goal. So, if he isn’t dwelling on the past memorable moments you shared or talking about the present, it doesn’t necessarily mean you aren’t in his future plans.   He doesn’t need something to get rid off his loneliness or boredom and he isn’t there because it’s convenient for him. If that had been the case, he would have been working rather than being with you. Right? If he chooses to hang out with you than bury his head in his project, it’s actually because he likes to be with you above and beyond anything else.   Go-getters are intellectual people. He would appreciate it more if the date be productive and fun at the same time than be the routine movie and dinner date. For him, an ideal date is more about taking different classes together, travelling somewhere, attending business conferences and fairs and reading books or magazines side by side and perhaps having an interesting discussion or even a debate.   The fact that he hangs out with you, shares his deepest passions and dreams with you is because he wants, rather needs his partner’s support. So, instead of shutting him out for being too workaholic or selfish, try to be understanding and support him in his endeavours.   There is nothing more boring to him than a girl who doesn’t have a life and aspirations of her own. Live your life, enjoy it and  work up your passion because that’s what he truly respects and seeks in his beau. If you can be ambitious yourself and appreciate him too for for that, there is no denying he will be so much devoted to you.   He may already be successful or may have everything in him to be so. So, if you always dreamt of being with someone with power and the courage to earn that, a go-getter is one for you.
9 Truths Of Dating A Chatterbox:	When you are dating a chatterbox some things come by as a given. The utterly chirpy beau may be too noisy and irritating at times talking on and on and on but at the same time he can be cute and extremely loving. Read on to find out the real truths only that person who is dating a chatterbox can relate to. image source / Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Visions Ltd.      
12 Things To Keep In Mind When Dating A Girl Who’s A Party Hopper:	She is a queer and unique person who definitely has some very different ways of life. When the others tuck themselves into their beds, she revs up her car’s engine to join her league in a night of incessant dance and booze. So, if your girlfriend is this girl, congratulations, you are already in a world of a party hopper’s crazy, fun and nightless days. Like every relationship, a relationship with a party animal too is full of turns and twists, and often unusual ones too. You can learn to get accustomed to your girl’s colourful and loud lifestyle the hard way from experience or you can read the following list and help yourself to fit in and make your relationship with her, a success. image source / Eros International If you are not the party type person and yet she is dating you, she must really like you for your laid back charm. But that doesn’t mean you have to overdo it. You must still try to be outgoing for her.   Just because you return home right at 8pm, while she chooses to stay up late partying with her friends, doesn’t imply you are better.   Of course it doesn’t need to be only you trying to fit in her crazy night schedules; she too must make compromises and amendments in her lifestyle for your sake but trying to change her for your own selfishness is not good either.   A party hopper has her calender overstuffed so forgetting your date or getting late for it sometimes is on the menu. Save yourself the disappointment and headache by checking in with her at least 30 minutes before a date.   Okay so your serious and sophisticated charm is what’s gotten her hooked on to you but still you should try to loosen up and realize how lucky you are to have such a fun and lively girl by your side.   It’s stupid, prejudiced and only a total waste of time. Just because she has a bunch of friends dancing with her, is comfortable around opposite sex and shares a laugh or two with them doesn’t make her guilty of cheating on you. So, give that green face a rest and learn to be more trusting.   She is open to have you party hard with her. But there would be times she may just want to be surrounded with her friends and enjoy the night. Respect her feelings. If you love your space, love to be left alone to sleep, watch tv, read, go hiking or whatever, she’s got that right too.   Unless she’s a psychic who can read your thoughts, you need to let her know if something’s bothering you, whether it be her calling you in the wee hours of morning and waking you up or leaving her phone anywhere missing your calls all the time.   If she pukes on a stranger or sings terrible song in front of the crowd and still enjoys it, be happy for her. It’s rare to find someone who can laugh at oneself. Don’t feel embarrassed, instead take a cue from her and join the fun.   She could be really bad at being punctual but she does has some great skills that are admirable. Say, breaking ice with strangers like they never were any, organizing top notch parties or her mastery over making your hangover vanish in a jiffy.   A night in a club with her, some mixed tape of great techno music or just a keg of smooth liquor to enjoy with you… And she’ll be happy.   She is a party hopper so all you need is to take her to some great pub with fantastic music and food. But even apart from that you can always give it a thoughtful and personalized touch by taking her on long drive with peppy music to accompany you, discover crowds and new clubs or go to music festivals together. Also, don’t forget to take her on traditional dates sometimes as well. She’ll appreciate it.
If You Are Goofy, Here Are 12 Reasons Why She’ll Fall For You:	Whenever you ask a girl what qualities does she want in a guy, somehow ‘a good sense of humour’ is one thing that is never amiss. No girl can deny that a guy who can make her giggle like a silly school girl has something about him that’s absolutely electrifying and magnetic. So, if you are well habitual of making your friends snort with laughter, thank your goofy genes because while you are busy pulling an another Chandler, she maybe feeling an unknown attraction towards you right now.  And here is why. image source There’s never a dull moment with you around. You can cheer up anyone and make almost any gathering a lively party.   People need to struggle to keep pace with you while you leave no opportunity to crack a spontaneous joke. And who doesn’t love a witty joker?   Anyone can pull a fart joke but to make her laugh hard till her stomach starts hurting and her eyes watery is an art. Only a well knowledgeable person with a a treasure of funny voices and faces can manage to do that.   Debate took on an ugly turn or a friend got dumped? She knows they can leave it on the jester of the group to drop the temperature of the room. You have it in you to make the most appropriate wisecrack to lighten the dense atmosphere.   She knows that if they leave you in a room full of complete strangers and lock the door, it will only be a matter of minutes before they can hear the voices of laughter from inside. You are an expert at small talk and making friends.   You have the ability to keenly observe the tiniest of details in your environment and find the absurdness in them. This is what makes you a great comedian and imprints you on her mind.   When you can be goofy and laugh at yourself, she automatically finds herself getting comfortable. When with you, she can thus, laugh and not be embarrassed about anything.   Your social skill is what’s to thank for. You make every party a hit with your dry sarcasm, crazy impressions and well timed jokes. This is the reason why her friends tell her what a riot you are besides a great catch.   You would rather share punchlines than punches with anyone. You are known to keep your temper in check and take things easy without giving in to drama.   It takes a secure guy to poke someone or make fun of himself. It is but obvious that a guy who’s comfortable in his shoes will be attractive to her.   You could shoot a joke or two on yourself but it’s evident that humour is a way to mask the complex chest of emotions that lie deep inside of you. And when you are enough at ease to give a sneak peak of it to her, it makes her deeply long for you.   You know the perfect one-liner to make her smile even from the curtains of tears. Your cute smirk and your thoughtfulness is what makes her heart melt. And then my friend, how can she keep herself, from falling for you, that is, if she hasn’t already.
How To Pick Up Girl Easy And Quick, This Disabled Guy Will Boost Your Confidence:	Internet is flooded with new videos of guys doing gold digger pranks. They go and ask a girl out to hang out with them. Initially the girl says no to the guy, but when he pulls up in his Lamborghini, she suddenly gets attracted to him and wants to go out with him. In such a materialistic world , what hope does a disabled person have in meeting the woman of his dreams? This YouTuber named Kshitij from Iron Man Lifestyle believes that all you need to do to meet women is confidence. Not looks, not money and not even the ability to walk. And to prove this, he went in a wheelchair to see if disabled people can meet women or not. The results were shocking. Check it out for yourself in the video below. Liked the story? Do share your reviews with us to help us keep getting good viralstories for you.
This Hindu-Muslim Couple Wedding Celebration Has Stolen The Internet’s Heart:	“ We were dating for a long time and I never knew that this in going to happen “..says Junaid Shaikh. Inter religion marriage is not easy considering the complexity of our culture and rituals and so unfortunate that even today Hindu-Muslim marriage is considered a Taboo in our country. It takes a lot of courage to love someone out of your religion and culture and be with that person for the rest of your life. What moves us the most is Junaid’s words – “ We are just having a celebration, a celebration of 2 cultures and 2 families spending the rest of their lives together” Video source:  Shutterdown – Lakshya Chawla This video has already got more 42k+ views on facebook. Please share Garima & Junaid story with your friends. Lets create more #Garima&Junaid
14 Bollywood Clichés Without Which No College Life Can Actually Be Complete:	Bollywood never gets old… And one of the proofs is it’s college based movies. OK… not really. But seriously, it has so many movies with colleges as backdrop that they have actually become cult films for the students. And although there are so many stupid clichés in them like the whole college dancing with you matching perfectly with your steps etc. etc. etc. that are not only silly but also too unrealistic; there are still others which are actually true of any given college. Let’s find out what are these. You just have to have a at least one crush on one of the faculty of whose class you never miss and who is the only one who believes you are a good and sincere student! image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   It’s a must to secretly drink in the class… Maybe at the back bench or even at the back side of your college. And then being not so sly about it! image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   You have at least one friend who is a pro with strings and is always in demand to play the latest number on his/her guitar!! Maybe this is why they made it in the first place…to impress your classmates. image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   What are classes made for if not bunking? Dharma Productions- UTV Motion Pictures   Bunking and wasting all day in the canteen to look out for your sweetheart is on your daily agenda. image source / T-Series   When there is making of life long friends being in the process, of course you’ll have quite a many night outs…. ‘Too many’ as your parents may complaint. image source / Dharma Productions- UTV Motion Pictures   But obvious… After so much fun all night long with your buddies, you of course need rest and where better than to rest your sleepy head on the class desk. image source / Red Chillies Entertainment- Eros International   College and a trip to Goa with your friends is like mornings and breakfast…. Ok, the latter can be skipped sometimes, but Goan trip? Naah ahh… image source / Excel Entertainment   When you have such a crazy gang, every moment of life is worth capturing forever… image source / Aamir Khan Productions- Excel Entertainment   Apart from being the best time ever to get officially approved bunks, it’s also the best time to have fun organizing, performing or just enjoying the shows! image source / Dharma Productions- Yash Raj Films   Yup… more than fests, it’s the parties that you enjoy almost everyday… And half of the times you don’t even know, who’s it anyway! image source / Y-Films   Crushes and love in college are as old as the concept of college itself! You will always find pairs soaking the sun in the campus ground no matter which period is on… And even you, in hopes to pair up! 😉 image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Gosh! These are true as well…. Take any college.. Guys will always be guys.. image source / Vivek Kumar Mitthu   Exam time is one time when you sneak into your pal’s hostel room and spend the whole night ‘group-studying’! Reliance Entertainment
20 Interesting Bloopers Of Bollywood Movies:	While watching movies we come across loads of silly and illogical bloopers that inadvertently make us exclaim WTF! Bollywood movies are stuffed with such horrendous mistakes that lead us to think either they think they are extremely smart and will get away with anything or assume the audience to be stupid enough to not notice their boo boos. We saw poor SRK getting killed b y that wretched ahem game character and then buried in Christian ritual… But voila! As miraculously as the game character came to life, same way did SRK’s buried body turned to ashes for Kareena to do the last rites as per Hindu procedure.   Ranbir Kapoor takes away the nuisance of a book too while handling her luggage, from Deepika… But they don’t just say Knowledge is Power for nothing.. The omnipotent book is back in the lass’s hands the next instant.   In the movie Rohit Mehra is shown to be away in Singapore for a good 2 years period and still one fine day his mother calls him to break the news of Preity Zinta being pregnant!! OMG! Maybe that’s Jadoo!!   OMG! They remembered to use the new name and logo of ABP News (than its older Star News) on the TV channel… But forgot to change it for good on the mic. Shi*!   They sing this song Nanha Munna Rahi Hoon… Which is cute and inspiring as hell but the thing is the song was a part of a 1962 movie ‘Son of India’ while the movie sequence was set in the 1950s. Hmm… Maybe patriotism just spoke to him.   Apparently Tapasvi Maharaj was right about how you shouldn’t trust Sarfaraz. He said he works at Pakistan embassy in Bruges but as it turns out there’s isn’t one… Though Brussels does.   Moreover who could tell Kalyan Express can become Durronto too just for Sanjay baba?   SRK has a lot of trouble with ashes it seems. He is seen happily putting the urn containing his Grandpa’s asthiyaan (ashes) in his bag before leaving for Goa. But in somehow his Granny hands him the same urn on the railway platform while he’e about to leave.   It seems like they director had a vision and he broadcast the Gujrat riots of 2002 on a channel Headlines Today which was yet to take birth a yea from then in 2003. We need such visionaries, don’t we?   The opening scene sees three friends arriving at a dhaba tripling on a motor bike… But as the scene gives way to a song, they are seen leaving in a jeep! Mmm…. transforming bike! Can we have one too?   Suhas is already at the venue, getting ready and humming something gibberish while trimming his nose hair.. (Eww)… But something crazy happened and he found himself kicked out of the venue and hysterically making entrance from the main gate! What an idiot…. Not him.. The direc… Nevermind.   They say you can’t see ghosts in cameras. Well this could be the only reason why the musicians who were playing on Raghu’s right when he went to meet Harman.. Disappeared without a trace when its CCTV camera footage was seen. *Goosebumps*   Disappearing mystery just gets weirder. When Raghu flings wine, there the nasty stuff ruining the whole wall and the painting on it… But the next instant it’s spotlessly clean! (Psst… mom is asking which cleaner did they use. Anyone?)   Set in 1982 the movie is shown to have a game of cricket consisting of an over with 6 balls but back in that time there were only 5 allowed. Howwzzaattt?!   The right front door of the SUV is completely damaged but the next instant its all hammered and polished and as brand as new! Well done boys… Your garage’s address please?   Heard the term ‘remote sensing’? Now, witness remote dressing.   Its good the timid girl was travelling on her own and exploring but we recommend to check before sitting in a train; for all we know the train she was boarding that was supposed to go from Paris (France) to Amsterdam (Netherlands)… …was a sprinter that only runs in Netherlands and definitely doesn’t cross borders!   We saw omnipotent… It’s time to witness the omnipresence now. See these guys strumming the guitar and doing jugalbandi as Shraddha kapoor croons… Now behold as they are backstage too chatting and all… Respect!   You know the Tomatina Festival that tempted you as hell to play it yourself, that’s celebrated in August.. And that scary half as*ed bull chase? Well that’s celebrated in July… So ideally it should have been sported before the fun natural facial festival of La Tomatina.   When Prem sets off to meet Sandhya it’s in this baby… But perhaps it took them years to reach her place or God knows what… It turned into this oldie… Hmm… Omni Van bhi Complan peeti hai … grew up so fast. All images sourced from here . 
14 Birthday Gifts That Would Be Perfect For These Celebrities This Year:	Recently Deepika Padukone and A R Rahman celebrated their birthdays. While he spent his evening chatting live with his fans on FB, Dippy got the lovely gift of getting to celebrate the day with her beau in New York. It led us to think, what would other of our Bollywood celebs may want this year as gifts for their birthdays? So we researched a bit and came with some brilliant ideas for them. image source image source Oh yeah.. Maybe that will work.   image source Agar dum hai toh saamne aa !   image source image source Oh you are so thoughtful!!   image source Well of course… What does one need in a person anyway?   We really wish they had gifted her this much before….   image source image source Hmm… So, thumhe laghta hey .. Ki yay kham kharega ?!!   image source OH thank you!! Thank you so much!!   image source Mmmm…. Stop talking and let me eat.   image source OK OK.. This time pakka acting lessons lunga .   image source image source OMG!! How did you know I wanted that?!!   image source image source Nooo… Get me something from the movie ‘Aliens’.   image source   image source Yayyyy!!! No more paparazzi letting our cat out the bag!!   image source Hahaha..!! As if that would help!!!! 😉   image source Yes. Meri ‘Karan-Arjun’ aayegi …..   Featured Image Source
7 Must Have Characters Of Any Bollywood Movie:	We just can’t get enough of Bollywood movies but what we like even more than that is to laugh at their nonsensical and stereotypical characters that they don’t seem to get enough of putting there either! So, here are some typical Bollywood typecast that I am sure you would agree with. Don’t ever expect this guy to go back to his own house. He is here to stay with his buddy’s family, eat their food and run errands for them and assist his friend free of cost in all his madness soaked endeavours. image source / Tips Music Films- UTV Motion Pictures   She sticks to her guru mata , nods in agreement at everything, says dumb things and always dresses sloppily to make her hot (and high headed) friend even hotter. image source / Yash Raj Films   Dressed completely as a typical bhartiya naari , she is all for her husband and children. She would only do housework and mind you with full dedication and forget and forgive every wrong doing of his beloved family. image source   With work profile restricted completely to dancing in every song then disappearing immediately, she has nothing to contribute to the movie other than her unsolicited adaayein . But yes, she is always the reason for the villain getting killed. So, sincere thanks for getting kidnapped every time. image source / UTV Motion Pictures   If he’s a dad he’s gotta be strict, often so much that he would set his pet men on the hero for romancing his daughter or at least scratch him out of his will if he’s his own son. image source / Yash Raj Films   He is the demon born as a human. There can be nothing good in him at all. Name any crime and he would have done it all. And almost always meet his fate fighting one on one with the hero because y’all know dying with a bullet is just so junior level gunda style. image source / Eros International   Hero has another meaning in Bollywood… It means he can kill a hundred goons with a single punch and can put up a fight with a 7 ft., double in size villain and mix him up in dirt even after braving three bullets, getting his arms torn and legs broken. image source / Eros International
13 Motivational Bollywood Dialogues That You Never Thought Could Be Used In These Situations:	Bollywood is by no means deficient in great and memorable dialogues. And among them you will surely find those gems that can actually prove to be brilliant motivators even in our common lives. But when we think about these dialogues meaning serious business of provoking thoughts… The people with devil’s workshop for mind will surely love to use them in these hilarious ways…. The more you sweat in peace … the less you bleed in war (Border) image source / J.P. Films   Darya bhi main darakht bhi main, jehlam bhi main chanab bhi main, deir hoon haram bhi hoon, shiyah bhi hoon sunni bhi hon, mein hoon pandit, main tha main hoon aur main hi rahoonga. (Haider) image source / UTV Motion Pictures   Kabhi kisi ko itna bhi mat darao, ki darr hi khatma ho jaaye. (Mary Kom) image source / Viacom 18 Motion Pictures   Success ke peeche mat bhaago; kabil bano, kabil … kamyabi toh saali jhak maarke peeche aaegi (3 Idiots) image source / Reliance Entertainment    Door jana hi hai toh paap se door jao … paapi se door kyun jaate ho (Bheja Fry) image source / HandMade Films   I don’t believe in destiny … I believe in me (Luck By Chance) image source / Excel Entertainment- Big Pictures   Sometimes even the wrong train takes us to the right station. (Lunchbox) image source / Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures –  Sony Pictures Classics   Risk toh Spiderman ko bhi lena padta hai … main toh phir bhi salesman hoon (Rocket Singh) image source / Yash Raj Films   Raaste ki parwah karoonga toh … manzil bura maan jayegi (Once Upon A Time In Mumbai) image source / Balaji Motion Pictures   Ab bhi jiska khoon na khaula, khoon nahin voh paani hai … joh desh ke kaam na aaye woh bekaar jawani ha. (Rang De Basanti) image source / UTV Motion Pictures- Aamir Khan Productions   Insaan ko dibbe mein sirf tab hona chahiye … jab woh mar chuka ho (Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara) image source / Eros International   Dimaag aur dil jab ek saath kaam karte hai na … toh farak nahi padta hai ki dimaag kaunsa hai aur dil kaunsa hai (Iqbal) image source / Mukta Searchlight Films   Life mein kitna bhi try karo, kuch na kuch toh chootega hi. Toh jahan hain wahin ka maza lete hain na. (Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewaani) image source /UTV Motion Pictures-   Featured Image Source / Reliance Entertainment 
11 Things You Learnt From Dil Dhadakne Do:	One of the most awaited movies of 2015, Dil Dhadakne Do is here. You must probably even watched it by now, for the the excitement and curiosity it created with the wonderful cruise poster and the funny trailers, was enough to arouse the urgency in you to watch it first day itself. So, how did you like it. While you mmmm.. on that for a while trying to figure out how exactly to answer that difficult question, we tell you what we learnt from it! Here you go. image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International   image source / Eros International
Baaghi: A Story That Talks About Rebels in Love:	Haven’t we all always been fascinated about love stories?  Bollywood has been delivering cliché love stories to our audience for decades, and we would all still flock at the theatres to watch them like we didn’t know the ending. I think it is time we all agree upon the fact that Bollywood love stories are the staple of our country. No matter how many different kinds of concepts keep coming our way, a comforting love story is what makes into our everyday guilty pleasures to feel better about life. Another story on the same lines, but not cliché is what  Baaghi  is all about. They start the story with two rebels who always fight with each other or with others to get their things done. The lead actors Ronnie (Tiger Shroff) and Sia (Shraddha Kapoor) hit off their love story amidst beautiful backdrops of undisturbed forests. Ronnie, who is a martial arts academy student, comes across Sia. Being the rebels they are, the couple tends to stay put to their ego and refrains from feelings for each other. At the same institute, Ronnie finds a guru who tells him ‘ Baaghi  bano, par kisi maqsad ke liye.’ This dialogue is pretty much the crux of the movie, giving us all the reasons why we should watch Baaghi on ZEE5 now. A still from the movie! After Ronnie and Sia fall in love over a brief time, then enters the villain Raghav (Sudheer Babu) who also falls head over heels for Sia. He feels that Sia is the right match to his attitude, and hence decides that she is the perfect match for him. Following this, he gets to know about Ronnie and Sia and decides to kidnap her. He takes her to Bangkok where Ronnie and Raghav come face-to-face to fight for their ladylove. The film carries a certain kind of charm with a little humour here and there added by the fights put up by Tiger Shroff. Shroff does complete justice to his character, with an immense improvement from his previous film, whereas Kapoor keeps up her charm and acting despite being restricted to a damsel in distress. The action sequences are choreographed in a rather stunning way, making it almost difficult for you to turn your eyes away. This 2 hours 20-minute long movie gives you enough entertainment on a laid-back evening. Shraddha Kapoor, being her pretty-self, delivers some punches and packs here and there, showing the rebel in her character. Whereas the talented Tiger Shroff is sure to carry you away with his emotions and flared muscles that are very candy to the eye. The best part about Baaghi is that the fights are based on the traditional way of dealing with the hands rather than guns and weapons, which makes the cut for this movie. The movie received some good reviews from some of the leading critics like  Anupama Chopra,  Rajeev Masand and similar ones, pouring all praises for Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor. With the birthdays of the lead actors Tiger Shroff (2nd March) and Shraddha Kapoor (3rd March) approaching soon, there is yet another reason to revisit their performances and give them a thumbs up by watching Baaghi! 
17 Celebrity Reactions On The Grave Issue Of “The Porn Ban”:	The banning of porn in India has shook everyone. It is one difficult time for the whole of nation and when every common man is grieving at the loss of their favourite thing to do of all, even the celebrities aren’t left untouched. Ironically, though we don’t have the means anymore, but definitely it will get harder with each passing moment. But at least you aren’t alone. image source   image source   image source   image source   image source       image source   image source   image source   image source   Reliance Entertainment   image source   image source     image source   image source   image source   image source / Featured Image Source
Kaafir, A Tale Winning Millions Heart:	Kaafir, the ZEE5 Original web series has been the talk of the town since launch. Starring Dia Mirza and Mohit Raina in the lead, the web series shows the journey of Kainaaz Akhtar, resident of POK who crosses over to India and is held as a prisoner. It portrays the beautiful relationship the mother Kainaaz and her daughter Seher share and their fight to return back legally to Pakistan. All the eight episodes keep you hooked and leave you with some questions to answer about the struggles and bonds. Inspired by a true story, Kaafir is a tale worth telling the masses. The simplicity and innocence of the child are in complete sync with the struggles and tortures her mother faces. The journalist cum lawyer, Vedant played by Mohit Raina has his own share of efforts to overcome. Having lost his brother to militant, he saved from imprisonment a few months backfill him with never-ending guilt. This is what forces him to take up Kainaaz’s case, and the bond shared by Kainaaz and Vedant speaks volumes in itself. (Click  here  to see Mohit Raina’s interview with The Indian Express about his role in Kaafir, why he chose the project and more.) Kaafir tells the tale of two warring nations, its politics and society and gender oppression. Kainaaz, played by Dia Mirza, showcases the emotions of a victim perfectly. The commendable acting by her evokes sympathy and compassion for her character by the audiences. Her mental trauma and constant efforts to free her will force you to question about the struggles people face who accidentally cross borders. What’s the best part of this endearing tale? Kaafir draws the similarities between two different nations and its people in terms of culture, lifestyle, food and most importantly, emotions. What is shared between the two countries is the love between a mother and her child and the struggles we all face every day. Indians and Pakistan share many things in common: Kafir has been clearly defined in Quran – they are not non-muslims but are thought so by the Muslims or Moin. People have a challenging life at the borders – and we need to be sympathetic towards them for the same. According to Quran- Kafir is the one who conceals the fact, is ungrateful and kafirejects Quran. Be it an Indian or a Pakistani, both are peace lovers and that is why you must be empathetic, kind and helpful towards the ones struggling at the borders. If you are looking for some exciting web series to watch this week, watch this intriguing tale Kaafir and we are sure you will just love it.
List Of Quirky Bollywood Movies About Con Men:	You know the saying right, that TRUST is a dangerous game. On a desperate attempt to watch something good this weekend, I stumbled upon this movie called The Wolf of Wall Street’. Though I’m literally watching this for the 50th time, I can’t help but get awestruck by DiCaprio’s portrayal of Jordan Belfort every time and this got me more passionate about con artist movies. And it is this inclination that got me looking for some of the best Bollywood movies about con men. So in this list, we are listing down movies that are based on con artists. Also, I will not be condoning any movie based on a bank heist or robbery, so as great as it is, Dhoom series did not make into this list. The Fakir of Venice Presented in the 2009 Indian Film Festival, it took The Fakir of Venice 10 years to find its way into Bollywood. This 2019 movie is about a young man Aadhi (played by Farhan Akhtar) who only cares about money and would do anything to get it, even if it means going underground, literally. Though the movie is over 10 years old, the crux of the movie is still fresh and entertaining, making it an enjoyable watch even in 2019. Also, The Fakir of Venice movie is supposed to be the debut movie for Farhan Akhtar. Ladies Vs Ricky Bahl In this movie, Ranveer Singh makes girls fall prey for his tricks with his charming attitude. While some found this movie extremely misogynistic, I think there is nothing fair when it comes to cheating someone for money. For what it’s worth, Ranveer leaves his past behind and starts a new life by the end of the movie, so I think that makes up for what he has done in the past. Raja Natwarlal This 2014 Bollywood movie features Emraan Hashmi as Raja who cons people for his livelihood. On an attempt to make a big catch, Hashmi ends up stealing the money of Billionaire Varda Yadav (played by Kay Kay Menon) who just can’t stand the thought of getting robbed by two cons and orders his goons to kill them. The thrilling chase that follows forms the rest of the film. Music added an extra element of emotion to the film, all thanks to Yuvan Shankar Raja who did his Bollywood debut through this movie. Special 26 No one batted an eyelid when they Akshay Kumar played the role of a con man who does fake CBI raids to steal money from the rich. The movie was so good, in fact, that it was later remade in Tamil as Thaanaa Serndha Koottam. The movie tasted a massive success at the box office, proving good movies are always welcomed by the audience. While we all like seeing Akshay Kumar in righteous roles, this is one movie you just can’t afford to miss out. We are pretty con-fident that these are some of the best movies of Bollywood in this list, puns intended. Con-sidering how much we love these movies, I think you are going to have to have a fun time watching it. 
